“Srimad-Bhagavatam – Canto Ten” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada.Summary: Srimad-Bhagavatam is compared to the ripened fruit of Vedic knowledge.Also known as the Bhagavata Purana, this multi-volume work elaborates on thepastimes of Lord Krishna and His devotees, and includes detailed descriptionsof, among other phenomena, the process of creation and annihilation of theuniverse. His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada considered thetranslation of the Bhagavatam his life’s work.COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of thisbook, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines established byinternational copyright laws. You may use this electronic file to evaluate theprinted version of this book, for your own private use, or for short excerptsused in academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the like.You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more than tenpercent (10%) of this book in any media without the express written permissionfrom the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Srimad-Bhagavatam” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book TrustInternational, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluatedozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,www.Krishna.com.                    Canto 10: "The Summum Bonum"                             Tenth Canto                      SUMMARY OF THE TENTH CANTO   A short description of each chapter of this Tenth Canto is as follows. TheFirst Chapter, which has sixty-nine verses, describes Maharaja Pariksit'seagerness to learn about the incarnation of Lord Krsna, and it also tells howKamsa killed the six sons of Devaki because of his fear of being killed by hereighth child. The Second Chapter contains forty-two verses, describing theentrance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, into the womb of Devakito fulfill His mission of killing Kamsa. When Lord Krsna was within Devaki'swomb, all the demigods, headed by Brahma, offered prayers to the Lord. The ThirdChapter contains fifty-three verses. This chapter describes the appearance ofLord Krsna as He is. The Lord's father and mother, understanding the Lord'sappearance, offered prayers. Fearing Kamsa, the Lord's father brought the childfrom Mathura to Gokula Vrndavana. The Fourth Chapter contains forty-six verses,which tell of a prophecy by the goddess Candika. After consulting demoniacfriends, Kamsa began killing all the children born at that time, since hethought this would be to his benefit.   The Fifth Chapter contains thirty-two verses, describing how Nanda Maharajaperformed the birth ceremony of Krsna and then went to Mathura, where he metVasudeva. The Sixth Chapter contains forty-four verses. In this chapter, NandaMaharaja, following the advice of his friend Vasudeva, returns to Gokula and onthe way sees the dead body of the Putana demoness and is astonished at herhaving been killed by Krsna. The Seventh Chapter, which contains thirty-seven
verses, describes Maharaja Pariksit's enthusiasm to hear about the boyhoodpastimes of Lord Krsna, who killed Sakatasura and Trnavartasura and showedwithin His mouth the entire cosmic manifestation. In the Eighth Chapter thereare fifty-two verses, which describe Gargamuni's performing the name-givingceremony of Krsna and Balarama and how Krsna and Balarama performed playfulchildish activities, crawling on the ground, trying to walk with Their smalllegs, and stealing butter and breaking the pots. This chapter also describes thevision of the universal form.   The Ninth Chapter, which has twenty-three verses, describes how Krsnadisturbed His mother while she was churning butter. Because she left Krsna tosee to the stove, where the milk was boiling, and did not allow Him to suck herbreast, Krsna was very angry and broke a pot of yogurt. To chastise her naughtychild, mother Yasoda wanted to bind Him with rope, but every time she tried shefailed because of a shortage of rope when the time came to knot it. In the TenthChapter there are forty-three verses. This chapter describes how Krsna, asDamodara, caused the twin Yamalarjuna trees to fall and how the two demigodswithin the trees were delivered by the mercy of Krsna. In the Eleventh Chapterthere are fifty-nine verses. This chapter describes how Nanda Maharaja releasedKrsna from the ropes, how Krsna showed His mercy to a fruit seller whileexchanging grains for fruit, and how Nanda Maharaja and others decided to leaveGokula for Vrndavana, where Krsna killed Vatsasura and Bakasura.   Chapter Twelve contains forty-four verses, describing Krsna's pastimes withthe cowherd boys in the forest and the killing of the demon named Aghasura.Chapter Thirteen contains sixty-four verses, describing how Brahma stole Krsna'scalves and His friends, the cowherd boys. Krsna expanded His pastimes for oneyear, representing Himself as the calves and boys in forms exactly like theirown. In this way He bewildered Brahma, who at last surrendered when his illusionwas over. The Fourteenth Chapter contains sixty-one verses. In this chapter,Brahma offers prayers to Krsna after fully understanding Him to be the SupremePersonality of Godhead. The Fifteenth Chapter contains fifty-two verses. Thischapter describes how Krsna entered Talavana Forest with Balarama, how Balaramakilled Dhenukasura, and how Krsna protected the cowherd boys and cows from thepoisonous effects of Kaliya.   The Sixteenth Chapter contains sixty-seven verses. This chapter describes thechastisement of Kaliya by Krsna, and it also describes the prayers offered byKaliya's wives. In the Seventeenth Chapter there are twenty-five verses. Thischapter describes why Kaliya entered the River Yamuna after leaving his home,Nagalaya, one of the dvipas, which according to some corresponds to the FijiIslands. This chapter also describes how Garuda was cursed by Saubhari Rsi, howthe cowherd boys, Krsna's friends, were enlivened when Krsna emerged from theYamuna, and how Krsna stopped the forest fire and saved the sleeping inhabitantsof Vraja.   The Eighteenth Chapter contains thirty-two verses, giving a description ofKrsna and Balarama, Their picnics within the forest, the climate of Vrndavana inthe summer and the spring, and Lord Balarama's killing of Pralambasura. ChapterNineteen contains sixteen verses, describing Krsna's entering the forest knownas Munjaranya, saving the cowherd boys and cows from the forest fire, andbringing them to Bhandiravana. Chapter Twenty contains forty-nine verses. Thischapter describes the enjoyment of Balarama and Krsna in the forest with thecowherd boys during the rainy season, and it gives various instructions throughanalogies concerning the rainy season and autumn.   Chapter Twenty-one contains twenty verses, describing how Krsna entered theforest of Vrndavana in the autumn, playing His flute, and how He attracted thegopis, who were singing His glories. The Twenty-second Chapter contains thirty-eight verses, describing how the gopis prayed to the goddess Katyayani to obtainKrsna as their husband and how Krsna later stole the garments of the gopis whilethe gopis were bathing in the Yamuna. The Twenty-third Chapter contains fifty-two verses, describing how the cowherd boys, being very hungry, followed Krsna's
directions by begging some food for Him and themselves from brahmanas engaged inperforming yajnas. The brahmanas refused to give food to Krsna and Balarama,although the boys begged for it, but the wives of the brahmanas agreed, andtherefore Krsna bestowed His mercy upon them.   The Twenty-fourth Chapter contains thirty-eight verses, describing how Krsnadefied King Indra, despite Indra's position of prestige, by stopping the indra-yajna and instead worshiping Govardhana. The Twenty-fifth Chapter containsthirty-three verses. As described in this chapter, because the indra-yajna wasstopped, King Indra was very angry, and to kill the inhabitants of Vrndavana,Vraja, he flooded the entire area with rain. Krsna, however, accepted KingIndra's challenge by lifting Govardhana Hill as an umbrella to protect Vrndavanaand all the cows. The Twenty-sixth Chapter contains twenty-five verses,describing how Nanda Maharaja, seeing the extraordinary activities of Krsna, wasstruck with wonder and how he thus narrated for all the cowherd men the wholestory of Krsna's opulence, as foretold by Gargamuni. Chapter Twenty-seven, whichcontains twenty-eight verses, describes how King Indra, upon seeing Krsna'sunlimited power, worshiped Lord Krsna, who was fully washed with milk suppliedby the surabhi and who thus became known as Govinda. The Twenty-eighth Chaptercontains seventeen verses. In this chapter Krsna saves His father, NandaMaharaja, from the custody of Varuna and shows the cowherd men how Vaikunthalokais situated.   The Twenty-ninth Chapter contains forty-eight verses, describing how Krsnatalked to the gopis before performing the rasa-lila and how, after the beginningof the rasa-lila, Krsna disappeared from the scene. Chapter Thirty containsforty-four verses, describing how the gopis, being separated from Krsna, wentmad and began to wander in the forest in search of Him. The gopis met SrimatiRadharani, the daughter of King Vrsabhanu, and they all wandered on the bank ofthe Yamuna searching for Krishna. Chapter Thirty-one contains nineteen verses,describing how the bereaved gopis waited in great anxiety to meet Krsna. ChapterThirty-two contains twenty-two verses. In this chapter, Krsna appears among thegopis, who are fully satisfied in ecstatic love for Him. Chapter Thirty-threecontains thirty-nine verses. In this chapter Krsna appears in multiforms in themidst of the gopis, with whom He dances in the rasa dance. Then they all bathein the River Yamuna. Also in this chapter, Sukadeva mitigates the doubts ofPariksit concerning the performance of the rasa-lila.   Chapter Thirty-four contains thirty-two verses. This chapter describes howNanda Maharaja, Krsna's father, was swallowed by a big python, who had been ademigod named Vidyadhara but was cursed by Angira Rsi. Krsna rescued His fatherand saved this demigod simultaneously. Chapter Thirty-five contains twenty-sixverses. This chapter describes how Krsna went to the pasturing grounds with thecows and how the gopis sang in separation from Him.   Chapter Thirty-six contains forty verses. This chapter describes Krsna'skilling of Aristasura. It also describes Narada's disclosure to Kamsa that bothRama and Krsna were sons of Vasudeva. Because of this disclosure, Kamsa arrangedto kill both Rama and Krsna. He sent his assistant Kesi to Vrndavana, and laterhe sent Akrura to bring Rama and Krsna to Mathura. Chapter Thirty-seven containsthirty-three verses. In this chapter Krsna kills the Kesi demon, Narada worshipsKrsna by narrating His future activities, and Krsna kills the demon namedVyomasura. Chapter Thirty-eight contains forty-three verses. This chapterdescribes how Akrura went to Vrndavana and how he was received by Rama-Krsna andNanda Maharaja. Chapter Thirty-nine contains fifty-seven verses. This chapterdescribes how Rama and Krsna, having been invited by Kamsa started for Mathura.While They were ready on the chariot, the gopis began to cry, and Krsna sent Hismessenger to pacify them. Thus He was able to travel toward Mathura. On the way,Akrura was shown the entire Visnuloka within the water of the Yamuna.   Chapter Forty contains thirty verses, in which the prayers of Akrura aredescribed. Chapter Forty-one, which contains fifty-two verses, describes theentrance of Rama and Krsna into the city of Mathura, where the ladies were very
jubilant to see these two brothers. Krsna killed a washerman, glorified Sudamaand gave Sudama His benediction. Chapter Forty-two, which contains thirty-eightverses, describes how Krsna delivered Kubja and how He broke Kamsa's giganticbow and killed its caretakers. Thus Kamsa and Krsna met. Chapter Forty-threecontains forty verses. Outside the sporting arena of Kamsa, Krsna killed anelephant named Kuvalayapida. Then He entered the arena and spoke with Canura.Chapter Forty-four, which contains fifty-one verses, describes how Krsna andBalarama killed the wrestlers named Canura and Mustika and thereafter killedKamsa and his eight brothers. Krsna, however, pacified Kamsa's wives and His ownfather and mother, Vasudeva and Devaki.   Chapter Forty-five contains fifty verses. This chapter describes how Krsnapacified His father and mother and celebrated the enthronement of Hisgrandfather Ugrasena. After promising the inhabitants of Vrndavana that He wouldreturn very soon, Krsna underwent ritualistic ceremonies as a ksatriya. He tookthe vow of brahmacarya and lived in the guru-kula, where He studied regularly.By killing the demon named Pancajana, He received a conchshell named Pancajanya.Krishna rescued the son of His guru from the custody of Yamaraja and returnedhim. After thus offering guru-daksina to repay His teacher, Lord Krsna returnedto Mathura-puri. Chapter Forty-six contains forty-nine verses. As described inthis chapter, Krsna sent Uddhava to Vrndavana to pacify His father and mother,Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda. Chapter Forty-seven contains sixty-nine verses,describing how Uddhava, following Krsna's order, went to pacify the gopis andthen returned to Mathura. Thus Uddhava appreciated the ecstatic love felt forKrsna by the inhabitants of Vrndavana.   Chapter Forty-eight contains thirty-six verses. This chapter describes howKrsna fulfilled the desire of Kubja by going to her house and enjoying her.Krsna then went to the home of Akrura. Satisfied by Akrura's prayers, Krsnapraised him very much and sent him to Hastinapura to gather information aboutthe Pandavas. Chapter Forty-nine contains thirty-one verses. As described inthis chapter, Akrura, following Krsna's orders, went to Hastinapura, where hemet Vidura and Kunti and heard from them about Dhrtarastra's mistreatment of thePandavas. Informed of the Pandavas' faith in Krsna, Akrura advised Dhrtarastra,and after understanding Dhrtarastra's mind, he returned to Mathura, where hedescribed everything about the situation in Hastinapura.   Chapter Fifty contains fifty-seven verses. In this chapter, Jarasandha,having heard that his son-in-law Kamsa was killed, attacked Mathura to kill Ramaand Krsna but was defeated seventeen times. When Jarasandha was about to attackfor the eighteenth time, Kalayavana, having been advised by Narada, alsoattacked Mathura. Thus the Yadava dynasty entered a fort in the midst of thewater and lived there by mystic power. After giving full protection to theYadava dynasty and conferring with Lord Baladeva, Lord Krsna emerged fromDvaraka. Chapter Fifty-one, which contains sixty-three verses, describes howMucukunda killed Kalayavana simply by glancing upon him.   Chapter Fifty-two contains forty-four verses. In this chapter, Mucukundaoffers prayers to Krsna, and then Krsna kills all the soldiers of Kalayavana andreturns to Dvaraka with their booty. When Jarasandha attacked Mathura again,Rama and Krsna, as if afraid of him, fled to the top of a mountain, to whichJarasandha then set fire. Unseen by Jarasandha, Krsna and Balarama jumped fromthe mountain and entered Dvaraka, which was surrounded by the sea. Jarasandha,thinking that Krsna and Balarama had been killed, returned with his soldiers tohis own country, and Krsna continued to live in Dvaraka. Rukmini, the daughterof Vidarbha, was very much attracted to Krsna, and she sent Krsna a letterthrough a brahmana. Chapter Fifty-three contains fifty-seven verses. FollowingRukmini's request, Krsna went to the city of Vidarbha and kidnapped her in thepresence of such enemies as Jarasandha. Chapter Fifty-four contains sixtyverses. As described in this chapter, Krsna defeated all the opposing princesand disfigured Rukmini's brother Rukmi. Then Krsna returned with Rukmini toDvaraka, where they were united in a regular marriage. Rukmi, however, remained
in a place known as Bhojakata, being angry at his brother-in-law, Krsna. ChapterFifty-five, containing forty verses, describes the birth of Pradyumna, howPradyumna was kidnapped by Sambarasura, and how Pradyumna later killedSambarasura and returned to Dvaraka with his wife, Ratidevi.   Chapter Fifty-six contains forty-five verses. As described in this chapter,King Satrajit, by the mercy of the sun-god, received a jewel called Syamantaka.Later, when this jewel was stolen, Satrajit unnecessarily became doubtful ofKrsna, but Krsna, to vindicate His position, retrieved the jewel, along with thedaughter of Jambavan. Krsna later married Satrajit's daughter and received afull dowry. As described in Chapter Fifty-seven, which contains forty-twoverses, both Balarama and Krsna went to Hastinapura, having heard about the firein the shellac house of the Pandavas. After Satrajit was killed by Satadhanva atthe instigation of Akrura and Krtavarma, Balarama and Krsna returned to Dvaraka.Satadhanva left the Syamantaka jewel with Akrura and fled to the forest. Thusalthough Krsna killed Satadhanva, He was unable to retrieve the jewel. Finallythe jewel was discovered and awarded to Akrura. Chapter Fifty-eight containsfifty-eight verses. After the Pandavas finished living incognito in the forest,Krsna went to Indraprastha to see them. He then married five wives, headed byKalindi. After Krsna and Arjuna set fire to the Khandava Forest, Arjuna receivedthe Gandiva bow. The demon Maya Danava constructed an assembly house for thePandavas, and Duryodhana was very much aggrieved.   Chapter Fifty-nine contains forty-five verses. In this chapter, Krsna, at therequest of Indra, kills the demon Narakasura, the son of the earth personified,along with the demon's associates, headed by Mura. The earth personified offersprayers to Krsna and returns to Him all the paraphernalia that Narakasura hasstolen. Krsna then bestows fearlessness upon the son of Narakasura and marriesthe sixteen thousand princesses whom the demon kidnapped. Also in this chapter,Krsna takes away the parijata plant from the heavenly planets, and thefoolishness of Indra and others is described.   Chapter Sixty contains fifty-nine verses. In this chapter, Krsna makesRukmini angry with His joking words. Krsna pacifies Rukmini, and there is alover's quarrel between them. Chapter Sixty-one contains forty verses. Thischapter contains a description of the sons and grandsons of Krsna. At the timeof Aniruddha's marriage, Balarama kills Rukmi and breaks the teeth of the Kingof Kalinga.   Chapter Sixty-two contains thirty-three verses. This chapter begins thediscourse concerning the abduction of Usa, the daughter of Banasura, and theamorous pastimes between Usa and Aniruddha. It also describes a fight betweenAniruddha and Banasura and how Banasura seized Aniruddha with a snake-noose.Chapter Sixty-three, which contains fifty-three verses, describes how thestrength of Lord Siva was defeated in a battle between Banasura and the Yadavas.The Raudra-jvara, having been defeated by the Vaisnava-jvara, offered prayers toKrishna. Krsna severed all but four of Bana's one thousand arms and thus showedhim mercy. Krsna then returned to Dvaraka with Usa and Aniruddha.   Chapter Sixty-four contains forty-four verses. In this chapter, Krsnaliberates King Nrga, the son of Iksvaku, from a curse and instructs all kings byexplaining the fault in misappropriating the property of a brahmana. Inconnection with the deliverance of King Nrga, there are instructions for theYadavas, who were puffed up with pride due to wealth, opulence, enjoyment and soon.   Chapter Sixty-five contains thirty-four verses. As described in this chapter,Lord Baladeva, desiring to see His friends and relatives, went to Gokula. In themonths of Caitra and Vaisakha, in the groves by the Yamuna, Lord Balaramaperformed the rasa-rasotsava and yamuna-karsana lilas in the association of Hisgopis.   As described in Chapter Sixty-six, which contains forty-three verses, Krishnawent to Kasi and then killed Paundraka, as well as his friend the King of Kasi,Sudaksina and others. Chapter Sixty-seven, which contains twenty-eight verses,
describes how Lord Baladeva, while enjoying with many young girls on RaivatakaMountain, vanquished the extremely mischievous ape Dvivida, who was the brotherof Mainda and a friend of Narakasura's.   Chapter Sixty-eight has fifty-four verses. As described in this chapter, whenSamba, the son of Jambavati, kidnapped Laksmana, the daughter of Duryodhana, hewas captured in a fight with the Kauravas. In order to free him and establishpeace, Lord Baladeva went to Hastinapura as a well-wisher. The Kauravas,however, were uncooperative, and upon seeing their arrogance, Lord Baladevabegan pulling their city of Hastinapura with His plow. The Kauravas, headed byDuryodhana, offered prayers to Lord Baladeva, who then returned to Dvaraka withSamba and Laksmana.   Chapter Sixty-nine contains forty-five verses. As described in this chapter,Krsna exhibited His householder life with His sixteen thousand wives. Even thegreat sage Narada was astonished at how Krsna, having expanded Himself intosixteen thousand forms, was conducting His householder life. Thus Narada offeredprayers to Lord Krsna, and Krsna was very much pleased with him.   Chapter Seventy, which contains forty-seven verses, describes how Krsnaexhibited His daily ritualistic ceremonies and how He released the kingsarrested by Jarasandha. While Lord Krsna was receiving a messenger sent by thesekings, Narada came to see Krsna and told Him news of the Pandavas. Naradainformed Krsna that the Pandavas desired to perform a rajasuya sacrifice, andKrsna agreed to attend it, but He first asked for Uddhava's decision aboutwhether to give preference to killing King Jarasandha or performing therajasuya-yajna. Chapter Seventy-one contains forty-five verses, describing thehappiness of the Pandavas when Krsna went to Indraprastha. By the inconceivabledesire of Krsna, Jarasandha would be killed, and the rajasuya-yajna would beperformed by Maharaja Yudhisthira.   Chapter Seventy-two contains forty-six verses. By agreeing to perform therajasuya-yajna, Krishna gave Maharaja Yudhisthira great pleasure. This chapteralso describes the killing of Jarasandha, the enthroning of his son, and therelease of the kings whom Jarasandha had arrested. Chapter Seventy-threecontains thirty-five verses. After Lord Krsna released the kings and restoredtheir royal power, He was worshiped by Sahadeva, the son of Jarasandha, and thenHe returned to Indraprastha with Bhima and Arjuna. Chapter Seventy-four containsfifty-four verses. Maharaja Yudhisthira offered prayers to Krsna and offered Himthe first worship in the rajasuya-yajna. To honor the Lord in this way is theforemost duty of every man, but this was intolerable to Sisupala, the King ofCedi. Sisupala began to blaspheme Krsna, who thus severed the King's head fromhis body and awarded him the salvation called sarupya-mukti. After theconclusion of the rajasuya sacrifice, Krsna returned to Dvaraka with His queens.Chapter Seventy-five contains forty verses. As described in this chapter,Maharaja Yudhisthira, after the rajasuya-yajna, performed the final ritualisticbathing ceremonies. Duryodhana was bewildered in the palace constructed by MayaDanava, and thus he felt insulted.   Chapter Seventy-six contains thirty-three verses, describing how Salva, oneof the kings Krsna defeated when He kidnapped Rukmini, decided to rid the entireworld of the Yadavas. To defeat the Yadavas, Salva worshiped Lord Siva, whorewarded him with an aerial car named Saubha. When Salva fought with the Vrsnis,Pradyumna smashed the car designed by Maya Danava, but he was attacked bySalva's brother, whose name was Dyuman. Beaten unconscious by Dyuman's club,Pradyumna was carried some distance away from the warfield by his charioteer,but later he lamented having been removed from the battlefield. Chapter Seventy-seven contains thirty-seven verses. In this chapter, Pradyumna recovers from hisinjuries and begins fighting with Salva. When Krsna returned to Dvaraka fromIndraprastha, He immediately went to the battlefield where Salva and Pradyumnawere fighting. There He killed Salva, although Salva was powerfully equippedwith illusory weapons.
   Chapter Seventy-eight contains forty verses. As described in this chapter, afriend of Salva's named Dantavakra and Dantavakra's brother Viduratha werekilled by Sri Krsna. Instead of taking part in the fighting between the Kauravasand the Pandavas, Baladeva, who had been staying at Dvaraka-puri, went touringholy places. Because of the misbehavior of Romaharsana, Baladeva killed him atNaimisaranya and appointed his son Ugrasrava, Suta Gosvami, the speaker ofSrimad-Bhagavatam, to continue the discourses on the Puranas. Chapter Seventy-nine contains thirty-four verses. This chapter describes how the brahmanas ofNaimisaranya advised Baladeva to atone for the death of Romaharsana. Afterkilling a demon named Balvala, Baladeva traveled and bathed in holy places untilHe at last came to the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, where Bhima and Duryodhanawere fighting. Then He returned to Dvaraka and went again to Naimisaranya, whereHe instructed the rsis. Then He left with His wife Revati.   Chapter Eighty, which contains forty-five verses, describes how Sudama Vipra,a friend of Krsna's, approached Krsna for money and was worshiped by Krsna, whoreminisced with him about their boyhood at the guru-kula. Chapter Eighty-onecontains forty-one verses. This chapter describes the friendly talks betweenKrsna and His friend Sudama. Krsna very gladly accepted a gift of flat rice fromSudama Vipra. When Sudama Vipra returned home, he saw that everything there waswonderfully opulent, and he praised the friendship of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. With the gifts of the Lord, he enjoyed material opulence, and later hewas promoted back home, back to Godhead.   Chapter Eighty-two contains forty-eight verses. This chapter describes howthe Yadavas went to Kuruksetra because of a solar eclipse and how other kingsspoke to them of Krsna. At this meeting, Krsna satisfied Nanda Maharaja and theresidents of Vrndavana, who had also come there. Chapter Eighty-three containsforty-three verses, describing how the women assembled at Kuruksetra engaged intopics of Sri Krsna and how Draupadi asked all Krsna's queens about how they hadmarried Him. Chapter Eighty-four contains seventy-one verses. As described inthis chapter, when great sages went to see Krsna at Kuruksetra, Krsna took thisopportunity to praise them. Because Vasudeva desired to perform a greatsacrifice on this occasion, the sages advised him regarding worship of Krsna,the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After the yajna was performed, all who werepresent dispersed to their respective abodes. Chapter Eighty-five containsfifty-nine verses. At the request of His father and mother, Krsna, by His mercy,returned their dead sons, all of whom were liberated. Chapter Eighty-sixcontains fifty-nine verses. This chapter describes how Arjuna kidnapped Subhadrawith a great fight. It also describes how Krsna went to Mithila to favor Hisdevotee Bahulasva and stay at the house of Srutadeva and advise them aboutspiritual advancement.   Chapter Eighty-seven contains fifty verses, describing the prayers offered toNarayana by the Vedas. Chapter Eighty-eight contains forty verses. This chapterdescribes how Vaisnavas become transcendental by worshiping Lord Visnu and thenreturn home, back to Godhead. By worship of demigods, one may get materialpower, but this chapter describes how an ordinary living being in the materialworld can be favored by Lord Sri Krsna, and it establishes Lord Visnu'ssupremacy above Lord Brahma and Lord Siva. Chapter Eighty-nine contains sixty-five verses, disclosing who is the best among the material deities. AlthoughVisnu is among the three deities--Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara--He istranscendental and supreme. In this chapter we also find a description of howKrsna and Arjuna went to Mahakala-pura to deliver the son of a Dvaraka brahmanaand how Arjuna was astonished. Chapter Ninety contains fifty verses. Thischapter summarizes Krsna's lilas and presents the logic of madhurena samapayet,establishing that everything ends well in transcendental bliss.                             Chapter One                The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction
   The summary of the First Chapter is as follows. This chapter describes howKamsa, frightened by hearing an omen about his being killed by the eighth son ofDevaki, killed Devaki's sons one after another.   When Sukadeva Gosvami finished describing the dynasty of Yadu, as well as thedynasties of the moon-god and sun-god, Maharaja Pariksit requested him todescribe Lord Krsna, who appeared with Baladeva in the Yadu dynasty, and howKrsna performed His activities within this world. Krsna is transcendental, theKing said, and therefore to understand His activities is the occupation ofliberated persons. Hearing of krsna-lila is the boat by which to achieve theultimate goal of life. Except for an animal killer or one who is following apolicy of suicide, every intelligent person must strive to understand Krsna andHis activities.   Krsna was the only worshipable Deity for the Pandavas. When Maharaja Pariksitwas in the womb of his mother, Uttara, Krsna saved him from the attack of thebrahma-sastra. Now Maharaja Pariksit asked Sukadeva Gosvami how His LordshipBaladeva, the son of Rohini, could have appeared in the womb of Devaki. Why didKrsna transfer Himself from Mathura to Vrndavana, King Pariksit asked, and howdid He live there with His family members? What did Krsna do in Mathura andVrndavana, and why did He kill His maternal uncle Kamsa? For how many years didKrsna reside in Dvaraka, and how many queens did He have? Maharaja Pariksitasked Sukadeva Gosvami all these questions. He also requested Sukadeva Gosvamito describe other activities of Krsna about which he could not inquire.   When Sukadeva Gosvami began to speak about Krsna consciousness, MaharajaPariksit forgot the fatigue brought about by his fasting. Enthusiastic todescribe Krsna, Sukadeva Gosvami said, "Like the waters of the Ganges,descriptions of the activities of Krsna can purify the entire universe. Thespeaker, the inquirer and the audience all become purified."   Once when the entire world was overburdened by the increasing military powerof demons in the form of kings, mother earth assumed the shape of a cow andapproached Lord Brahma for relief, Sympathetic to mother earth's lamentation,Brahma, accompanied by Lord Siva and other demigods, took the cow-shaped motherearth to the shore of the milk ocean, where he offered prayers to please LordVisnu, who lay there on an island in transcendental ecstasy. Brahma thereafterunderstood the advice of Maha-Visnu, who informed him that He would appear onthe surface of the earth to mitigate the burden created by the demons. Thedemigods, along with their wives, should appear there as associates of LordKrsna in the family of Yadu to increase the sons and grandsons in that dynasty.By the will of Lord Krsna, Anantadeva would appear first, as Balarama, andKrsna's potency, yogamaya, would also appear. Brahma informed mother earth aboutall this, and then he returned to his own abode.   After marrying Devaki, Vasudeva was returning home with her on a chariotdriven by Kamsa, her brother, when an ominous voice addressed Kamsa, warning himthat Devaki's eighth son would kill him. Upon hearing this omen, Kamsa wasimmediately ready to kill Devaki, but Vasudeva diplomatically began to instructhim. Vasudeva stressed that it would not be good for Kamsa to kill his youngersister, especially at the time of her marriage. Anyone who possesses a materialbody must die, Vasudeva advised him. Every living entity lives in a body forsome time and then transmigrates to another body, but one is unfortunatelymisled into accepting the body as the soul. If a person under this mistakenconception wants to kill another body, he is condemned as hellish.   Because Kamsa was not satisfied by Vasudeva's instructions, Vasudeva deviseda plan. He offered to bring Kamsa all of Devaki's children so that Kamsa couldkill them. Why then should Kamsa kill Devaki now? Kamsa was satisfied by thisproposal. In due course of time, when Devaki gave birth to a child, Vasudevabrought the newborn baby to Kamsa, who, upon seeing Vasudeva's magnanimity, wasstruck with wonder. When Vasudeva gave Kamsa the child, Kamsa, showing someintelligence, said that since he was to be killed by the eighth child, whyshould he kill the first? Although Vasudeva did not trust him, Kamsa requested
Vasudeva to take the child back. Later, however, after Narada approached Kamsaand disclosed to him that the demigods were appearing in the Yadu and Vrsnidynasties and conspiring to kill him, Kamsa decided to kill all the childrenborn in these families, and he also decided that any child born from the womb ofDevaki must be killed. Thus he arrested and imprisoned both Devaki and Vasudevaand killed six of their sons, one after another. Narada had also informed Kamsathat in his previous birth Kamsa was Kalanemi, a demon killed by Visnu.Consequently, Kamsa became a great enemy to all the descendants of the yadu-vamsa, the Yadu dynasty. He even arrested and imprisoned his own father,Ugrasena, for Kamsa wanted to enjoy the kingdom alone.   Krsna has threefold pastimes--the Vraja-lila, Mathura-lila and Dvaraka-lila.As already mentioned, in the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam there are ninetychapters, which describe all these lilas. The first four chapters describeBrahma's prayers for the relief of the earth's burden, and they also describethe appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Chapters Five throughThirty-nine recount Krsna's pastimes in Vrndavana. The Fortieth Chapterdescribes how Krsna enjoyed in the water of the Yamuna and how Akrura offeredprayers. Chapters Forty-one through Fifty-one, eleven chapters, tell of Krsna'spastimes in Mathura, and Chapters Fifty-two through Ninety, thirty-ninechapters, relate Krsna's pastimes in Dvaraka.   Chapters Twenty-nine through Thirty-three describe Krsna's dancing with thegopis, known as the rasa-lila. Therefore these five chapters are known as rasa-pancadhyaya. The Forty-seventh Chapter of the Tenth Canto is a description knownas the bhramara-gita.                                TEXT 1                                 TEXT                             sri-rajovaca                        kathito vamsa-vistaro                        bhavata soma-suryayoh                       rajnam cobhaya-vamsyanam                        caritam paramadbhutam                               SYNONYMS   sri-raja uvaca--King Pariksit said; kathitah--has already been described;vamsa-vistarah--a broad description of the dynasties; bhavata--by Your Lordship;soma-suryayoh--of the moon-god and the sun-god; rajnam--of the kings; ca--and;ubhaya--both; vamsyanam--of the members of the dynasties; caritam--thecharacter; parama--exalted; adbhutam--and wonderful.                             TRANSLATION   King Pariksit said: My dear lord, you have elaborately described thedynasties of both the moon-god and the sun-god, with the exalted and wonderfulcharacter of their kings.                               PURPORT   At the end of the Ninth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter, Sukadeva Gosvamisummarized the activities of Krsna. He spoke of how Krsna had personallyappeared to reduce the burden on the earth, how He had manifested His pastimesas a householder, and how, soon after His birth, He had transferred Himself toHis Vrajabhumi-lila. Pariksit Maharaja, being naturally a devotee of Krsna,wanted to hear more about Lord Krsna. Therefore, to encourage Sukadeva Gosvamito continue speaking about Krsna and give further details, he thanked Sukadeva
Gosvami for having described the activities of Krsna in brief. Sukadeva Gosvamihad said:               jato gatah pitr-grhad vrajam edhitartho                 hatva ripun suta-satani krtorudarah                utpadya tesu purusah kratubhih samije                atmanam atma-nigamam prathayan janesu   "The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, known as lila-purusottama,appeared as the son of Vasudeva but immediately left His father's home and wentto Vrndavana to expand His loving relationships with His confidential devotees.In Vrndavana the Lord killed many demons, and afterward He returned to Dvaraka,where according to Vedic principles He married many wives who were the best ofwomen, begot through them hundreds of sons, and performed sacrifices for His ownworship to establish the principles of householder life." (Bhag. 9.24.66)   The Yadu dynasty belonged to the family descending from Soma, the moon-god.Although the planetary systems are so arranged that the sun comes first, beforethe moon, Pariksit Maharaja gave more respect to the dynasty of the moon-god,the soma-vamsa, because in the Yadava dynasty, descending from the moon, Krsnahad appeared. There are two different ksatriya families of the royal order, onedescending from the king of the moon planet and the other descending from theking of the sun. Whenever the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears, Hegenerally appears in a ksatriya family because He comes to establish religiousprinciples and the life of righteousness. According to the Vedic system, theksatriya family is the protector of the human race. When the Supreme Personalityof Godhead appeared as Lord Ramacandra, He appeared in the surya-vamsa, thefamily descending from the sun-god, and when He appeared as Lord Krsna, He didso in the Yadu dynasty, or yadu-vamsa, whose descent was from the moon-god. Inthe Ninth Canto, Twenty-fourth Chapter, of Srimad-Bhagavatam, there is a longlist of the kings of the yadu-vamsa. All the kings in both the soma-vamsa andsurya-vamsa were great and powerful, and Maharaja Pariksit praised them veryhighly (rajnam cobhaya-vamsyanam caritam paramadbhutam). Nonetheless, he wantedto hear more about the soma-vamsa because that was the dynasty in which Krsnahad appeared.   The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is described inBrahma-samhita as the abode of cintamani: cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa-laksavrtesu surabhir abhipalayantam. The Vrndavana-dhama on this earth is areplica of that same abode. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (8.20), in the spiritualsky there is another, eternal nature, transcendental to manifested andunmanifested matter. The manifested world can be seen in the form of many starsand planets such as the sun and moon, but beyond this is the unmanifested, whichis imperceptible to those who are embodied. And beyond this unmanifested matteris the spiritual kingdom, which is described in Bhagavad-gita as supreme andeternal. That kingdom is never annihilated. Although material nature is subjectto repeated creation and annihilation, that spiritual nature remains as it iseternally. In the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, that spiritual nature, thespiritual world, is described as Vrndavana, Goloka Vrndavana or Vraja-dhama. Theelaborate description of the above-mentioned sloka from the Ninth Canto--jatogatah pitr-grhad--will be found here, in the Tenth Canto.                                TEXT 2                                 TEXT                       yados ca dharma-silasya                         nitaram muni-sattama                         tatramsenavatirnasya                       visnor viryani samsa nah
                               SYNONYMS   yadoh--of Yadu or the Yadu dynasty; ca--also; dharma-silasya--who werestrictly attached to religious principles; nitaram--highly qualified; muni-sattama--O best of all munis, king of the munis (Sukadeva Gosvami); tatra--inthat dynasty; amsena--with His plenary expansion Baladeva; avatirnasya--whoappeared as an incarnation; visnoh--of Lord Visnu; viryani--the gloriousactivities; samsa--kindly describe; nah--unto us.                             TRANSLATION   O best of munis, you have also described the descendants of Yadu, who werevery pious and strictly adherent to religious principles. Now, if you will,kindly describe the wonderful, glorious activities of Lord Visnu, or Krsna, whoappeared in that Yadu dynasty with Baladeva, His plenary expansion.                               PURPORT   The Brahma-samhita (5.1) explains that Krsna is the origin of the visnu-tattva.                        isvarah paramah krsnah                       sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah                         anadir adir govindah                         sarva-karana-karanam   "Krsna, who is known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has aneternal, blissful, spiritual body. He is the origin of all. He has no otherorigin, for He is the prime cause of all causes."                yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya                jivanti loma-vilaja jagad-anda-nathah                visnur mahan sa iha yasya kala-viseso                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   "The Brahmas, the heads of the innumerable universes, live only for theduration of one breath of Maha-Visnu. I worship Govinda, the original Lord, ofwhom Maha-Visnu is but a portion of a plenary portion." (Brahma-samhita 5.48)   Govinda, Krsna, is the original Personality of Godhead. Krsnas tu bhagavansvayam. Even Lord Maha-Visnu, who by His breathing creates many millions uponmillions of universes, is Lord Krsna's kala-visesa, or plenary portion of aplenary portion. Maha-Visnu is a plenary expansion of Sankarsana, who is aplenary expansion of Narayana. Narayana is a plenary expansion of the catur-vyuha, and the catur-vyuha are plenary expansions of Baladeva, the firstmanifestation of Krsna. Therefore when Krsna appeared with Baladeva, all thevisnu-tattvas appeared with Him.   Maharaja Pariksit requested Sukadeva Gosvami to describe Krsna and Hisglorious activities. Another meaning may be derived from this verse as follows,Although Sukadeva Gosvami was the greatest muni, he could describe Krsna onlypartially (amsena), for no one can describe Krsna fully. It is said thatAnantadeva has thousands of heads, but although He tries to describe Krsna withthousands of tongues, His descriptions are still incomplete.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT
                         avatirya yador vamse                       bhagavan bhuta-bhavanah                        krtavan yani visvatma                        tani no vada vistarat                               SYNONYMS   avatirya--after descending; yadoh vamse--in the dynasty of Yadu; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhuta-bhavanah--who is the cause of thecosmic manifestation; krtavan--executed; yani--whatever (activities); visva-atma--the Supersoul of the entire universe; tani--all of those (activities);nah--unto us; vada--kindly say; vistarat--elaborately.                             TRANSLATION   The Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, the cause ofthe cosmic manifestation, appeared in the dynasty of Yadu. Please tell meelaborately about His glorious activities and character, from the beginning tothe end of His life.                               PURPORT   In this verse the words krtavan yani indicate that all the differentactivities Krsna performed while present on earth are beneficial to humansociety. If religionists, philosophers and people in general simply hear theactivities of Krsna, they will be liberated. We have described several timesthat there are two kinds of krsna-katha, represented by Bhagavad-gita, spokenpersonally by Krsna about Himself, and Srimad-Bhagavatam, spoken by SukadevaGosvami about the glories of Krsna. Anyone who becomes even slightly interestedin krsna-katha is liberated. Kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah param vrajet(Bhag. 12.3.51). Simply by chanting or repeating krsna-katha, one is liberatedfrom the contamination of Kali-yuga. Caitanya Mahaprabhu therefore advised, yaredekha, tare kaha 'krsna'-upadesa (Cc. Madhya 7.128). This is the mission ofKrsna consciousness: to hear about Krsna and thus be liberated from materialbondage.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                     nivrtta-tarsair upagiyamanad                 bhavausadhac chrotra-mano-'bhiramat                      ka uttamasloka-gunanuvadat                    puman virajyeta vina pasughnat                               SYNONYMS   nivrtta--released from; tarsaih--lust or material activities; upagiyamanat--which is described or sung; bhava-ausadhat--which is the right medicine for thematerial disease; srotra--the process of aural reception; manah--the subjectmatter of thought for the mind; abhiramat--from the pleasing vibrations fromsuch glorification; kah--who; uttamasloka--of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead; guna-anuvadat--from describing such activities; puman--a person;virajyeta--can keep himself aloof; vina--except; pasu-ghnat--either a butcher orone who is killing his own personal existence.                             TRANSLATION
   Glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is performed in theparampara system; that is, it is conveyed from spiritual master to disciple.Such glorification is relished by those no longer interested in the false,temporary glorification of this cosmic manifestation. Descriptions of the Lordare the right medicine for the conditioned soul undergoing repeated birth anddeath. Therefore, who will cease hearing such glorification of the Lord except abutcher or one who is killing his own self?                               PURPORT   In India it is the practice among the general populace to hear about Krsna,either from Bhagavad-gita or from Srimad-Bhagavatam, in order to gain relieffrom the disease of repeated birth and death. Although India is now fallen, whenthere is a message that someone will speak about Bhagavad-gita or Srimad-Bhagavatam, thousands of people still gather to hear. This verse indicates,however, that such recitation of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam must bedone by persons completely freed from material desires (nivrtta-tarsaih).Everyone within this material world, beginning from Brahma down to theinsignificant ant, is full of material desires for sense enjoyment, and everyoneis busy in sense gratification, but when thus engaged one cannot fullyunderstand the value of krsna-katha, either in the form of Bhagavad-gita or inSrimad-Bhagavatam.   If we hear the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from liberatedpersons, this hearing will certainly free us from the bondage of materialactivities, but hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam spoken by a professional recitercannot actually help us achieve liberation. Krsna-katha is very simple. InBhagavad-gita it is said that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As HeHimself explains, mattah parataram nanyat kincid asti dhananjaya: "O Arjuna,there is no truth superior to Me." (Bg. 7.7) Simply by understanding this fact--that Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead--one can become a liberatedperson. But, especially in this age, because people are interested in hearingBhagavad-gita from unscrupulous persons who depart from the simple presentationof Bhagavad-gita and distort it for their personal satisfaction, they fail toderive the real benefit. There are big scholars, politicians, philosophers andscientists who speak on Bhagavad-gita in their own polluted way, and people ingeneral hear from them, being uninterested in hearing the glories of the SupremePersonality of Godhead from a devotee. A devotee is one who has no other motivefor reciting Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam than to serve the Lord. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu has therefore advised us to hear the glories of the Lordfrom a realized person (bhagavata paro diya bhagavata sthane). Unless one ispersonally a realized soul in the science of Krsna consciousness, a neophyteshould not approach him to hear about the Lord, for this is strictly forbiddenby Srila Sanatana Gosvami, who quotes from the padma purana:                        avaisnava-mukhodgirnam                        putam hari-kathamrtam                       sravanam naiva kartavyam                      sarpocchistam yatha payah   One should avoid hearing from a person not situated in Vaisnava behavior. AVaisnava is nivrtta-trsna; that is, he has no material purpose, for his onlypurpose is to preach Krsna consciousness. So-called scholars, philosophers andpoliticians exploit the importance of Bhagavad-gita by distorting its meaningfor their own purposes. Therefore this verse warns that krsna-katha should berecited by a person who is nivrtta-trsna. Sukadeva Gosvami epitomizes the properreciter for Srimad-Bhagavatam, and Pariksit Maharaja, who purposefully left hiskingdom and family prior to meeting death, epitomizes the person fit to hear it.A qualified reciter of Srimad-Bhagavatam gives the right medicine (bhavausadhi)
for the conditioned souls. The Krsna consciousness movement is therefore tryingto train qualified preachers to recite Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gitathroughout the entire world, so that people in general in all parts of the worldmay take advantage of this movement and thus be relieved of the threefoldmiseries of material existence.   The instructions of Bhagavad-gita and the descriptions of Srimad-Bhagavatamare so pleasing that almost anyone suffering from the threefold miseries ofmaterial existence will desire to hear the glories of the Lord from these booksand thus benefit on the path of liberation. Two classes of men, however, willnever be interested in hearing the message of Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam--those who are determined to commit suicide and those determined tokill cows and other animals for the satisfaction of their own tongues. Althoughsuch persons may make a show of hearing Srimad-Bhagavatam at a Bhagavata-saptaha, this is but another creation of the karmis, who cannot derive anybenefit from such a performance. The word pasu-ghnat is important in thisconnection. pasu-ghna means "butcher." Persons fond of performing ritualisticceremonies for elevation to the higher planetary systems must offer sacrifices(yajnas) by killing animals. Lord Buddhadeva therefore rejected the authority ofthe Vedas because his mission was to stop animal sacrifices, which arerecommended in Vedic ritualistic ceremonies.                nindasi yajna-vidher ahaha sruti-jatam                  sa-daya-hrdaya darsita-pasu-ghatam            kesava dhrta-buddha-sarira jaya jagadisa hare   (Gita-govinda)   Even though animal sacrifices are sanctioned in Vedic ceremonies, men whokill animals for such ceremonies are considered butchers. Butchers cannot beinterested in Krsna consciousness, for they are already materially allured.Their only interest lies in developing comforts for the temporary body.                       bhogaisvarya-prasaktanam                          tayapahrta-cetasam                        vyavasayatmika buddhih                        samadhau na vidhiyate   "In the minds of those who are too attached to sense enjoyment and materialopulence, and who are bewildered by such things, the resolute determination ofdevotional service to the Supreme Lord does not take place." (Bg. 2.44) SrilaNarottama dasa Thakura says:          manusya-janama paiya,     radha-krsna na bhajiya,                      janiya suniya visa khainu   Anyone who is not Krsna conscious and who therefore does not engage in theservice of the Lord is also pasu-ghna, for he is willingly drinking poison. Sucha person cannot be interested in krsna-katha because he still has a desire formaterial sense gratification; he is not nivrtta-trsna. As it is said,traivargikas te purusa vimukha hari-medhasah. Those interested in trivarga--thatis, in dharma, artha and kama--are religious for the sake of achieving amaterial position with which to gain better facilities for sense gratification.Such persons are killing themselves by willingly keeping themselves in the cycleof birth and death. They cannot be interested in Krsna consciousness.   For krsna-katha, topics about Krsna consciousness, there must be a speakerand a hearer, both of whom can be interested in Krsna consciousness if they areno longer interested in material topics. One can actually see how this attitudeautomatically develops in persons who are Krsna conscious. Although the devotees
of the Krsna consciousness movement are quite young men, they no longer readmaterialistic newspapers, magazines and so on, for they are no longer interestedin such topics (nivrtta-tarsaih). They completely give up the bodilyunderstanding of life. For topics concerning Uttamasloka, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the spiritual master speaks, and the disciple hears withattention. Unless both of them are free from material desires, they cannot beinterested in topics of Krsna consciousness. The spiritual master and discipledo not need to understand anything more than Krsna because simply byunderstanding Krsna and talking about Krsna, one becomes a perfectly learnedperson (yasmin vijnate sarvam evam vijnatam bhavati). The Lord sits withineveryone's heart, and by the grace of the Lord the devotee receives instructionsdirectly from the Lord Himself, who says in Bhagavad-gita (15.15):                    sarvasya caham hrdi sannivisto                   mattah smrtir jnanam apohanam ca                   vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyo                    vedanta-krd veda-vid eva caham   "I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge andforgetfulness. By all the Vedas, I am to be known; indeed, I am the compiler ofVedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas." Krsna consciousness is so exaltedthat one who is perfectly situated in Krsna consciousness, under the directionof the spiritual master, is fully satisfied by reading krsna-katha as found inSrimad-Bhagavatam, Bhagavad-gita and similar Vedic literatures. Since merelytalking about Krsna is so pleasing, we can simply imagine how pleasing it is torender service to Krsna.   When discourses on krsna-katha take place between a liberated spiritualmaster and his disciple, others also sometimes take advantage of hearing thesetopics and also benefit. These topics are the medicine to stop the repetition ofbirth and death. The cycle of repeated birth and death, by which one takes ondifferent bodies again and again, is called bhava or bhava-roga. If anyone,willingly or unwillingly, hears krsna-katha, his bhava-roga, the disease ofbirth and death, will certainly stop. Therefore krsna-katha is calledbhavausadha, the remedy to stop the repetition of birth and death. Karmis, orpersons attached to material sense enjoyment, generally cannot give up theirmaterial desires, but krsna-katha is such a potent medicine that if one isinduced to hear krsna-kirtana, he will certainly be freed from this disease. Apractical example is Dhruva Maharaja, who at the end of his tapasya was fullysatisfied. When the Lord wanted to give Dhruva a benediction, Dhruva refused it.Svamin krtartho'smi varam na yace. "My dear Lord," he said, "I am fullysatisfied. I do not ask for any benediction for material sense gratification."We actually see that even young boys and girls in the Krsna consciousnessmovement have given up their long practice of bad habits like illicit sex, meat-eating, intoxication and gambling. Because Krsna consciousness is so potent thatit gives them full satisfaction, they are no longer interested in material sensegratification.                              TEXTS 5-7                                 TEXT                   pitamaha me samare 'maranjayair                  devavratadyatirathais timingilaih                  duratyayam kaurava-sainya-sagaram                krtvataran vatsa-padam sma yat-plavah                drauny-astra-viplustam idam mad-angam                    santana-bijam kuru-pandavanam
                    jugopa kuksim gata atta-cakro                   matus ca me yah saranam gatayah                    viryani tasyakhila-deha-bhajam                    antar bahih purusa-kala-rupaih                    prayacchato mrtyum utamrtam ca                    maya-manusyasya vadasva vidvan                               SYNONYMS   pitamahah--my grandfathers, the five Pandavas (Yudhisthira, Bhima, Arjuna,Nakula and Sahadeva); me--my; samare--on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra; amaramjayaih--with fighters who could gain victory over the demigods on thebattlefield; devavrata-adya--Bhismadeva and others; atirathaih--great commandersin chief; timingilaih--resembling great timingila fish, which can easily eatlarge sharks; duratyayam--very difficult to cross; kaurava-sainya-sagaram--theocean of the assembled soldiers of the Kauravas; krtva--considering such anocean; ataran--crossed it; vatsa-padam--exactly as one steps over a smallhoofprint of a calf; sma--in the past; yat-plavah--the shelter of the boat ofKrsna's lotus feet; drauni--of Asvatthama; astra--by the brahmastra; viplustam--being attacked and burned; idam--this; mat-angam--my body; santana-bijam--theonly seed left, the last descendant of the family; kuru-pandavanam--of the Kurusand the Pandavas (because no one but me lived after the Battle of Kuruksetra);jugopa--gave protection; kuksim--within the womb; gatah--being placed; atta-cakrah--taking in hand the disc; matuh--of my mother; ca--also; me--my; yah--theLord who; saranam--the shelter; gatayah--who had taken; viryani--theglorification of the transcendental characteristics; tasya--of Him (the SupremePersonality of Godhead); akhila-deha-bhajam--of all the materially embodiedliving entities; antah bahih--inside and outside; purusa--of the Supreme Person;kala-rupaih--in the forms of eternal time; prayacchatah--who is the giver;mrtyum--of death; uta--it is so said; amrtam ca--and eternal life; maya-manusyasya--of the Lord, who appeared as an ordinary human being by His ownpotency; vadasva--kindly describe; vidvan--O learned speaker (Sukadeva Gosvami).                             TRANSLATION   Taking the boat of Krsna's lotus feet, my grandfather Arjuna and otherscrossed the ocean of the Battlefield of Kuruksetra, in which such commanders asBhismadeva resembled great fish that could very easily have swallowed them. Bythe mercy of Lord Krsna, my grandfathers crossed this ocean, which was verydifficult to cross, as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of a calf. Becausemy mother surrendered unto Lord Krsna's lotus feet, the Lord, Sudarsana-cakra inhand, entered her womb and saved my body, the body of the last remainingdescendant of the Kurus and the Pandavas, which was almost destroyed by thefiery weapon of Asvatthama. Lord Sri Krsna, appearing within and outside of allmaterially embodied living beings by His own potency in the forms of eternaltime--that is, as Paramatma and as virat-rupa--gave liberation to everyone,either as cruel death or as life. Kindly enlighten me by describing Histranscendental characteristics.                               PURPORT   As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.58):                   samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavam                    mahat-padam punya-yaso murareh                 bhavambudhir vatsa-padam param padam                   padam padam yad vipadam na tesam
   "For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is theshelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Murari, or the enemy of theMura demon, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in acalf's hoofprint. His goal is param padam, or Vaikuntha, the place where thereare no material miseries, not the place where there is danger at every step."   One who seeks shelter at the lotus feet of Lord Krsna is immediatelyprotected by the Lord. As the Lord promises in Bhagavad-gita (18.66), aham tvamsarva-papebhyo moksayisyami ma sucah: "I shall deliver you from all sinfulreactions. Do not fear." By taking shelter of Lord Krsna, one comes under thesafest protection. Thus when the Pandavas took shelter at the lotus feet ofKrsna, all of them were on the safe side of the Battlefield of Kuruksetra.Pariksit Maharaja, therefore, felt obliged to think of Krsna in the last days ofhis life. This is the ideal result of Krsna consciousness: ante narayana-smrtih.If at the time of death one can remember Krsna, one's life is successful.Pariksit Maharaja, therefore, because of his many obligations to Krsna,intelligently decided to think of Krsna constantly during the last days of hislife. Krsna had saved the Pandavas, Maharaja Pariksit's grandfathers, on theBattlefield of Kuruksetra, and Krsna had saved Maharaja Pariksit himself when hewas attacked by the brahmastra of Asvatthama. Krsna acted as the friend andworshipable Deity of the Pandava family. Moreover, apart from Lord Krsna'spersonal contact with the Pandavas, Krsna is the Supersoul of all livingentities, and He gives everyone liberation, even if one is not a pure devotee.Kamsa, for example, was not at all a devotee, yet Krsna, after killing him, gavehim salvation. Krsna consciousness is beneficial to everyone, whether one is apure devotee or a nondevotee. This is the glory of Krsna consciousness.Considering this, who will not take shelter at the lotus feet of Krsna. Krsna isdescribed in this verse as maya-manusya because He descends exactly like a humanbeing. He is not obliged to come here, like karmis, or ordinary living beings;rather, He appears by His own internal energy (sambhavamy atma-mayaya) just toshow favor to the fallen conditioned souls. Krsna is always situated in Hisoriginal position as sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, and anyone who renders service toHim is also situated in his original, spiritual identity (svarupenavyavasthitih). This is the highest perfection of human life.                                TEXT 8                                 TEXT                       rohinyas tanayah prokto                       ramah sankarsanas tvaya                      devakya garbha-sambandhah                         kuto dehantaram vina                               SYNONYMS   rohinyah--of Rohinidevi, the mother of Baladeva; tanayah--the son; proktah--is well known; ramah--Balarama; sankarsanah--Balarama is none other thanSankarsana, the first Deity in the quadruple group (Sankarsana, Aniruddha,Pradyumna and Vasudeva); tvaya--by you (it is so said); devakyah--of Devaki, themother of Krsna; garbha-sambandhah--connected with the womb; kutah--how; deha-antaram--transferring bodies; vina--without.                             TRANSLATION   My dear Sukadeva Gosvami, you have already explained that Sankarsana, whobelongs to the second quadruple, appeared as the son of Rohini named Balarama.If Balarama was not transferred from one body to another, how is it possible
that He was first in the womb of Devaki and then in the womb of Rohini? Kindlyexplain this to me.                               PURPORT   Here is a question particularly directed at understanding Balarama, who isSankarsana Himself. Balarama is well known as the son of Rohini, yet it is alsoknown that He was the son of Devaki. Pariksit Maharaja wanted to understand themystery of Balarama's being the son of both Devaki and Rohini.                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT                       kasman mukundo bhagavan                       pitur gehad vrajam gatah                     kva vasam jnatibhih sardham                        krtavan satvatam patih                               SYNONYMS   kasmat--why; mukundah--Krsna, who can award liberation to everyone; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pituh--of His father (Vasudeva); gehat--from the house; vrajam--to Vrajadhama, Vrajabhumi; gatah--went; kva--where;vasam--placed Himself to live; jnatibhih--His relatives; sardham--with; krtavan--did so; satvatam patih--the master of all Vaisnava devotees.                             TRANSLATION   Why did Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, leave the house of Hisfather, Vasudeva, and transfer Himself to the house of Nanda in Vrndavana? Wheredid the Lord, the master of the Yadu dynasty, live with His relatives inVrndavana?                               PURPORT   These are inquiries about the itinerary of Krsna. Just after His birth in thehouse of Vasudeva in Mathura, Krsna transferred Himself to Gokula, on the otherside of the Yamuna, and after some days He moved with His father, mother andother relatives to Nanda-grama, Vrndavana. Maharaja Pariksit was very much eagerto hear about Krsna's activities in Vrndavana. This entire canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam is full of activities performed in Vrndavana and Dvaraka. The firstforty chapters describe Krsna's Vrndavana affairs, and the next fifty describeKrsna's activities in Dvaraka. Maharaja Pariksit, to fulfill his desire to hearabout Krsna, requested Sukadeva Gosvami to describe these activities in fulldetail.                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT                        vraje vasan kim akaron                        madhupuryam ca kesavah                      bhrataram cavadhit kamsam                        matur addhatad-arhanam                               SYNONYMS
   vraje--at Vrndavana; vasan--while residing; kim akarot--what did He do;madhupuryam--in Mathura; ca--and; kesavah--Krsna, the killer of Kesi; bhrataram--the brother; ca--and; avadhit--killed; kamsam--Kamsa; matuh--of His mother;addha--directly; a-tat-arhanam--which was not at all sanctioned by the sastras.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Krsna lived both in Vrndavana and in Mathura. What did He do there? Whydid He kill Kamsa, His mother's brother? Such killing is not at all sanctionedin the sastras.                               PURPORT   One's maternal uncle, the brother of one's mother, is on the level of one'sfather. When a maternal uncle has no son, his nephew legally inherits hisproperty. Therefore, why did Krsna directly kill Kamsa, the brother of Hismother? Maharaja Pariksit was very much inquisitive about the facts in thisregard.                               TEXT 11                                 TEXT                        deham manusam asritya                        kati varsani vrsnibhih                        yadu-puryam sahavatsit                     patnyah katy abhavan prabhoh                               SYNONYMS   deham--body; manusam--exactly like a man; asritya--accepting; kati varsani--how many years; vrsnibhih--in the company of the Vrsnis, those who were born inthe Vrsni family; yadu-puryam--in Dvaraka, in the residential quarters of theYadus; saha--with; avatsit--the Lord lived; patnyah--wives; kati--how many;abhavan--were there; prabhoh--of the Lord.                             TRANSLATION   Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, has no material body, yet Heappears as a human being. For how many years did He live with the descendants ofVrsni? How many wives did He marry, and for how many years did He live inDvaraka?                               PURPORT   In many places the Supreme Personality of Godhead is described as sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, possessing a spiritual, blissful body. His bodily feature isnarakrti, that is, exactly like that of a human being. Here the same idea isrepeated in the words manusam asritya, which indicate that He accepts a bodyexactly like that of a man. Everywhere it is confirmed that Krsna is nevernirakara, or formless. He has His form, exactly like that of a human being.There is no doubt about this.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                       etad anyac ca sarvam me
                        mune krsna-vicestitam                        vaktum arhasi sarvajna                        sraddadhanaya vistrtam                               SYNONYMS   etat--all these details; anyat ca--and others also; sarvam--everything; me--unto me; mune--O great sage; krsna-vicestitam--the activities of Lord Krsna;vaktum--to describe; arhasi--you are able; sarva-jna--because you knoweverything; sraddadhanaya--because I am not envious but have all faith in Him;vistrtam--in full detail.                             TRANSLATION   O great sage, who know everything about Krsna, please describe in detail allthe activities of which I have inquired and also those of which I have not, forI have full faith and am very eager to hear of them.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT                       naisatiduhsaha ksun mam                        tyaktodam api badhate                      pibantam tvan-mukhambhoja-                        cyutam hari-kathamrtam                               SYNONYMS   na--not; esa--all this; ati-duhsaha--extremely difficult to bear; ksut--hunger; mam--unto me; tyakta-udam--even after giving up drinking water; api--also; badhate--does not hinder; pibantam--while drinking; tvat-mukha-ambhoja-cyutam--emanating from your lotus mouth; hari-katha-amrtam--the nectar of topicsconcerning Krsna.                             TRANSLATION   Because of my vow on the verge of death, I have given up even drinking water,yet because I am drinking the nectar of topics about Krsna, which is flowingfrom the lotus mouth of Your Lordship, my hunger and thirst, which are extremelydifficult to bear, cannot hinder me.                               PURPORT   To prepare to meet death in seven days, Maharaja Pariksit gave up all foodand drink. As a human being, he was certainly both hungry and thirsty, andtherefore Sukadeva Gosvami might have wanted to stop narrating thetranscendental topics of Krsna; but despite his fast, Maharaja Pariksit was notat all fatigued. "The hunger and thirst from my fast do not disturb me," hesaid. "Once when I felt very thirsty, I went to the asrama of Samika Muni todrink water, but the muni did not supply it. I therefore wrapped a dead snakeover his shoulder, and that is why I was cursed by the brahmana boy. Now,however, I am quite fit. I am not at all disturbed by my hunger and thirst."This indicates that although on the material platform there are disturbancesfrom hunger and thirst, on the spiritual platform there is no such thing asfatigue.   The entire world is suffering because of spiritual thirst. Every living beingis Brahman, or spirit soul, and needs spiritual food to satisfy his hunger and
thirst. Unfortunately, however, the world is completely unaware of the nectar ofkrsna-katha. The Krsna consciousness movement is therefore a boon tophilosophers, religionists and people in general. There is certainly a charmingattraction in Krsna and krsna-katha. Therefore the Absolute Truth is calledKrsna, the most attractive.   The word amrta is also an important reference to the moon, and the wordambuja means "lotus." The pleasing moonshine and pleasing fragrance of the lotuscombined to bring pleasure to everyone hearing krsna-katha from the mouth ofSukadeva Gosvami. As it is said:                   matir na krsne paratah svato va                   mitho 'bhipadyeta grha-vratanam                    adanta-gobhir visatam tamisram                    punah punas carvita-carvananam   "Because of their uncontrolled senses, persons too addicted to materialisticlife make progress toward hellish conditions and repeatedly chew that which hasalready been chewed. Their inclinations toward Krsna are never aroused, eitherby the instructions of others, by their own efforts, or by a combination ofboth." (Bhag. 7.5.30) At the present moment, all of human society is engaged inthe business of chewing the chewed (punah punas carvita-carvananam). People areprepared to undergo mrtyu-samsara-vartmani, taking birth in one form, dying,accepting another form and dying again. To stop this repetition of birth anddeath, krsna-katha, or Krsna consciousness, is absolutely necessary. But unlessone hears krsna-katha from a realized soul like Sukadeva Gosvami, one cannotrelish the nectar of krsna-katha, which puts an end to all material fatigue, andenjoy the blissful life of transcendental existence. In relation to the Krsnaconsciousness movement, we actually see that those who have tasted the nectar ofkrsna-katha lose all material desires, whereas those who cannot understand Krsnaor krsna-katha regard the Krsna conscious life as "brainwashing" and "mindcontrol." While the devotees enjoy spiritual bliss, the nondevotees aresurprised that the devotees have forgotten material hankerings.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                              suta uvaca                evam nisamya bhrgu-nandana sadhu-vadam               vaiyasakih sa bhagavan atha visnu-ratam             pratyarcya krsna-caritam kali-kalmasa-ghnam                vyahartum arabhata bhagavata-pradhanah                               SYNONYMS   sutah uvaca--Suta Gosvami said; evam--thus; nisamya--hearing; bhrgu-nandana--O son of the Bhrgu dynasty, Saunaka; sadhu-vadam--pious questions; vaiyasakih--Sukadeva Gosvami, the son of Vyasadeva; sah--he; bhagavan--the most powerful;atha--thus; visnu-ratam--unto Pariksit Maharaja, who was always protected byVisnu; pratyarcya--offering him respectful obeisances; krsna-caritam--topics ofLord Krsna; kali-kalmasa-ghnam--which diminish the troubles of this age of Kali;vyahartum--to describe; arabhata--began; bhagavata-pradhanah--Sukadeva Gosvami,the chief among the pure devotees.                             TRANSLATION   Suta Gosvami said: O son of Bhrgu [Saunaka Rsi], after Sukadeva Gosvami, themost respectable devotee, the son of Vyasadeva, heard the pious questions of
Maharaja Pariksit, he thanked the King with great respect. Then he began todiscourse on topics concerning Krsna, which are the remedy for all sufferings inthis age of Kali.                               PURPORT   In this verse the words krsna-caritam kali-kalmasa-ghnam indicate that theactivities of Lord Krsna are certainly the greatest panacea for all miseries,especially in this age of Kali. It is said that in Kali-yuga people have onlyshort lives, and they have no culture of spiritual consciousness. If anyone isat all interested in spiritual culture, he is misled by many bogus svamis andyogis who do not refer to krsna-katha. Therefore most people are unfortunate anddisturbed by many calamities. Srila Vyasadeva prepared Srimad-Bhagavatam at therequest of Narada Muni in order to give relief to the suffering people of thisage (kali-kalmasa-ghnam). The Krsna consciousness movement is seriously engagedin enlightening people through the pleasing topics of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Allover the world, the message of Srimad-Bhagavatam and Bhagavad-gita is beingaccepted in all spheres of life, especially in advanced, educated circles.   Srila Sukadeva Gosvami is described in this verse as bhagavata-pradhanah,whereas Maharaja Pariksit is described as visnu-ratam. Both words bear the samemeaning; that is, Maharaja Pariksit was a great devotee of Krsna, and SukadevaGosvami was also a great saintly person and a great devotee of Krsna. Combinedtogether to present krsna-katha, they give great relief to suffering humanity.                        anarthopasamam saksad                        bhakti-yogam adhoksaje                        lokasyajanato vidvams                        cakre satvata-samhitam   "The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him,can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But themass of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyasadeva compiledthis Vedic literature, Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is in relation to the SupremeTruth." (Bhag. 1.7.6) People in general are unaware that the message of Srimad-Bhagavatam can give all of human society relief from the pangs of Kali-yuga(kali-kalmasa-ghnam).                               TEXT 15                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                       samyag vyavasita buddhis                         tava rajarsi-sattama                         vasudeva-kathayam te                       yaj jata naisthiki ratih                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; samyak--completely; vyavasita--fixed; buddhih--intelligence; tava--of Your Majesty; raja-rsi-sattama--O best ofrajarsis, saintly kings; vasudeva-kathayam--in hearing about the topics ofVasudeva, Krsna; te--your; yat--because; jata--developed; naisthiki--withoutcessation; ratih--attraction or ecstatic devotional service.                             TRANSLATION
   Srila Sukadeva Gosvami said: O Your Majesty, best of all saintly kings,because you are greatly attracted to topics of Vasudeva, it is certain that yourintelligence is firmly fixed in spiritual understanding, which is the only truegoal for humanity. Because that attraction is unceasing, it is certainlysublime.                               PURPORT   Krsna-katha is compulsory for the rajarsi, or executive head of government.This is also mentioned in Bhagavad-gita (imam rajarsayo viduh). Unfortunately,however, in this age the governmental power is gradually being captured bythird-class and fourth-class men who have no spiritual understanding, andsociety is therefore very quickly becoming degraded. Krsna-katha must beunderstood by the executive heads of government, for otherwise how will peoplebe happy and gain relief from the pangs of materialistic life? One who has fixedhis mind in Krsna consciousness should be understood to have very sharpintelligence in regard to the value of life. Maharaja Pariksit was rajarsi-sattama, the best of all saintly kings, and Sukadeva Gosvami was muni-sattama,the best of munis. Both of them were elevated because of their common interestin krsna-katha. The exalted position of the speaker and the audience will beexplained very nicely in the next verse. Krsna-katha is so enlivening thatMaharaja Pariksit forgot everything material, even his personal comfort inrelation to food and drink. This is an example of how the Krsna consciousnessmovement should spread all over the world to bring both the speaker and theaudience to the transcendental platform and back home, back to Godhead.                               TEXT 16                                 TEXT                        vasudeva-katha-prasnah                       purusams trin punati hi                     vaktaram pracchakam srotrms                        tat-pada-salilam yatha                               SYNONYMS   vasudeva-katha-prasnah--questions about the pastimes and characteristics ofVasudeva, Krsna; purusan--persons; trin--three; punati--purify; hi--indeed;vaktaram--the speaker, such as Sukadeva Gosvami; pracchakam--and an inquisitivehearer like Maharaja Pariksit; srotrn--and, between them, the listeners hearingabout the topics; tat-pada-salilam yatha--exactly as the entire world ispurified by the Ganges water emanating from the toe of Lord Visnu.                             TRANSLATION   The Ganges, emanating from the toe of Lord Visnu, purifies the three worlds,the upper, middle and lower planetary systems. Similarly, when one asksquestions about the pastimes and characteristics of Lord Vasudeva, Krsna, threevarieties of men are purified: the speaker or preacher, he who inquires, and thepeople in general who listen.                               PURPORT   It is said, tasmad gurum prapadyeta jijnasuh sreya uttamam (Bhag. 11.3.21).Those interested in understanding transcendental subject matters as the goal oflife must approach the bona fide spiritual master. Tasmad gurum prapadyeta. Onemust surrender to such a guru, who can give right information about Krsna.
Herein, Maharaja Pariksit has surrendered to the right personality, SukadevaGosvami, for enlightenment in vasudeva-katha. Vasudeva is the originalPersonality of Godhead, who has unlimited spiritual activities. Srimad-Bhagavatam is a record of such activities, and Bhagavad-gita is the record ofVasudeva speaking personally. Therefore, since the Krsna consciousness movementis full of vasudeva-katha, anyone who hears, anyone who joins the movement andanyone who preaches will be purified.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                       bhumir drpta-nrpa-vyaja-                        daityanika-satayutaih                        akranta bhuri-bharena                       brahmanam saranam yayau                               SYNONYMS   bhumih--mother earth; drpta--puffed up; nrpa-vyaja--posing as kings, or thesupreme power personified in the state; daitya--of demons; anika--of militaryphalanxes of soldiers; sata-ayutaih--unlimitedly, by many hundreds of thousands;akranta--being overburdened; bhuri-bharena--by a burden of unnecessary fightingpower; brahmanam--unto Lord Brahma; saranam--to take shelter; yayau--went.                             TRANSLATION   Once when mother earth was overburdened by hundreds of thousands of militaryphalanxes of various conceited demons dressed like kings, she approached LordBrahma for relief.                               PURPORT   When the world is overburdened by unnecessary military arrangements and whenvarious demoniac kings are the executive heads of state, this burden causes theappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):                        yada yada hi dharmasya                        glanir bhavati bharata                       abhyutthanam adharmasya                        tadatmanam srjamy aham   "Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendantof Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at that time I appear Myself."When the residents of this earth become atheistic and godless, they descend tothe status of animals like dogs and hogs, and thus their only business is tobark among themselves. This is dharmasya glani, deviation from the goal of life.Human life is meant for attaining the highest perfection of Krsna consciousness,but when people are godless and the presidents or kings are unnecessarily puffedup with military power, their business is to fight and increase the militarystrength of their different states. Nowadays, therefore, it appears that everystate is busy manufacturing atomic weapons to prepare for a third world war.Such preparations are certainly unnecessary; they reflect the false pride of theheads of state. The real business of a chief executive is to see to thehappiness of the mass of people by training them in Krsna consciousness indifferent divisions of life. Catur-varnyam maya srstam guna-karma-vibhagasah(Bg. 4.13). A leader should train the people as brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas
and sudras and engage them in various occupational duties, thus helping themprogress toward Krsna consciousness. Instead, however, rogues and thieves in theguise of protectors arrange for a voting system, and in the name of democracythey come to power by hook or crook and exploit the citizens. Even long, longago, asuras, persons devoid of God consciousness, became the heads of state, andnow this is happening again. The various states of the world are preoccupiedwith arranging for military strength. Sometimes they spend sixty-five percent ofthe government's revenue for this purpose. But why should people's hard-earnedmoney be spent in this way? Because of the present world situation, Krsna hasdescended in the form of the Krsna consciousness movement. This is quitenatural, for without the Krsna consciousness movement the world cannot bepeaceful and happy.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                     gaur bhutvasru-mukhi khinna                       krandanti karunam vibhoh                        upasthitantike tasmai                         vyasanam samavocata                               SYNONYMS   gauh--the shape of a cow; bhutva--assuming; asru-mukhi--with tears in theeyes; khinna--very much distressed; krandanti--weeping; karunam--piteously;vibhoh--of Lord Brahma; upasthita--appeared; antike--in front; tasmai--unto him(Lord Brahma); vyasanam--her distress; samavocata--submitted.                             TRANSLATION   Mother earth assumed the form of a cow. Very much distressed, with tears inher eyes, she appeared before Lord Brahma and told him about her misfortune.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                       brahma tad-upadharyatha                        saha devais taya saha                        jagama sa-tri-nayanas                       tiram ksira-payo-nidheh                               SYNONYMS   brahma--Lord Brahma; tat-upadharya--understanding everything rightly; atha--thereafter; saha--with; devaih--the demigods; taya saha--with mother earth;jagama--approached; sa-tri-nayanah--with Lord Siva, who has three eyes; tiram--the shore; ksira-payah-nidheh--of the ocean of milk.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, having heard of the distress of mother earth, Lord Brahma, withmother earth, Lord Siva and all the other demigods, approached the shore of theocean of milk.                               PURPORT
   After Lord Brahma understood the precarious condition of the earth, he firstvisited the demigods headed by Lord Indra, who are in charge of the variousaffairs of this universe, and Lord Siva, who is responsible for annihilation.Both maintenance and annihilation go on perpetually, under the order of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.8), paritranayasadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam. Those who are obedient to the laws of God areprotected by different servants and demigods, whereas those who are undesirableare vanquished by Lord Siva. Lord Brahma first met all the demigods, includingLord Siva. Then, along with mother earth, they went to the shore of the ocean ofmilk, where Lord Visnu lies on a white island, Svetadvipa.                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                       tatra gatva jagannatham                         deva-devam vrsakapim                        purusam purusa-suktena                         upatasthe samahitah                               SYNONYMS   tatra--there (on the shore of the ocean of milk); gatva--after going;jagannatham--unto the master of the entire universe, the Supreme Being; deva-devam--the Supreme God of all gods; vrsakapim--the Supreme Person, Visnu, whoprovides for everyone and diminishes everyone's suffering; purusam--the SupremePerson; purusa-suktena--with the Vedic mantra known as purusa-sukta; upatasthe--worshiped; samahitah--with full attention.                             TRANSLATION   After reaching the shore of the ocean of milk, the demigods worshiped theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu, the master of the whole universe,the supreme God of all gods, who provides for everyone and diminishes everyone'ssuffering. With great attention, they worshiped Lord Visnu, who lies on theocean of milk, by reciting the Vedic mantras known as the Purusa-sukta.                               PURPORT   The demigods, such as Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, King Indra, Candra and Surya,are all subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Aside from thedemigods, even in human society there are many influential personalitiessupervising various businesses or establishments. Lord Visnu, however, is theGod of gods (paramesvara). He is parama-purusa, the Supreme Being, Paramatma. Asconfirmed in the Brahma-samhita (5.1), isvarah paramah krsnah sac-cid-ananda-vigrahah: "Krsna, known as Govinda, is the supreme controller. He has aneternal, blissful, spiritual body." No one is equal to or greater than theSupreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore He is described here by manywords: jagannatha, deva-deva, vrsakapi and purusa. The supremacy of Lord Visnuis also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (10.12) in this statement by Arjuna:                       param brahma param dhama                       pavitram paramam bhavan                       purusam sasvatam divyam                        adi-devam ajam vibhum   "You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the supreme abode and purifier,the Absolute Truth and the eternal divine person. You are the primal God,
transcendental and original, and You are the unborn and all-pervading beauty."Krsna is adi-purusa, the original Personality of Godhead (govindam adi-purusamtam aham bhajami). Visnu is a plenary expansion of Lord Krsna, and all thevisnu-tattvas are paramesvara, deva-deva.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                   giram samadhau gagane samiritam                   nisamya vedhas tridasan uvaca ha                  gam paurusim me srnutamarah punar                   vidhiyatam asu tathaiva ma ciram                               SYNONYMS   giram--a vibration of words; samadhau--in trance; gagane--in the sky;samiritam--vibrated; nisamya--hearing; vedhah--Lord Brahma; tridasan--unto thedemigods; uvaca--said; ha--oh; gam--the order; paurusim--received from theSupreme Person; me--from me; srnuta--just hear; amarah--O demigods; punah--again; vidhiyatam--execute; asu--immediately; tatha eva--just so; ma--do not;ciram--delay.                             TRANSLATION   While in trance, Lord Brahma heard the words of Lord Visnu vibrating in thesky. Thus he told the demigods: O demigods, hear from me the order ofKsirodakasayi Visnu, the Supreme Person, and execute it attentively withoutdelay.                               PURPORT   It appears that the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can be heardin trance by competent persons. Modern science gives us telephones, by which onecan hear sound vibrations from a distant place. Similarly, although otherpersons cannot hear the words of Lord Visnu, Lord Brahma is able to hear theLord's words within himself. This is confirmed in the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.1.1): tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye. Adi-kavi is Lord Brahma. Inthe beginning of the creation, Lord Brahma received the instructions of Vedicknowledge from Lord Visnu through the medium of the heart (hrda). The sameprinciple is confirmed herewith. While Brahma was in trance, he was able to hearthe words of Ksirodakasayi Visnu, and he carried the Lord's message to thedemigods. Similarly, in the beginning, Brahma first received the Vedic knowledgefrom the Supreme Personality of Godhead through the core of the heart. In bothinstances the same process was used in transmitting the message to Lord Brahma.In other words, although Lord Visnu was invisible even to Lord Brahma, LordBrahma could hear Lord Visnu's words through the heart. The Supreme Personalityof Godhead is invisible even to Lord Brahma, yet He descends on this earth andbecomes visible to people in general. This is certainly an act of His causelessmercy, but fools and nondevotees think that Krsna is an ordinary historicalperson. Because they think that the Lord is an ordinary person like them, theyare described as mudha (avajananti mam mudhah). The causeless mercy of theSupreme Personality of Godhead is neglected by such demoniac persons, who cannotunderstand the instructions of Bhagavad-gita and who therefore misinterpretthem.                               TEXT 22
                                 TEXT                   puraiva pumsavadhrto dhara-jvaro                  bhavadbhir amsair yadusupajanyatam                  sa yavad urvya bharam isvaresvarah                sva-kala-saktya ksapayams cared bhuvi                               SYNONYMS   pura--even before this; eva--indeed; pumsa--by the Supreme Personality ofGodhead; avadhrtah--was certainly known; dhara-jvarah--the distress on theearth; bhavadbhih--by your good selves; amsaih--expanding as plenary portions;yadusu--in the family of King Yadu; upajanyatam--take your birth and appearthere; sah--He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); yavat--as long as; urvyah--of the earth; bharam--the burden; isvara-isvarah--the Lord of lords; sva-kala-saktya--by His own potency the time factor; ksapayan--diminishing; caret--shouldmove; bhuvi--on the surface of the earth.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Brahma informed the demigods: Before we submitted our petition to theLord, He was already aware of the distress on earth. Consequently, for as longas the Lord moves on earth to diminish its burden by His own potency in the formof time, all of you demigods should appear through plenary portions as sons andgrandsons in the family of the Yadus.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.39):                 ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan                  nanavataram akarod bhuvanesu kintu              krsnah svayam samabhavat paramah puman yo                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   "I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is alwayssituated in various incarnations such as Rama, Nrsimha and many sub-incarnationsas well, but who is the original personality of Godhead, known as Krsna, and whoincarnates personally also."   In this verse from Srimad-Bhagavatam we find the words puraiva pumsavadhrtodhara jvarah. The word pumsa refers to Krsna, who was already aware of how thewhole world was suffering because of the increase of demons. Without referenceto the supreme power of the Personality of Godhead, demons assert themselves tobe independent kings and presidents, and thus they create a disturbance byincreasing their military power. When such disturbances are very prominent,Krsna appears. At present also, various demoniac states all over the world areincreasing their military power in many ways, and the whole situation has becomedistressful. Therefore Krsna has appeared by His name, in the Hare Krsnamovement, which will certainly diminish the burden of the world. Philosophers,religionists, and people in general must take to this movement very seriously,for man-made plans and devices will not help bring peace on earth. Thetranscendental sound Hare Krsna is not different from the person Krsna.                        nama cintamanih krsnas                        caitanya-rasa-vigrahah                      purnah suddho nitya-mukto                       'bhinnatvan nama-naminoh
   (Padma Purana)   There is no difference between the sound Hare Krsna and Krsna the person.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                         vasudeva-grhe saksad                        bhagavan purusah parah                       janisyate tat-priyartham                       sambhavantu sura-striyah                               SYNONYMS   vasudeva-grhe--in the house of Vasudeva (who would be the father of Krsnawhen the Lord appeared); saksat--personally; bhagavan--the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, who has full potency; purusah--the original person; parah--who istranscendental; janisyate--will appear; tat-priya-artham--and for Hissatisfaction; sambhavantu--should take birth; sura-striyah--all the wives of thedemigods.                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, who has full potency, willpersonally appear as the son of Vasudeva. Therefore all the wives of thedemigods should also appear in order to satisfy Him.                               PURPORT   In Bhagavad-gita (4.9) the Lord says, tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mameti: after giving up the material body, the devotee of the Lord returns home,back to Godhead. This means that the devotee is first transferred to theparticular universe where the Lord is at that time staying to exhibit Hispastimes. There are innumerable universes, and the Lord is appearing in one ofthese universes at every moment. Therefore His pastimes are called nitya-lila,eternal pastimes. The Lord's appearance as a child in the house of Devaki takesplace continuously in one universe after another. Therefore, the devotee isfirst transferred to that particular universe where the pastimes of the Lord arecurrent. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, even if a devotee does not complete thecourse of devotional service, he enjoys the happiness of the heavenly planets,where the most pious people dwell, and then takes birth in the house of a sucior sriman, a pious brahmana or a wealthy vaisya (sucinam srimatam gehe yoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate). Thus a pure devotee, even if unable to execute devotionalservice completely, is transferred to the upper planetary system, where piouspeople reside. From there, if his devotional service is complete, such a devoteeis transferred to the place where the Lord's pastimes are going on. Herein it issaid, sambhavantu sura-striyah. Sura-stri, the women of the heavenly planets,were thus ordered to appear in the Yadu dynasty in Vrndavana to enrich thepastimes of Lord Krsna. These sura-stri, when further trained to live withKrsna, would be transferred to the original Goloka Vrndavana. During LordKrsna's pastimes within this world, the sura-stri were to appear in differentways in different families to give pleasure to the Lord, just so that they wouldbe fully trained before going to the eternal Goloka Vrndavana. With theassociation of Lord Krsna, either at Dvaraka-puri, Mathura-puri or Vrndavana,they would certainly return home, back to Godhead. Among the sura-stri, thewomen of the heavenly planets, there are many devotees, such as the mother of
the Upendra incarnation of Krsna. It was such devoted women who were called forin this connection.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                         vasudeva-kalanantah                        sahasra-vadanah svarat                         agrato bhavita devo                        hareh priya-cikirsaya                               SYNONYMS   vasudeva-kala anantah--the plenary expansion of Lord Krsna known asAnantadeva or Sankarsana Ananta, the all-pervasive incarnation of the SupremeLord; sahasra-vadanah--having thousands of hoods; svarat--fully independent;agratah--previously; bhavita--will appear; devah--the Lord; hareh--of LordKrsna; priya-cikirsaya--with the desire to act for the pleasure.                             TRANSLATION   The foremost manifestation of Krsna is Sankarsana, who is known as Ananta. Heis the origin of all incarnations within this material world. Previous to theappearance of Lord Krsna, this original Sankarsana will appear as Baladeva, justto please the Supreme Lord Krsna in His transcendental pastimes.                               PURPORT   Sri Baladeva is the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. He is equal insupremacy to the Supreme Godhead, yet wherever Krsna appears, Sri Baladevaappears as His brother, sometimes elder and sometimes younger. When Krsnaappears, all His plenary expansions and other incarnations appear with Him. Thisis elaborately explained in Caitanya-caritamrta. This time, Baladeva wouldappear before Krsna as Krsna's elder brother.                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT                        visnor maya bhagavati                        yaya sammohitam jagat                         adista prabhunamsena                       karyarthe sambhavisyati                               SYNONYMS   visnoh maya--the potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu;bhagavati--as good as Bhagavan and therefore known as Bhagavati; yaya--by whom;sammohitam--captivated; jagat--all the worlds, both material and spiritual;adista--being ordered; prabhuna--by the master; amsena--with her differentpotential factors; karya-arthe--for executing business; sambhavisyati--wouldalso appear.                             TRANSLATION   The potency of the Lord, known as visnu-maya, who is as good as the SupremePersonality of Godhead, will also appear with Lord Krsna. This potency, acting
in different capacities, captivates all the worlds, both material and spiritual.At the request of her master, she will appear with her different potencies inorder to execute the work of the Lord.                               PURPORT   Parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8). In the Vedasit is said that the potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are calledby different names, such as yogamaya and mahamaya. Ultimately, however, theLord's potency is one, exactly as electric potency is one although it can actboth to cool and to heat. The Lord's potency acts in both the spiritual andmaterial worlds. In the spiritual world the Lord's potency works as yogamaya,and in the material world the same potency works as mahamaya, exactly aselectricity works in both a heater and a cooler. In the material world, thispotency, working as mahamaya, acts upon the conditioned souls to deprive themmore and more of devotional service. It is said, yaya sammohito jiva atmanamtri-gunatmakam. In the material world the conditioned soul thinks of himself asa product of tri-guna, the three modes of material nature. This is the bodilyconception of life. Because of associating with the three gunas of the materialpotency, everyone identifies himself with his body. Someone is thinking he is abrahmana, someone a ksatriya, and someone a vaisya or sudra. Actually, however,one is neither a brahmana, a ksatriya, a vaisya nor a sudra; one is part andparcel of the Supreme Lord (mamaivamsah), but because of being covered by thematerial energy, mahamaya, one identifies himself in these different ways. Whenthe conditioned soul becomes liberated, however, he thinks himself an eternalservant of Krsna. Jivera 'svarupa' haya--krsnera 'nitya-dasa.' When he comes tothat position, the same potency, acting as yogamaya, increasingly helps himbecome purified and devote his energy to the service of the Lord.   In either case, whether the soul is conditioned or liberated, the Lord issupreme. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (9.10), mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram: it is by the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that thematerial energy, mahamaya, works upon the conditioned soul.                         prakrteh kriyamanani                       gunaih karmani sarvasah                         ahankara-vimudhatma                         kartaham iti manyate   "The bewildered spirit soul, under the influence of the three modes ofmaterial nature, thinks himself to be the doer of activities which are inactuality carried out by nature." (Bg. 3.27) Within conditioned life, no one hasfreedom, but because one is bewildered, being subject to the rule of mahamaya,one foolishly thinks himself independent (ahankara-vimudhatma kartaham itimanyate). But when the conditioned soul becomes liberated by executingdevotional service, he is given a greater and greater chance to relish arelationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead in different transcendentalstatuses, such as dasya-rasa, sakhya-rasa, vatsalya-rasa and madhurya-rasa.   Thus the Lord's potency, visnu-maya, has two features--avaranika and unmukha.When the Lord appeared, His potency came with Him and acted in different ways.She acted as yogamaya with Yasoda, Devaki and other intimate relations of theLord, and she acted in a different way with Kamsa, Salva and other asuras. Bythe order of Lord Krsna, His potency yogamaya came with Him and exhibiteddifferent activities according to the time and circumstances. Karyarthesambhavisyati. Yogamaya acted differently to execute different purposes desiredby the Lord. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.13), mahatmanas tu mam parthadaivim prakrtim asritah. The mahatmas, who fully surrender to the lotus feet ofthe Lord, are directed by yogamaya, whereas the duratmas, those who are devoidof devotional service, are directed by mahamaya.
                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                         ity adisyamara-ganan                        prajapati-patir vibhuh                       asvasya ca mahim girbhih                       sva-dhama paramam yayau                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti--thus; adisya--afterinforming; amara-ganan--all the demigods; prajapati-patih--Lord Brahma, themaster of the Prajapatis; vibhuh--all-powerful; asvasya--after pacifying; ca--also; mahim--mother earth; girbhih--by sweet words; sva-dhama--his own planet,known as Brahmaloka; paramam--the best (within the universe); yayau--returned.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After thus advising the demigods and pacifyingmother earth, the very powerful Lord Brahma, who is the master of all otherPrajapatis and is therefore known as Prajapati-pati, returned to his own abode,Brahmaloka.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                          suraseno yadupatir                        mathuram avasan purim                       mathuran churasenams ca                         visayan bubhuje pura                               SYNONYMS   surasenah--King Surasena; yadu-patih--the chief of the Yadu dynasty;mathuram--at the place known as Mathura; avasan--went to live; purim--in thatcity; mathuran--at the place known as the Mathura district; surasenan ca--andthe place known as Surasena; visayan--such kingdoms; bubhuje--enjoyed; pura--formerly.                             TRANSLATION   Formerly, Surasena, the chief of the Yadu dynasty, had gone to live in thecity of Mathura. There he enjoyed the places known as Mathura and Surasena.                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                        rajadhani tatah sabhut                        sarva-yadava-bhubhujam                        mathura bhagavan yatra                        nityam sannihito harih                               SYNONYMS
   rajadhani--the capital; tatah--from that time; sa--the country and the cityknown as Mathura; abhut--became; sarva-yadava-bhubhujam--of all the kings whoappeared in the Yadu dynasty; mathura--the place known as Mathura; bhagavan--theSupreme personality of Godhead; yatra--wherein; nityam--eternally; sannihitah--intimately connected, living eternally; harih--the Lord, the Supreme Personalityof Godhead.                             TRANSLATION   Since that time, the city of Mathura had been the capital of all the kings ofthe Yadu dynasty. The city and district of Mathura are very intimately connectedwith Krsna, for Lord Krsna lives there eternally.                               PURPORT   It is understood that Mathura City is the transcendental abode of Lord Krsna;it is not an ordinary material city, for it is eternally connected with theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Vrndavana is within the jurisdiction of Mathura,and it still continues to exist. Because Mathura and Vrndavana are intimatelyconnected with Krsna eternally, it is said that Lord Krsna never leavesVrndavana (vrndavanam parityajya padam ekam na gacchati). At present, the placeknown as Vrndavana, in the district of Mathura, continues its position as atranscendental place, and certainly anyone who goes there becomestranscendentally purified. Navadvipa-dhama is also intimately connected withVrajabhumi. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura therefore says:          sri gauda-mandala-bhumi,     yeba jane cintamani,                      ta'ra haya vrajabhume vasa   "Vrajabhumi" refers to Mathura-Vrndavana, and Gauda-mandala-bhumi includesNavadvipa. These two places are nondifferent. Therefore, anyone living inNavadvipa-dhama, knowing Krsna and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be the samepersonality, lives in Vrajabhumi, Mathura-Vrndavana. The Lord has made itconvenient for the conditioned soul to live in Mathura, Vrndavana and Navadvipaand thus be directly connected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Simplyby living in these places, one can immediately come in contact with the Lord.There are many devotees who vow never to leave Vrndavana and Mathura. This isundoubtedly a good vow, but if one leaves Vrndavana, Mathura or Navadvipa-dhamafor the service of the Lord, he is not disconnected from the Supreme Personalityof Godhead. At any rate, we must understand the transcendental importance ofMathura-Vrndavana and Navadvipa-dhama. Anyone who executes devotional service inthese places certainly goes back home, back to Godhead, after giving up hisbody. Thus the words mathura bhagavan yatra nityam sannihito harih areparticularly important. A devotee should fully utilize this instruction to thebest of his ability. Whenever the Supreme Lord personally appears, He appears inMathura because of His intimate connection with this place. Therefore althoughMathura and Vrndavana are situated on this planet earth, they are transcendentalabodes of the Lord.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                      tasyam tu karhicic chaurir                         vasudevah krtodvahah                       devakya suryaya sardham                        prayane ratham aruhat
                               SYNONYMS   tasyam--in that place known as Mathura; tu--indeed; karhicit--some time ago;saurih--the demigod, descendant of Sura; vasudevah--who appeared as Vasudeva;krta-udvahah--after being married; devakya--Devaki; suryaya--his newly marriedwife; sardham--along with; prayane--for returning home; ratham--the chariot;aruhat--mounted.                             TRANSLATION   Some time ago, Vasudeva, who belonged to the demigod family [or to the Suradynasty], married Devaki. After the marriage, he mounted his chariot to returnhome with his newly married wife.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                        ugrasena-sutah kamsah                        svasuh priya-cikirsaya                        rasmin hayanam jagraha                      raukmai ratha-satair vrtah                               SYNONYMS   ugrasena-sutah--the son of Ugrasena; kamsah--by the name Kamsa; svasuh--ofhis own sister Devaki; priya-cikirsaya--to please her on the occasion of hermarriage; rasmin--the reins; hayanam--of the horses; jagraha--took; raukmaih--made of gold; ratha-sataih--by hundreds of chariots; vrtah--surrounded.                             TRANSLATION   Kamsa, the son of King Ugrasena, in order to please his sister Devaki on theoccasion of her marriage, took charge of the reins of the horses and became thechariot driver. He was surrounded by hundreds of golden chariots.                             TEXTS 31-32                                 TEXT                        catuh-satam paribarham                         gajanam hema-malinam                        asvanam ayutam sardham                      rathanam ca tri-sat-satam                         dasinam sukumarinam                         dve sate samalankrte                        duhitre devakah pradad                         yane duhitr-vatsalah                               SYNONYMS   catuh-satam--four hundred; paribarham--dowry; gajanam--of elephants; hema-malinam--decorated with garlands of gold; asvanam--of horses; ayutam--tenthousand; sardham--along with; rathanam--of chariots; ca--and; tri-sat-satam--three times six hundred (eighteen hundred); dasinam--of maidservants; su-kumarinam--very young and beautiful unmarried girls; dve--two; sate--hundred;
samalankrte--fully decorated with ornaments; duhitre--unto his daughter;devakah--King Devaka; pradat--gave as a gift; yane--while going away; duhitr-vatsalah--who was very fond of his daughter Devaki.                             TRANSLATION   Devaki's father, King Devaka, was very much affectionate to his daughter.Therefore, while she and her husband were leaving home, he gave her a dowry offour hundred elephants nicely decorated with golden garlands. He also gave tenthousand horses, eighteen hundred chariots, and two hundred very beautiful youngmaidservants, fully decorated with ornaments.                               PURPORT   The system of giving a dowry to one's daughter has existed in Vediccivilization for a very long time. Even today, following the same system, afather who has money will give his daughter an opulent dowry. A daughter wouldnever inherit the property of her father, and therefore an affectionate father,during the marriage of his daughter, would give her as much as possible. Adowry, therefore, is never illegal according to the Vedic system. Here, ofcourse, the gift offered as a dowry by Devaka to Devaki was not ordinary.Because Devaka was a king, he gave a dowry quite suitable to his royal position.Even an ordinary man, especially a high-class brahmana, ksatriya or vaisya, issupposed to give his daughter a liberal dowry. Immediately after the marriage,the daughter goes to her husband's house, and it is also a custom for thebrother of the bride to accompany his sister and brother-in-law to exhibitaffection for her. This system was followed by Kamsa. These are all old customsin the society of varnasrama-dharma, which is now wrongly designated as Hindu.These long-standing customs are nicely described here.                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                       sankha-turya-mrdangas ca                       nedur dundubhayah samam                        prayana-prakrame tata                       vara-vadhvoh sumangalam                               SYNONYMS   sankha--conchshells; turya--bugles; mrdangah--drums; ca--also; neduh--vibrated; dundubhayah--kettledrums; samam--in concert; prayana-prakrame--at thetime of departure; tata--O beloved son; vara-vadhvoh--of the bridegroom and thebride; su-mangalam--for the purpose of their auspicious departure.                             TRANSLATION   O beloved son, Maharaja Pariksit, when the bride and bridegroom were ready tostart, conchshells, bugles, drums and kettledrums all vibrated in concert fortheir auspicious departure.                               TEXT 34                                 TEXT                       pathi pragrahinam kamsam                         abhasyahasarira-vak
                       asyas tvam astamo garbho                       hanta yam vahase 'budha                               SYNONYMS   pathi--on the way; pragrahinam--who was managing the reins of the horses;kamsam--unto Kamsa; abhasya--addressing; aha--said; a-sarira-vak--a voice comingfrom someone whose body was invisible; asyah--of this girl (Devaki); tvam--you;astamah--the eighth; garbhah--pregnancy; hanta--killer; yam--her whom; vahase--you are carrying; abudha--you foolish rascal.                             TRANSLATION   While Kamsa, controlling the reins of the horses, was driving the chariotalong the way, an unembodied voice addressed him, "You foolish rascal, theeighth child of the woman you are carrying will kill you!"                               PURPORT   The omen spoke of astamo garbhah, referring to the eighth pregnancy, but didnot clearly say whether the child was to be a son or a daughter. Even if Kamsawere to see that the eighth child of Devaki was a daughter, he should have nodoubt that the eighth child was to kill him. According to the Visva-kosadictionary, the word garbha means "embryo" and also arbhaka, or "child." Kamsawas affectionate toward his sister, and therefore he had become the chariotdriver to carry her and his brother-in-law to their home. The demigods, however,did not want Kamsa to be affectionate toward Devaki, and therefore, from anunseen position, they encouraged Kamsa to offend her. Moreover, the six sons ofMarici had been cursed to take birth from the womb of Devaki, and upon beingkilled by Kamsa they would be delivered. When Devaki understood that Kamsa wouldbe killed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who would appear from her womb,she felt great joy. The word vahase is also significant because it indicatesthat the ominous vibration condemned Kamsa for acting just like a beast ofburden by carrying his enemy's mother.                               TEXT 35                                 TEXT                       ity uktah sa khalah papo                        bhojanam kula-pamsanah                       bhaginim hantum arabdham                      khadga-panih kace 'grahit                               SYNONYMS   iti uktah--thus being addressed; sah--he (Kamsa); khalah--envious; papah--sinful; bhojanam--of the Bhoja dynasty; kula-pamsanah--one who can degrade thereputation of his family; bhaginim--unto his sister; hantum arabdham--beinginclined to kill; khadga-panih--taking a sword in his hand; kace--hair; agrahit--took up.                             TRANSLATION   Kamsa was a condemned personality in the Bhoja dynasty because he was enviousand sinful. Therefore, upon hearing this omen from the sky, he caught hold ofhis sister's hair with his left hand and took up his sword with his right handto sever her head from her body.
                               PURPORT   Kamsa was driving the chariot and controlling the reins with his left hand,but as soon as he heard the omen that his sister's eighth child would kill him,he gave up the reins, caught hold of his sister's hair, and with his right handtook up a sword to kill her. Before, he had been so affectionate that he wasacting as his sister's chariot driver, but as soon as he heard that his self-interest or his life was at risk, he forgot all affection for her andimmediately became a great enemy. This is the nature of demons. No one shouldtrust a demon, despite any amount of affection. Aside from this, a king, apolitician or a woman cannot be trusted, since they can do anything abominablefor their personal interest. Canakya Pandita therefore says, visvaso naivakartavyah strisu raja-kulesu ca.                               TEXT 36                                 TEXT                        tam jugupsita-karmanam                        nrsamsam nirapatrapam                         vasudevo maha-bhaga                         uvaca parisantvayan                               SYNONYMS   tam--unto him (Kamsa); jugupsita-karmanam--who was ready to commit such anoffensive act; nrsamsam--very cruel; nirapatrapam--shameless; vasudevah--Vasudeva; maha-bhagah--the greatly fortunate father of Vasudeva; uvaca--said;parisantvayan--pacifying.                             TRANSLATION   Wanting to pacify Kamsa, who was so cruel and envious that he was shamelesslyready to kill his sister, the great soul Vasudeva, who was to be the father ofKrsna, spoke to him in the following words.                               PURPORT   Vasudeva, who was to be the father of Krsna, is described here as maha-bhaga,a very upright and sober personality, because although Kamsa was ready to killVasudeva's wife, Vasudeva remained sober and unagitated. In a peaceful attitude,Vasudeva began to address Kamsa by putting forward reasonable arguments.Vasudeva was a great personality because he knew how to pacify a cruel personand how to forgive even the bitterest enemy. One who is fortunate is nevercaught, even by tigers or snakes.                               TEXT 37                                 TEXT                          sri-vasudeva uvaca                       slaghaniya-gunah surair                       bhavan bhoja-yasaskarah                      sa katham bhaginim hanyat                        striyam udvaha-parvani                               SYNONYMS
   sri-vasudevah uvaca--the great personality Vasudeva said; slaghaniya-gunah--aperson who possesses praiseworthy qualities; suraih--by great heroes; bhavan--your good self; bhoja-yasah-karah--a brilliant star in the Bhoja dynasty; sah--one such as your good self; katham--how; bhaginim--your sister; hanyat--cankill; striyam--especially a woman; udvaha-parvani--at the time of the marriageceremony.                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva said: My dear brother-in-law Kamsa, you are the pride of yourfamily, the Bhoja dynasty, and great heroes praise your qualities. How couldsuch a qualified person as you kill a woman, your own sister, especially on theoccasion of her marriage?                               PURPORT   According to Vedic principles, a brahmana, an old man, a woman, a child or acow cannot be killed under any circumstances. Vasudeva stressed that Devaki wasnot only a woman but a member of Kamsa s family. Because she was now married toVasudeva, she was para-stri, another man's wife, and if such a woman werekilled, not only would Kamsa be implicated in sinful activities, but hisreputation as king of the Bhoja dynasty would be damaged. Thus Vasudeva tried inmany ways to convince Kamsa in order to stop him from killing Devaki.                               TEXT 38                                 TEXT                        mrtyur janmavatam vira                          dehena saha jayate                        adya vabda-satante va                     mrtyur vai praninam dhruvah                               SYNONYMS   mrtyuh--death; janma-vatam--of the living entities who have taken birth;vira--O great hero; dehena saha--along with the body; jayate--is born (one whohas taken birth is sure to die); adya--today; va--either; abda-sata--of hundredsof years; ante--at the end; va--or; mrtyuh--death; vai--indeed; praninam--forevery living entity; dhruvah--is assured.                             TRANSLATION   O great hero, one who takes birth is sure to die, for death is born with thebody. One may die today or after hundreds of years, but death is sure for everyliving entity.                               PURPORT   Vasudeva wanted to impress upon Kamsa that although Kamsa feared dying andtherefore wanted to kill even a woman, he could not avoid death. Death is sure.Why then should Kamsa do something that would be detrimental to his reputationand that of his family? As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (2.27):                       jatasya hi dhruvo mrtyur                       dhruvam janma mrtasya ca                       tasmad apariharye 'rthe
                        na tvam socitum arhasi   "For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who is dead,birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, youshould not lament." One should not fear death. Rather, one should prepareoneself for the next birth. One should utilize one's time in this human form toend the process of birth and death. It is not that to save oneself from deathone should entangle oneself in sinful activities. This is not good.                               TEXT 39                                 TEXT                        dehe pancatvam apanne                        dehi karmanugo 'vasah                         dehantaram anuprapya                       praktanam tyajate vapuh                               SYNONYMS   dehe--when the body; pancatvam apanne--turns into five elements; dehi--theproprietor of the body, the living being; karma-anugah--following the reactionsof his own fruitive activities; avasah--spontaneously, automatically; deha-antaram--another body (made of material elements); anuprapya--receiving as aresult; praktanam--the former; tyajate--gives up; vapuh--body.                             TRANSLATION   When the present body turns to dust and is again reduced to five elements--earth, water, fire, air and ether--the proprietor of the body, the living being,automatically receives another body of material elements according to hisfruitive activities. When the next body is obtained, he gives up the presentbody.                               PURPORT   This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita, which presents the beginning of spiritualunderstanding.                       dehino 'smin yatha dehe                        kaumaram yauvanam jara                       tatha dehantara-praptir                       dhiras tatra na muhyati   "As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youthto old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) A person or ananimal is not the material body; rather, the material body is the covering ofthe living being. Bhagavad-gita compares the body to a dress and elaboratelyexplains how one changes dresses one after another. The same Vedic knowledge isconfirmed here. The living being, the soul, is constantly changing bodies oneafter another. Even in the present life, the body changes from childhood toboyhood, from boyhood to youth, and from youth to old age; similarly, when thebody is too old to continue, the living being gives up this body and, by thelaws of nature, automatically gets another body according to his fruitiveactivities, desires and ambitions. The laws of nature control this sequence, andtherefore as long as the living entity is under the control of the external,material energy, the process of bodily change takes place automatically,
according to one's fruitive activities. Vasudeva therefore wanted to impressupon Kamsa that if he committed this sinful act of killing a woman, in his nextlife he would certainly get a material body still more conditioned to thesufferings of material existence. Thus Vasudeva advised Kamsa not to commitsinful activities.   One who commits sinful activities because of ignorance, tamo-guna, obtains alower body. Karanam guna-sango 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu (Bg. 13.22). There arehundreds and thousands of different species of life. Why are there higher andlower bodies? One receives these bodies according to the contaminations ofmaterial nature. If in this life one is contaminated by the mode of ignoranceand sinful activities (duskrti), in the next life, by the laws of nature, onewill certainly get a body full of suffering. The laws of nature are notsubservient to the whimsical desires of the conditioned soul. Our endeavor,therefore, should be to associate always with sattva-guna and not indulge inrajo-guna or tamo-guna (rajas-tamo-bhavah). Lusty desires and greed keep theliving entity perpetually in ignorance and prevent him from being elevated tothe platform of sattva-guna or suddha-sattva-guna. One is advised to be situatedin suddha-sattva-guna, devotional service, for thus one is immune to thereactions of the three modes of material nature.                               TEXT 40                                 TEXT                      vrajams tisthan padaikena                        yathaivaikena gacchati                        yatha trna-jalaukaivam                        dehi karma-gatim gatah                               SYNONYMS   vrajan--a person, while traveling on the road; tisthan--while standing; padaekena--on one foot; yatha--as; eva--indeed; ekena--by another foot; gacchati--goes; yatha--as; trna-jalauka--a worm on a vegetable; evam--in this way; dehi--the living entity; karma-gatim--the reactions of fruitive activities; gatah--undergoes.                             TRANSLATION   Just as a person traveling on the road rests one foot on the ground and thenlifts the other, or as a worm on a vegetable transfers itself to one leaf andthen gives up the previous one, the conditioned soul takes shelter of anotherbody and then gives up the one he had before.                               PURPORT   This is the process of the soul's transmigration from one body to another. Atthe time of death, according to his mental condition, the living being iscarried by the subtle body, consisting of mind, intelligence and ego, to anothergross body. When higher authorities have decided what kind of gross body theliving entity will have, he is forced to enter such a body, and thus heautomatically gives up his previous body. Dull-minded persons who do not havethe intelligence to understand this process of transmigration take for grantedthat when the gross body is finished, one's life is finished forever. Suchpersons have no brains with which to understand the process of transmigration.At the present moment there is great opposition to the Hare Krsna movement,which is being called a "brainwashing" movement. But actually the so-calledscientists, philosophers and other leaders in the Western countries have no
brains at all. The Hare Krsna movement is trying to elevate such foolish personsby enlightening their intelligence so that they will take advantage of the humanbody. Unfortunately, because of gross ignorance, they regard the Hare Krsnamovement as a brainwashing movement. They do not know that without Godconsciousness one is forced to continue transmigrating from one body to another.Because of their devilish brains, they will next be forced to accept anabominable life and practically never be able to liberate themselves from theconditional life of material existence. How this transmigration of the soultakes place is very clearly explained in this verse.                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT                  svapne yatha pasyati deham idrsam                    manorathenabhinivista-cetanah                  drsta-srutabhyam manasanucintayan                 prapadyate tat kim api hy apasmrtih                               SYNONYMS   svapne--in a dream; yatha--as; pasyati--one sees; deham--the kind of body;idrsam--similarly; manorathena--by mental speculation; abhinivista--is fullyabsorbed; cetanah--he whose consciousness; drsta--by whatever has beenexperienced by seeing with the eyes; srutabhyam--and by hearing a description ofsomething else; manasa--by the mind; anucintayan--thinking, feeling and willing;prapadyate--surrenders; tat--to that situation; kim api--what to speak of; hi--indeed; apasmrtih--experiencing forgetfulness of the present body.                             TRANSLATION   Having experienced a situation by seeing or hearing about it, onecontemplates and speculates about that situation, and thus one surrenders to it,not considering his present body. Similarly, by mental adjustments one dreams atnight of living under different circumstances, in different bodies, and forgetshis actual position. Under this same process, one gives up his present body andaccepts another [tatha dehantara-praptih].                               PURPORT   Transmigration of the soul is very clearly explained in this verse. Onesometimes forgets his present body and thinks of his childhood body, a body ofthe past, and of how one was playing, jumping, talking and so on. When thematerial body is no long workable, it becomes dust: "For dust thou art, and untodust shalt thou return." But when the body again mixes with the five materialelements--earth, water, fire, air and ether--the mind continues to work. Themind is the subtle substance in which the body is created, as we actuallyexperience in our dreams and also when we are awake in contemplation. One mustunderstand that the process of mental speculation develops a new type of bodythat does not actually exist. If one can understand the nature of the mind(manorathena) and its thinking, feeling and willing, one can very easilyunderstand how from the mind different types of bodies develop.   The Krsna consciousness movement, therefore, offers a process oftranscendental activities wherein the mind is fully absorbed in affairspertaining to Krsna. The presence of the soul is perceived by consciousness, andone must purify his consciousness from material to spiritual, or, in otherwords, to Krsna consciousness. That which is spiritual is eternal, and thatwhich is material is temporary. Without Krsna consciousness, one's consciousness
is always absorbed in temporary things. For everyone, therefore, Krsnarecommends in Bhagavad-gita (9.34), man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mamnamaskuru. One should always be absorbed in thought of Krsna, one should becomeHis devotee, one should always engage in His service and worship Him as thesupreme great, and one should always offer Him obeisances. In the material worldone is always a servant of a greater person, and in the spiritual world ourconstitutional position is to serve the Supreme, the greatest, param brahma.This is the instruction of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Jivera 'svarupa' haya--krsnera 'nitya-dasa' (Cc. Madhya 20.108).   To act in Krsna consciousness is the perfection of life and the highestperfection of yoga. As Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (6.47):                         yoginam api sarvesam                         mad-gatenantaratmana                      sraddhavan bhajate yo mam                        sa me yuktatamo matah   "Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me intranscendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and isthe highest of all."   The condition of the mind, which flickers between sankalpa and vikalpa,accepting something and rejecting it, is very important in transferring the soulto another material body at the time of death.                      yam yam vapi smaran bhavam                        tyajaty ante kalevaram                       tam tam evaiti kaunteya                       sada tad-bhava-bhavitah   "Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, that state hewill attain without fail." (Bg. 8.6) Therefore one must train the mind in thesystem of bhakti-yoga, as did Maharaja Ambarisa, who kept himself always inKrsna consciousness. Sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh. One must fix the mind atthe lotus feet of Krsna twenty-four hours a day. If the mind is fixed uponKrsna's lotus feet, the activities of the other senses will be engaged inKrsna's service. Hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktir ucyate: to serve Hrsikesa,the master of the senses, with purified senses is called bhakti. Those whoconstantly engage in devotional service are situated in a transcendental state,above the material modes of nature. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):                       mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena                         bhakti-yogena sevate                        sa gunan samatityaitan                        brahma-bhuyaya kalpate   "One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down in anycircumstance, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes tothe level of Brahman." One must learn the secret of success from the Vedicliteratures, especially when the cream of Vedic knowledge is presented byBhagavad-gita as it is.   Because the mind is ultimately controlled by the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna, the word apasmrtih is significant. Forgetfulness of one's ownidentity is called apasmrtih. This apasmrtih can be controlled by the SupremeLord, for the Lord says, mattah smrtir jnanam apohanam ca: "From Me comeremembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness." Instead of allowing one to forgetone's real position, Krsna can revive one's original identity at the time ofone's death, even though the mind may be flickering. Although the mind may workimperfectly at the time of death, Krsna gives a devotee shelter at His lotus
feet. Therefore when a devotee gives up his body, the mind does not take him toanother material body (tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti); rather, Krsnatakes the devotee to that place where He is engaged in His pastimes (mam eti),as we have already discussed in previous verses. One's consciousness, therefore,must always be absorbed in Krsna, and then one's life will be successful.Otherwise the mind will carry the soul to another material body. The soul willbe placed in the semen of a father and discharged into the womb of a mother. Thesemen and ovum create a particular type of body according to the form of thefather and mother, and when the body is mature, the soul emerges in that bodyand begins a new life. This is the process of transmigration of the soul fromone body to another (tatha dehantara-praptih). Unfortunately, those who are lessintelligent think that when the body disappears, everything is finished. Theentire world is being misled by such fools and rascals. But as stated inBhagavad-gita (2.20), na hanyate hanyamane sarire. The soul does not die whenthe body is destroyed. Rather, the soul takes on another body.                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                   yato yato dhavati daiva-coditam                    mano vikaratmakam apa pancasu                    gunesu maya-rocitesu dehy asau                    prapadyamanah saha tena jayate                               SYNONYMS   yatah yatah--from one place to another or from one position to another;dhavati--speculates; daiva-coditam--impelled by accident or deliberation; manah--the mind; vikara-atmakam--changing from one type of thinking, feeling andwilling to another; apa--at the end, he obtains (a mentality); pancasu--at thetime of death (when the material body turns totally into matter); gunesu--(themind, not being liberated, becomes attached) to the material qualities; maya-rocitesu--where the material energy creates a similar body; dehi--the spiritsoul who accepts such a body; asau--he; prapadyamanah--being surrendered (tosuch a condition); saha--with; tena--a similar body; jayate--takes birth.                             TRANSLATION   At the time of death, according to the thinking, feeling and willing of themind, which is involved in fruitive activities, one receives a particular body.In other words, the body develops according to the activities of the mind.Changes of body are due to the flickering of the mind, for otherwise the soulcould remain in its original, spiritual body.                               PURPORT   One can very easily understand that the mind is constantly flickering,changing in the quality of its thinking, feeling and willing. This is explainedby Arjuna in Bhagavad-gita (6.34):                       cancalam hi manah krsna                       pramathi balavad drdham                       tasyaham nigraham manye                         vayor iva suduskaram   The mind is cancala, flickering, and it changes very strongly. ThereforeArjuna admitted that controlling the mind is not at all possible; this would be
as difficult as controlling the wind. For example, if one were in a boat movingaccording to the wind on a river or the sea, and the wind were uncontrollable,the tilting boat would be very much disturbed and extremely difficult tocontrol. It might even capsize. Therefore, in the bhava-samudra, the ocean ofmental speculation and transmigration to different types of bodies, one mustfirst control the mind.   By regulative practice one can control the mind, and this is the purpose ofthe yoga system (abhyasa-yoga-yuktena). But there is a chance of failure withthe yoga system, especially in this age of Kali, because the yoga system usesartificial means. If the mind is engaged in bhakti-yoga, however, by the graceof Krsna one can very easily control it. Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu hasrecommended, harer nama harer nama harer namaiva kevalam. One should chant theholy name of the Lord constantly, for the holy name of the Lord is nondifferentfrom Hari, the Supreme Person.   By chanting the Hare Krsna mantra constantly, one can fix the mind on thelotus feet of Krsna (sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh) and in this way achievethe perfection of yoga. Otherwise, the flickering mind will hover on theplatform of mental speculation for sense enjoyment, and one will have totransmigrate from one type of body to another because the mind is trained onlyin relation to the material elements, or, in other words, to sensegratification, which is false. Maya-sukhaya bharam udvahato vimudhan (Bhag.7.9.43). Rascals (vimudhan), being controlled by mental speculation, make hugearrangements by which to enjoy life temporarily, but they must give up the bodyat the time of death, when everything is taken away by Krsna's external energy(mrtyuh sarva-haras caham). At that time, whatever one has created in this lifeis lost, and one must automatically accept a new body by the force of materialnature. In this life one may have constructed a very tall skyscraper, but in thenext life, because of one's mentality, one may have to accept a body like thatof a cat, a dog, a tree or perhaps a demigod. Thus the body is offered by thelaws of material nature. Karanam guna-sango 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu (Bg.13.22). The spirit soul takes birth in higher and lower species of life onlybecause of his association with the three qualities of material nature.                    urdhvam gacchanti sattva-stha                       madhye tisthanti rajasah                       jaghanya-guna-vrtti-stha                        adho gacchanti tamasah   "Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higherplanets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets; and those inthe mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds." (Bg. 14.18)   In conclusion, the Krsna consciousness movement offers the topmost welfareactivity for human society. The saner section of human society must thereforetake this movement very seriously for the benefit of all humanity. To saveoneself from the repetition of birth and death, one must purify hisconsciousness. Sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam tat-paratvena nirmalam. One must be freedfrom all designations--"I am American," "I am Indian," "I am this," "I am that"--and come to the platform of understanding that Krsna is the original master andwe are His eternal servants. When the senses are purified and engaged in Krsna'sservice, one achieves the highest perfection. Hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktirucyate. The Krsna consciousness movement is a movement of bhakti-yoga. Vairagya-vidya-nija-bhakti-yoga. By following the principles of this movement, onebecomes disassociated from material mental concoctions and is established on theoriginal platform of the eternal relationship between the living entity and theSupreme Personality of Godhead as servant and master. This, in summary, is thepurpose of the Krsna consciousness movement.                               TEXT 43
                                 TEXT                 jyotir yathaivodaka-parthivesv adah                    samira-veganugatam vibhavyate                  evam sva-maya-racitesv asau puman                     gunesu raganugato vimuhyati                               SYNONYMS   jyotih--the luminaries in the sky, such as the sun, the moon and the stars;yatha--as; eva--indeed; udaka--in water; parthivesu--or in other liquids, likeoil; adah--directly; samira-vega-anugatam--being forced by the movements of thewind; vibhavyate--appear in different shapes; evam--in this way; sva-maya-racitesu--in the situation created by one's mental concoctions; asau--the livingentity; puman--person; gunesu--in the material world, manifested by the modes ofnature; raga-anugatah--according to his attachment; vimuhyati--becomesbewildered by identification.                             TRANSLATION   When the luminaries in the sky, such as the moon, the sun and the stars, arereflected in liquids like oil or water, they appear to be of different shapes--sometimes round, sometimes long, and so on--because of the movements of thewind. Similarly, when the living entity, the soul, is absorbed in materialisticthoughts, he accepts various manifestations as his own identity because ofignorance. In other words, one is bewildered by mental concoctions because ofagitation from the material modes of nature.                               PURPORT   This verse gives a very good example by which to understand the differentpositions of the eternal spiritual soul in the material world and how the soultakes on different bodies (dehantara-praptih). The moon is stationary and isone, but when it is reflected in water or oil, it appears to take differentshapes because of the movements of the wind. Similarly, the soul is the eternalservant of Krsna, the Supreme personality of Godhead, but when put into thematerial modes of nature, it takes different bodies, sometimes as a demigod,sometimes a man, a dog, a tree and so on. By the influence of maya, the illusorypotency of the Supreme personality of Godhead, the living entity thinks that heis this person, that person, American, Indian, cat, dog, tree or whatever. Thisis called maya. When one is freed from this bewilderment and understands thatthe soul does not belong to any shape of this material world, one is situated onthe spiritual platform (brahma-bhuta).   This realization is sometimes explained as nirakara, or formlessness. Thisformlessness, however, does not mean that the soul has no form. The soul hasform, but the external, agitating form he has acquired because of materialcontamination is false. Similarly, God is also described as nirakara, whichmeans that God has no material form but is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. The livingentity is part and parcel of the supreme sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, but hismaterial forms are temporary, or illusory. Both the living entity and theSupreme Lord have original, spiritual forms (sac-cid-ananda-vigraha), but theLord, the Supreme, does not change His form. The Lord appears as He is, whereasthe living entity appears because material nature forces him to accept differentforms. When the living entity receives these different forms, he identifies withthem, and not with his original, spiritual form. As soon as the living entityreturns to his original, spiritual form and understanding, he immediatelysurrenders to the supreme form, the Personality of Godhead. This is explained in
Bhagavad-gita (7.19). Bahunam janmanam ante jnanavan mam prapadyate. When theliving entity, after many, many births in different forms, returns to hisoriginal form of Krsna consciousness, he immediately surrenders unto the lotusfeet of the supreme form, Krsna. This is liberation. As the Lord says inBhagavad-gita (18.54):                      brahma-bhutah prasannatma                        na socati na kanksati                        samah sarvesu bhutesu                      mad-bhaktim labhate param   "One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the SupremeBrahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything;he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains puredevotional service unto Me." Surrender unto the supreme form is the result ofbhakti. This bhakti, or understanding of one's own position, is the completeliberation. As long as one is under an impersonal understanding of the AbsoluteTruth, he is not in pure knowledge, but must still struggle for pure knowledge.Kleso 'dhikataras tesam avyaktasakta-cetasam (Bg. 12.5). Although one may bespiritually advanced, if one is attached to the impersonal feature of theAbsolute Truth one must still work very hard, as indicated by the words kleso'dhikatarah, which mean "greater suffering." A devotee, however, easily attainshis original position as a spiritual form and understands the SupremePersonality of Godhead in His original form.   Krsna Himself explains the forms of the living entities in the Second Chapterof Bhagavad-gita, where He clearly says to Arjuna that He, Arjuna and all otherliving entities, who were previously in their original forms, are separateindividual identities. They were individuals in the past, they are now situatedin individuality, and in the future they will all continue to maintain theirindividual forms. The only difference is that the conditioned living entityappears in various material forms, whereas Krsna appears in His original,spiritual form. Unfortunately, those who are not advanced in spiritual knowledgethink that Krsna is like one of them and that His form is like their materialforms. Avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam (Bg. 9.11). Krsna is neverpuffed up by material knowledge and is therefore called acyuta, whereas theliving entities fall down and are agitated by material nature. This is thedifference between the Supreme Lord and the living entities.   In this connection it is to be noted that Vasudeva, who was situated in atranscendental position, advised Kamsa not to commit further sinful activities.Kamsa, a representative of the demons, was always ready to kill Krsna, or God,whereas Vasudeva represents a transcendentally situated person to whom Krsna isborn (Vasudeva is the son of Vasudeva). Vasudeva wanted his brother-in-law Kamsato refrain from the sinful act of killing his sister, since the result of beingagitated by material nature would be that Kamsa would have to accept a body inwhich to suffer again and again. Elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam (5.5.4),Rsabhadeva also says:                   na sadhu manye yata atmano 'yam                     asann api klesada asa dehah   As long as the living entity is entangled in the fruitive activities of so-called happiness and distress, he will receive a particular type of body inwhich to endure the three kinds of suffering due to material nature (tri-tapa-yantrana). An intelligent person, therefore, must free himself from theinfluence of the three modes of material nature and revive his original,spiritual body by engaging in the service of the Supreme Person, Krsna. As longas one is materially attached, one must accept the process of birth, death, oldage and disease. One is therefore advised that an intelligent person, instead of
being entangled in so-called good and bad fruitive activities, should engage hislife in advancing in Krsna consciousness so that instead of accepting anothermaterial body (tyaktva deham punar janma naiti), he will return home, back toGodhead.                               TEXT 44                                 TEXT                      tasman na kasyacid droham                        acaret sa tatha-vidhah                       atmanah ksemam anvicchan                      drogdhur vai parato bhayam                               SYNONYMS   tasmat--therefore; na--not; kasyacit--of anyone; droham--envy; acaret--oneshould act; sah--a person (Kamsa); tatha-vidhah--who has been advised in such away (by Vasudeva); atmanah--his own; ksemam--welfare; anvicchan--if he desires;drogdhuh--of one who is envious of others; vai--indeed; paratah--from others;bhayam--there is a cause of fear.                             TRANSLATION   Therefore, since envious, impious activities cause a body in which onesuffers in the next life, why should one act impiously? Considering one'swelfare, one should not envy anyone, for an envious person must always fear harmfrom his enemies, either in this life or in the next.                               PURPORT   Instead of being inimical toward other living entities, one should actpiously by engaging in the service of the Supreme Lord, thus avoiding a fearfulsituation both in this life and in the next. In this regard, the following moralinstruction by the great politician Canakya Pandita is very meaningful:                       tyaja durjana-samsargam                        bhaja sadhu-samagamam                        kuru punyam aho ratram                        smara nityam anityatam   One should give up the company of devils, demons and nondevotees and shouldalways associate with devotees and saintly persons. One should always actpiously, thinking that this life is temporary, and not be attached to temporaryhappiness and distress. The Krsna consciousness movement is teaching all ofhuman society this principle of becoming Krsna conscious and thus solving theproblems of life forever (tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti so 'rjuna).                               TEXT 45                                 TEXT                          esa tavanuja bala                          krpana putrikopama                       hantum narhasi kalyanim                       imam tvam dina-vatsalah                               SYNONYMS
   esa--this; tava--your; anuja--younger sister; bala--innocent woman; krpana--completely dependent on you; putrika-upama--exactly like your own daughter;hantum--to kill her; na--not; arhasi--you deserve; kalyanim--who is under youraffection; imam--her; tvam--you; dina-vatsalah--very compassionate to the poorand innocent.                             TRANSLATION   As your younger sister, this poor girl Devaki is like your own daughter anddeserves to be affectionately maintained. You are merciful, and therefore youshould not kill her. Indeed, she deserves your affection.                               TEXT 46                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                       evam sa samabhir bhedair                        bodhyamano 'pi darunah                        na nyavartata kauravya                         purusadan anuvratah                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam--in this way; sah--he(Kamsa); samabhih--by attempts to pacify him (Kamsa); bhedaih--by moralinstructions that one should not be cruel to anyone else; bodhyamanah api--evenbeing pacified; darunah--he who was the most fiercely cruel; na nyavartata--could not be stopped (from the grievous act); kauravya--O Maharaja Pariksit;purusa-adan--the Raksasas, man-eaters; anuvratah--following in their footsteps.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: O best of the Kuru dynasty, Kamsa was fiercelycruel and was actually a follower of the Raksasas. Therefore he could be neitherpacified nor terrified by the good instructions given by Vasudeva. He did notcare about the results of sinful activities, either in this life or in the next.                               TEXT 47                                 TEXT                     nirbandham tasya tam jnatva                        vicintyanakadundubhih                      praptam kalam prativyodhum                         idam tatranvapadyata                               SYNONYMS   nirbandham--determination to do something; tasya--of him (Kamsa); tam--that(determination); jnatva--understanding; vicintya--thinking deeply;anakadundubhih--Vasudeva; praptam--had arrived; kalam--imminent danger of death;prativyodhum--to stop him from such activities; idam--this; tatra--thereupon;anvapadyata--thought of other ways.                             TRANSLATION
   When Vasudeva saw that Kamsa was determined to kill his sister Devaki, hethought to himself very deeply. Considering the imminent danger of death, hethought of another plan to stop Kamsa.                               PURPORT   Although Vasudeva saw the imminent danger that his wife Devaki would bekilled, he was convinced of his welfare because at his birth the demigods hadplayed drums and kettledrums. He therefore attempted another way to save Devaki.                               TEXT 48                                 TEXT                        mrtyur buddhimatapohyo                        yavad buddhi-balodayam                        yady asau na nivarteta                        naparadho 'sti dehinah                               SYNONYMS   mrtyuh--death; buddhi-mata--by an intelligent person; apohyah--should beavoided; yavat--as long as; buddhi-bala-udayam--intelligence and bodily strengthare present; yadi--if; asau--that (death); na nivarteta--cannot be checked; na--not; aparadhah--offense; asti--there is; dehinah--of the person in danger ofdeath.                             TRANSLATION   As long as he has intelligence and bodily strength, an intelligent personmust try to avoid death. This is the duty of every embodied person. But if deathcannot be avoided in spite of one's endeavors, a person facing death commits nooffense.                               PURPORT   It is natural for a person facing untimely death to try his best to savehimself. This is one's duty. Although death is sure, everyone should try toavoid it and not meet death without opposition because every living soul is bynature eternal. Because death is a punishment imposed in the condemned life ofmaterial existence, the Vedic culture is based on avoiding death (tyaktva dehampunar janma naiti). Everyone should try to avoid death and rebirth bycultivating spiritual life and should not submit to death without struggling tosurvive. One who is not trying to stop death is not an intelligent human being.Because Devaki was face to face with imminent death, it was Vasudeva's duty tosave her, as he was trying his best to do. He therefore considered another wayto approach Kamsa so that Devaki would be saved.                             TEXTS 49-50                                 TEXT                        pradaya mrtyave putran                         mocaye krpanam imam                         suta me yadi jayeran                       mrtyur va na mriyeta cet                       viparyayo va kim na syad
                        gatir dhatur duratyaya                         upasthito nivarteta                        nivrttah punar apatet                               SYNONYMS   pradaya--promising to deliver; mrtyave--unto Kamsa, who is death personifiedfor Devaki; putran--my sons; mocaye--I am releasing her from imminent danger;krpanam--innocent; imam--Devaki; sutah--sons; me--my; yadi--whether; jayeran--should take birth; mrtyuh--Kamsa; va--or; na--not; mriyeta--should die; cet--if;viparyayah--just the opposite; va--or; kim--whether; na--not; syat--it mayhappen; gatih--the movement; dhatuh--of providence; duratyaya--very difficult tounderstand; upasthitah--that which is presently obtained; nivarteta--may stop;nivrttah--Devaki's death being stopped; punah apatet--in the future it mayhappen again (but what can I do).                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva considered: By delivering all my sons to Kamsa, who is deathpersonified, I shall save the life of Devaki. Perhaps Kamsa will die before mysons take birth, or, since he is already destined to die at the hands of my son,one of my sons may kill him. For the time being, let me promise to hand over mysons so that Kamsa will give up this immediate threat, and if in due course oftime Kamsa dies, I shall have nothing to fear.                               PURPORT   Vasudeva wanted to save the life of Devaki by promising to deliver his sonsto Kamsa. "In the future," he thought, "Kamsa may die, or I may not beget anysons. Even if a son is born and I deliver him to Kamsa, Kamsa may die at hishands, for by providence anything could happen. It is very difficult tounderstand how things are managed by providence." Thus Vasudeva decided that hewould promise to deliver his sons to the hands of Kamsa in order to save Devakifrom the imminent danger of death.                               TEXT 51                                 TEXT                   agner yatha daru-viyoga-yogayor                   adrstato 'nyan na nimittam asti                   evam hi jantor api durvibhavyah                     sarira-samyoga-viyoga-hetuh                               SYNONYMS   agneh--of a fire in the forest; yatha--as; daru--of wood; viyoga-yogayoh--ofboth the escaping and the capturing; adrstatah--than unseen providence; anyat--some other reason or accident; na--not; nimittam--a cause; asti--there is; evam--in this way; hi--certainly; jantoh--of the living being; api--indeed;durvibhavyah--cannot be found out; sarira--of the body; samyoga--of theaccepting; viyoga--or of the giving up; hetuh--the cause.                             TRANSLATION   When a fire, for some unseen reason, leaps over one piece of wood and setsfire to the next, the reason is destiny. Similarly, when a living being accepts
one kind of body and leaves aside another, there is no other reason than unseendestiny.                               PURPORT   When there is a fire in a village, the fire sometimes jumps over one houseand burns another. Similarly, when there is a forest fire, the fire sometimesjumps over one tree and catches another. Why this happens, no one can say. Onemay set forth some imaginary reason why the nearest tree or house did not catchfire whereas a tree or house in a distant place did, but actually the reason isdestiny. This reason also applies to the transmigration of the soul, by which aprime minister in one life may become a dog in the next. The work of unseendestiny cannot be ascertained by practical experimental knowledge, and thereforeone must be satisfied by reasoning that everything is done by supremeprovidence.                               TEXT 52                                 TEXT                        evam vimrsya tam papam                        yavad-atmani-darsanam                        pujayam asa vai saurir                         bahu-mana-purahsaram                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this way; vimrsya--after contemplating; tam--unto Kamsa; papam--themost sinful; yavat--as far as possible; atmani-darsanam--with all theintelligence possible within himself; pujayam asa--praised; vai--indeed; saurih--Vasudeva; bahu-mana--offering all respect; purahsaram--before him.                             TRANSLATION   After thus considering the matter as far as his knowledge would allow,Vasudeva submitted his proposal to the sinful Kamsa with great respect.                               TEXT 53                                 TEXT                        prasanna-vadanambhojo                        nrsamsam nirapatrapam                          manasa duyamanena                        vihasann idam abravit                               SYNONYMS   prasanna-vadana-ambhojah--Vasudeva, who externally presented himself as ifvery happy; nrsamsam--unto the most cruel; nirapatrapam--shameless Kamsa;manasa--with the mind; duyamanena--which was full of anxiety and sorrow;vihasan--smiling externally; idam abravit--and spoke as follows.                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva's mind was full of anxiety because his wife was facing danger, butin order to please the cruel, shameless and sinful Kamsa, he externally smiledand spoke to him as follows.
                               PURPORT   Sometimes one must act duplicitously in a dangerous position, as Vasudeva didto save his wife. The material world is complicated, and to execute one'sduties, one cannot avoid adopting such diplomacy. Vasudeva did everythingpossible to save his wife for the sake of begetting Krsna. This indicates thatone may act duplicitously for the purpose of saving Krsna and His interests.According to the arrangement already foretold, Krsna was to appear throughVasudeva and Devaki to kill Kamsa. Vasudeva, therefore, had to do everything tosave the situation. Although all the events were prearranged by Krsna, a devoteemust try his best to serve the purpose of Krsna. Krsna Himself is all-powerful,but it is not that a devotee should therefore sit idly and leave everything toHim. This instruction is also found in Bhagavad-gita. Although Krsna was doingeverything for Arjuna, Arjuna never sat down idly as a nonviolent gentleman.Rather, he tried his best to fight the battle and be victorious.                               TEXT 54                                 TEXT                          sri-vasudeva uvaca                     na hy asyas te bhayam saumya                        yad vai sahasarira-vak                       putran samarpayisye 'sya                       yatas te bhayam utthitam                               SYNONYMS   sri-vasudevah uvaca--Sri Vasudeva said; na--not; hi--indeed; asyah--fromDevaki; te--of you; bhayam--fear; saumya--O most sober; yat--which; vai--indeed;sa--that omen; aha--dictated; a-sarira-vak--a vibration without a body; putran--all my sons; samarpayisye--I shall deliver to you; asyah--of her (Devaki);yatah--from whom; te--your; bhayam--fear; utthitam--has arisen.                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva said: O best of the sober, you have nothing to fear from your sisterDevaki because of what you have heard from the unseen omen. The cause of deathwill be her sons. Therefore I promise that when she gives birth to the sons fromwhom your fear has arisen, I shall deliver them all unto your hands.                               PURPORT   Kamsa feared Devaki's existence because after her eighth pregnancy she wouldgive birth to a son who would kill him. Vasudeva, therefore, to assure hisbrother-in-law the utmost safety, promised to bring him all the sons. He wouldnot wait for the eighth son, but from the very beginning would deliver to thehands of Kamsa all the sons to which Devaki would give birth. This was the mostliberal proposition offered by Vasudeva to Kamsa.                               TEXT 55                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        svasur vadhan nivavrte                      kamsas tad-vakya-sara-vit
                       vasudevo 'pi tam pritah                       prasasya pravisad grham                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; svasuh--of his sister (Devaki);vadhat--from the act of killing; nivavrte--stopped for the time being; kamsah--Kamsa; tat-vakya--the words of Vasudeva; sara-vit--knowing to be perfectlycorrect; vasudevah--Vasudeva; api--also; tam--to him (Kamsa); pritah--beingsatisfied; prasasya--pacifying more; pravisat grham--entered his own house.                             TRANSLATION   Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Kamsa agreed to the logical arguments ofVasudeva, and, having full faith in Vasudeva's words, he refrained from killinghis sister. Vasudeva, being pleased with Kamsa, pacified him further and enteredhis own house.                               PURPORT   Although Kamsa was a sinful demon, he believed that Vasudeva would neverdeviate from his word. The character of a pure devotee like Vasudeva is suchthat even so great a demon as Kamsa firmly believed in his words and wassatisfied. Yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akincana sarvair gunais tatra samasatesurah (Bhag. 5.18.12). All good attributes are present in a devotee, so much sothat even Kamsa believed in Vasudeva's words without a doubt.                               TEXT 56                                 TEXT                          atha kala upavrtte                         devaki sarva-devata                       putran prasusuve castau                        kanyam caivanuvatsaram                               SYNONYMS   atha--thereafter; kale--in due course of time; upavrtte--when it was ripe;devaki--Devaki, the wife of Vasudeva, Krsna's father; sarva-devata--Devaki, towhom all the demigods and God Himself appeared; putran--sons; prasusuve--gavebirth to; ca--and; astau--eight; kanyam ca--and one daughter named Subhadra;eva--indeed; anuvatsaram--year after year.                             TRANSLATION   Each year thereafter, in due course of time, Devaki, the mother of God andall the demigods, gave birth to a child. Thus she bore eight sons, one afteranother, and a daughter named Subhadra.                               PURPORT   The spiritual master is sometimes glorified as sarva-devamayo guruh (Bhag.11.7.27). By the grace of the guru, the spiritual master, one can understand thedifferent kinds of devas. The word deva refers to God, the Supreme personalityof Godhead, who is the original source of all the demigods, who are also calleddevas. In Bhagavad-gita (10.2) the Lord says, aham adir hi devanam: "I am thesource of all the devas." The Supreme Lord, Visnu, the Original person, expands
in different forms. Tad aiksata bahu syam (Chandogya Upanisad 6.2.3). He alonehas expanded into many. Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam (Brahma-samhita5.33). There are different grades of forms, known as svamsa and vibhinnamsa. Thesvamsa expansions, or visnu-tattva, are the Supreme Personality of Godhead,whereas the vibhinnamsa are jiva-tattva, who are part and parcel of the Lord(mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhutah sanatanah). If we accept Krsna as the SupremePersonality of Godhead and worship Him, all the parts and expansions of the Lordare automatically worshiped. Sarvarhanam acyutejya (Bhag. 4.31.14). Krsna isknown as Acyuta (senayor ubhayor madhye ratham sthapaya me 'cyuta). Byworshiping Acyuta, Krsna, one automatically worships all the demigods. There isno need of separately worshiping either the visnu-tattva or jiva-tattva. If oneconcentrates upon Krsna, one worships everyone. Therefore, because mother Devakigave birth to Krsna, she is described here as sarva-devata.                               TEXT 57                                 TEXT                       kirtimantam prathamajam                         kamsayanakadundubhih                        arpayam asa krcchrena                        so 'nrtad ativihvalah                               SYNONYMS   kirtimantam--by the name Kirtiman; prathama-jam--the first-born baby;kamsaya--unto Kamsa; anakadundubhih--Vasudeva; arpayam asa--delivered;krcchrena--with great pain; sah--he (Vasudeva); anrtat--from the breaking of thepromise, or from fear of being a liar; ati-vihvalah--was very much disturbed,being afraid.                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva was very much disturbed by fear of becoming a liar by breaking hispromise. Thus with great pain he delivered his first-born son, named Kirtiman,into the hands of Kamsa.                               PURPORT   In the Vedic system, as soon as a child is born, especially a male child, thefather calls for learned brahmanas, and according to the description of thechild's horoscope, the child is immediately given a name. This ceremony iscalled nama-karana. There are ten different samskaras, or reformatory methods,adopted in the system of varnasrama-dharma, and the name-giving ceremony is oneof them. Although Vasudeva's first son was to be delivered into the hands ofKamsa, the nama-karana ceremony was performed, and thus the child was namedKirtiman. Such names are given immediately after birth.                               TEXT 58                                 TEXT                       kim duhsaham nu sadhunam                        vidusam kim apeksitam                        kim akaryam kadaryanam                      dustyajam kim dhrtatmanam                               SYNONYMS
   kim--what is; duhsaham--painful; nu--indeed; sadhunam--for saintly persons;vidusam--of learned persons; kim apeksitam--what is dependence; kim akaryam--what is forbidden work; kadaryanam--of persons in the lowest grade; dustyajam--very difficult to give up; kim--what is; dhrta-atmanam--of persons who are self-realized.                             TRANSLATION   What is painful for saintly persons who strictly adhere to the truth? Howcould there not be independence for pure devotees who know the Supreme Lord asthe substance? What deeds are forbidden for persons of the lowest character? Andwhat cannot be given up for the sake of Lord Krsna by those who have fullysurrendered at His lotus feet?                               PURPORT   Since the eighth son of Devaki was to kill Kamsa, one might ask what the needwas for Vasudeva to deliver the first-born child. The answer is that Vasudevahad promised Kamsa that he would deliver all the children born of Devaki. Kamsa,being an asura, did not believe that the eighth child would kill him; he took itfor granted that he might be killed by any of the children of Devaki. Vasudeva,therefore, to save Devaki, promised to give Kamsa every child, whether male orfemale. From another point of view, Vasudeva and Devaki were very pleased whenthey understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, would come astheir eighth son. Vasudeva, a pure devotee of the Lord, was eager to see Krsnaappear as his child from the eighth pregnancy of Devaki. Therefore he wanted todeliver all the children quickly so that the eighth turn would come and Krsnawould appear. He begot one child every year so that Krsna's turn to appear wouldcome as soon as possible.                               TEXT 59                                 TEXT                     drstva samatvam tac chaureh                       satye caiva vyavasthitim                       kamsas tusta-mana rajan                        prahasann idam abravit                               SYNONYMS   drstva--by seeing; samatvam--being equipoised, undisturbed in distress orhappiness; tat--that; saureh--of Vasudeva; satye--in truthfulness; ca--indeed;eva--certainly; vyavasthitim--the firm situation; kamsah--Kamsa; tusta-manah--being very satisfied (with Vasudeva's behavior in delivering the first child tokeep his promise); rajan--O Maharaja Pariksit; prahasan--with a smiling face;idam--this; abravit--said.                             TRANSLATION   My dear King Pariksit, when Kamsa saw that Vasudeva, being situated intruthfulness, was completely equipoised in giving him the child, he was veryhappy. Therefore, with a smiling face, he spoke as follows.                               PURPORT
   The word samatvam is very significant in this verse. Samatvam refers to onewho is always equipoised, unaffected by either happiness or distress. Vasudevawas so steadily equipoised that he did not seem in the least agitated whendelivering his first-born child into the hands of Kamsa to be killed. InBhagavad-gita (2.56) it is said, duhkhesv anudvigna-manah sukhesu vigata-sprhah.In the material world, one should not be very eager to be happy, nor should onebe very much disturbed by material distress. Lord Krsna advised Arjuna:                      matra-sparsas tu kaunteya                       sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah                         agamapayino 'nityas                       tams titiksasva bharata   "O son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, andtheir disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance ofwinter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception, O scion of Bharata,and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed." (Bg. 2.14) Theself-realized soul is never disturbed by so-called distress or happiness, andthis is especially true of an exalted devotee like Vasudeva, who showed this byhis practical example. Vasudeva was not at all disturbed when delivering hisfirst child to Kamsa to be killed.                               TEXT 60                                 TEXT                        pratiyatu kumaro 'yam                      na hy asmad asti me bhayam                       astamad yuvayor garbhan                        mrtyur me vihitah kila                               SYNONYMS   pratiyatu--my dear Vasudeva, take back your child and go home; kumarah--newborn child; ayam--this; na--not; hi--indeed; asmat--from him; asti--there is;me--my; bhayam--fear; astamat--from the eighth; yuvayoh--of both you and yourwife; garbhat--from the pregnancy; mrtyuh--death; me--my; vihitah--has beenordained; kila--indeed.                             TRANSLATION   O Vasudeva, you may take back your child and go home. I have no fear of yourfirst child. It is the eighth child of you and Devaki I am concerned withbecause that is the child by whom I am destined to be killed.                               TEXT 61                                 TEXT                         tatheti sutam adaya                         yayav anakadundubhih                       nabhyanandata tad-vakyam                         asato 'vijitatmanah                               SYNONYMS   tatha--very well; iti--thus; sutam adaya--taking back his child; yayau--leftthat place; anakadundubhih--Vasudeva; na abhyanandata--did not very much value;
tat-vakyam--the words (of Kamsa); asatah--who was without character; avijita-atmanah--and without self-control.                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva agreed and took his child back home, but because Kamsa had nocharacter and no self-control, Vasudeva knew that he could not rely on Kamsa'sword.                             TEXTS 62-63                                 TEXT                        nandadya ye vraje gopa                        yas camisam ca yositah                         vrsnayo vasudevadya                       devaky-adya yadu-striyah                        sarve vai devata-praya                         ubhayor api bharata                        jnatayo bandhu-suhrdo                        ye ca kamsam anuvratah                               SYNONYMS   nanda-adyah--beginning from Nanda Maharaja; ye--all of which persons; vraje--in Vrndavana; gopah--the cowherd men; yah--which; ca--and; amisam--of all those(inhabitants of Vrndavana); ca--as well as; yositah--the women; vrsnayah--members of the Vrsni family; vasudeva-adyah--headed by Vasudeva; devaki-adyah--headed by Devaki; yadu-striyah--all the women of the Yadu dynasty; sarve--all ofthem; vai--indeed; devata-prayah--were inhabitants of heaven; ubhayoh--of bothNanda Maharaja and Vasudeva; api--indeed; bharata--O Maharaja Pariksit;jnatayah--the relatives; bandhu--friends; suhrdah--well-wishers; ye--all ofwhom; ca--and; kamsam anuvratah--even though apparently followers of Kamsa.                             TRANSLATION   The inhabitants of Vrndavana, headed by Nanda Maharaja and including hisassociate cowherd men and their wives, were none but denizens of the heavenlyplanets, O Maharaja Pariksit, best of the descendants of Bharata, and so toowere the descendants of the Vrsni dynasty, headed by Vasudeva, and Devaki andthe other women of the dynasty of Yadu. The friends, relatives and well-wishersof both Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva and even those who externally appeared to befollowers of Kamsa were all demigods.                               PURPORT   As previously discussed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, informedLord Brahma that Lord Krsna would personally descend to mitigate the sufferingon the earth. The Lord ordered all the denizens of the heavenly planets to takebirth in different families of the Yadu and Vrsni dynasties and in Vrndavana.Now this verse informs us that all the family and friends of the Yadu dynasty,the Vrsni dynasty, Nanda Maharaja and the gopas descended from the heavenlyplanets to see the pastimes of the Lord. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.8),the Lord's pastimes consist of paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam--savingthe devotees and killing the demons. To demonstrate these activities, the Lordcalled for devotees from different parts of the universe.   There are many devotees who are elevated to the higher planetary systems.
                       prapya punya-krtam lokan                        usitva sasvatih samah                        sucinam srimatam gehe                       yoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate   "The unsuccessful yogi, after many, many years of enjoyment on the planets ofthe pious living entities, is born into a family of righteous people, or into afamily of rich aristocracy." (Bg. 6.41) Some devotees, having failed to completethe process of devotional service, are promoted to the heavenly planets, towhich the pious are elevated, and after enjoying there they may be directlypromoted to the place where the Lord's pastimes are going on. When Lord Krsnawas to appear, the denizens of the heavenly planets were invited to see thepastimes of the Lord, and thus it is stated here that the members of the Yaduand Vrsni dynasties and the inhabitants of Vrndavana were demigods or almost asgood as demigods. Even those who externally helped the activities of Kamsabelonged to the higher planetary systems. The imprisonment and release ofVasudeva and the killing of various demons were all manifestations of thepastimes of the Lord, and because the devotees would be pleased to see theseactivities personally, they were all invited to take birth as friends andrelatives of these families. As confirmed in the prayers of Kunti (Bhag.1.8.19), nato natya-dharo yatha. The Lord was to play the part of a demon-killer, and a friend, son and brother to His devotees, and thus these devoteeswere all summoned.                               TEXT 64                                 TEXT                        etat kamsaya bhagavan                       chasamsabhyetya naradah                        bhumer bharayamananam                       daityanam ca vadhodyamam                               SYNONYMS   etat--all these words about the Yadu family and Vrsni family; kamsaya--untoKing Kamsa; bhagavan--the most powerful representative of the SupremePersonality of Godhead; sasamsa--informed (Kamsa, who was in doubt); abhyetya--after approaching him; naradah--the great sage Narada; bhumeh--on the surface ofthe earth; bharayamananam--of those who were a burden; daityanam ca--and of thedemons; vadha-udyamam--the endeavor to kill.                             TRANSLATION   Once the great saint Narada approached Kamsa and informed him of how thedemoniac persons who were a great burden on the earth were going to be killed.Thus Kamsa was placed into great fear and doubt.                               PURPORT   It has already been discussed that mother earth implored Lord Brahma to giveher relief from the distress created by the burdensome demons and that LordBrahma informed her that Lord Krsna Himself was going to appear. Krsna says inBhagavad-gita (4.8):                         paritranaya sadhunam                         vinasaya ca duskrtam
                       dharma-samsthapanarthaya                         sambhavami yuge yuge   Whenever there is a burden created by the demons and whenever the innocentdevotees are distressed by demoniac rulers, the Lord appears in due course oftime to kill the demons with the assistance of His real representatives, who aretechnically called demigods. In the Upanisads it is stated that the demigods aredifferent parts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As it is the duty of theparts of the body to serve the whole, it is the duty of Krsna's devotees toserve Krsna as He wants. Krsna's business is to kill the demons, and thereforethis should be a devotee's business also. Because the people of Kali-yuga arefallen, however, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, out of kindness for them, did notbring any weapon to kill them. Rather, by spreading Krsna consciousness, love ofKrsna, He wanted to kill their nefarious, demoniac activities. This is thepurpose of the Krsna consciousness movement. Unless the demoniac activities onthe surface of the world are diminished or vanquished, no one can be happy. Theprogram for the conditioned soul is fully described in Bhagavad-gita, and onesimply has to follow these instructions to become happy. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhuhas therefore prescribed:                        harer nama harer nama                        harer namaiva kevalam                      kalau nasty eva nasty eva                       nasty eva gatir anyatha   Let people chant the Hare Krsna mantra constantly. Then their demoniactendencies will be killed, and they will become first-class devotees, happy inthis life and in the next.                             TEXTS 65-66                                 TEXT                         rser vinirgame kamso                        yadun matva suran iti                       devakya garbha-sambhutam                      visnum ca sva-vadham prati                         devakim vasudevam ca                        nigrhya nigadair grhe                       jatam jatam ahan putram                         tayor ajana-sankaya                               SYNONYMS   rseh--of the great sage Narada; vinirgame--on the departure (after givinginformation); kamsah--Kamsa; yadun--all the members of the Yadu dynasty; matva--thinking of; suran--as demigods; iti--thus; devakyah--of Devaki; garbha-sambhutam--the children born from the womb; visnum--(accepting) as Visnu; ca--and; sva-vadham prati--fearing his own death from Visnu; devakim--Devaki;vasudevam ca--and her husband, Vasudeva; nigrhya--arresting; nigadaih--by ironshackles; grhe--confined at home; jatam jatam--each one who was born, one afteranother; ahan--killed; putram--the sons; tayoh--of Vasudeva and Devaki; ajana-sankaya--with the doubt that they would be Visnu.                             TRANSLATION
   After the departure of the great saint Narada, Kamsa thought that all themembers of the Yadu dynasty were demigods and that any of the children born fromthe womb of Devaki might be Visnu. Fearing his death, Kamsa arrested Vasudevaand Devaki and chained them with iron shackles. Suspecting each of the childrento be Visnu, Kamsa killed them one after another because of the prophecy thatVisnu would kill him.                               PURPORT   Srila Jiva Gosvami, in his notes on this verse, has mentioned how Narada Munigave Kamsa this information. This incident is described in the Hari-vamsa.Narada Muni went to see Kamsa by providence, and Kamsa received him very well.Narada, therefore, informed him that any one of the sons of Devaki might beVisnu. Because Visnu was to kill him, Kamsa should not spare any of Devaki'schildren, Narada Muni advised. Narada's intention was that Kamsa, by killing thechildren, would increase his sinful activities so that Krsna would soon appearto kill him. Upon receiving the instructions of Narada Muni, Kamsa killed allthe children of Devaki one after another.   The word ajana-sankaya indicates that Lord Visnu never takes birth (ajana)and that He therefore appeared as Krsna, taking birth just like a human being(manusim tanum asritam). Kamsa attempted to kill all the babies born of Devakiand Vasudeva, although he knew that if Visnu were born, He would not be killed.Actually it came to pass that when Visnu appeared as Krsna, Kamsa could not killHim; rather, as foretold, it was He who killed Kamsa. One should know in truthhow Krsna, who takes His birth transcendentally, acts to kill the demons but isnever killed. When one perfectly understands Krsna in this way, through themedium of sastra, one becomes immortal. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):                       janma karma ca me divyam                       evam yo vetti tattvatah                      tyaktva deham punar janma                       naiti mam eti so 'rjuna   "One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities doesnot, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, butattains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."                               TEXT 67                                 TEXT                       mataram pitaram bhratrn                       sarvams ca suhrdas tatha                      ghnanti hy asutrpo lubdha                        rajanah prayaso bhuvi                               SYNONYMS   mataram--unto the mother; pitaram--unto the father; bhratrn--unto brothers;sarvan ca--and anyone else; suhrdah--friends; tatha--as well as; ghnanti--theykill (as it is practically seen); hi--indeed; asu-trpah--those who envy thelives of others for their personal sense gratification; lubdhah--greedy;rajanah--such kings; prayasah--almost always; bhuvi--on the earth.                             TRANSLATION
   Kings greedy for sense gratification on this earth almost always kill theirenemies indiscriminately. To satisfy their own whims, they may kill anyone, eventheir mothers, fathers, brothers or friends.                               PURPORT   We have seen in the history of India that Aurangzeb killed his brother andnephews and imprisoned his father to fulfill political ambitions. There havebeen many similar instances, and Kamsa was the same type of king. Kamsa did nothesitate to kill his nephews and imprison his sister and his father. For demonsto do such things is not astonishing. Nonetheless, although Kamsa was a demon,he was aware that Lord Visnu cannot be killed, and thus he attained salvation.Even partial understanding of the activities of Lord Visnu makes one eligiblefor salvation. Kamsa knew a little about Krsna--that He could not be killed--andtherefore he attained salvation although he thought of Visnu, Krsna, as anenemy. What then is to be said of one who knows Krsna perfectly from thedescriptions of sastras like Bhagavad-gita? It is therefore the duty of everyoneto read Bhagavad-gita and understand Krsna perfectly. This will make one's lifesuccessful.                               TEXT 68                                 TEXT                         atmanam iha sanjatam                       janan prag visnuna hatam                         mahasuram kalanemim                       yadubhih sa vyarudhyata                               SYNONYMS   atmanam--personally; iha--in this world; sanjatam--born again; janan--understanding well; prak--previously, before this birth; visnuna--by Lord Visnu;hatam--was killed; maha-asuram--a great demon; kalanemim--by the name Kalanemi;yadubhih--with the members of the Yadu dynasty; sah--he (Kamsa); vyarudhyata--acted inimically.                             TRANSLATION   In his previous birth, Kamsa had been a great demon named Kalanemi and beenkilled by Visnu. Upon learning this information from Narada, Kamsa becameenvious of everyone connected with the Yadu dynasty.                               PURPORT   Persons who are demons, enemies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, arecalled asuras. As stated in Bhagavad-gita, the asuras, because of their enmitytoward the Supreme Personality of Godhead, take birth after birth in asurafamilies and therefore glide down to the darkest hellish regions.                               TEXT 69                                 TEXT                         ugrasenam ca pitaram                        yadu-bhojandhakadhipam                        svayam nigrhya bubhuje                         surasenan maha-balah
                               SYNONYMS   ugrasenam--unto Ugrasena; ca--and; pitaram--who was his own father; yadu--ofthe Yadu dynasty; bhoja--of the Bhoja dynasty; andhaka--of the Andhaka dynasty;adhipam--the king; svayam--personally; nigrhya--subduing; bubhuje--enjoyed;surasenan--all the states known as Surasena; maha-balah--the extremely powerfulKamsa.                             TRANSLATION   Kamsa, the most powerful son of Ugrasena, even imprisoned his own father, theKing of the Yadu, Bhoja and Andhaka dynasties, and personally ruled the statesknown as Surasena.                               PURPORT   The state known as Mathura was also included within the states known asSurasena.                  ADDITIONAL NOTES FOR THIS CHAPTER   Regarding transmigration of the soul, Srila Madhvacarya gives the followingnotes. When one is awake, whatever one sees or hears is impressed upon the mind,which later works in dreams to show one different experiences, although indreams one appears to accept a different body. For example, when one is awakeone does business and talks with customers, and similarly in dreams one meetsvarious customers, talks about business and gives quotations. Madhvacarya says,therefore, that dreams take place according to what one sees, hears andremembers. When one reawakens, of course, one forgets the body of the dream.This forgetfulness is called apasmrti. Thus we are changing bodies because weare sometimes dreaming, sometimes awake and sometimes forgetful. Forgetfulnessof our previously created body is called death, and our work in the present bodyis called life. After death, one cannot remember the activities of one'sprevious body, whether imaginary or factual.   The agitated mind is compared to agitated water reflecting the sun and themoon. Actually the sun and moon reflected on the water do not exist there;nonetheless, they are reflected according to the movements of the water.Similarly, when our minds are agitated, we wander in different materialatmospheres and receive different types of bodies. This is described inBhagavad-gita as guna-sanga. Karanam guna-sango 'sya. Madhvacarya says, guna-nubaddhah san. And Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu says, brahmanda bhramite konabhagyavan jiva (Cc. Madhya 19.151). The living entity rotates up and downthroughout the universe, sometimes in the upper planetary system, sometimes inthe middle and lower planetary systems, sometimes as a man, sometimes a god, adog, a tree and so on. This is all due to the agitation of the mind. The mindmust therefore be steadily fixed. As it is said, sa vai manah krsna-padaravindayoh. One should fix one's mind at the lotus feet of Krsna, and thenone will become free from agitation. This is the instruction of the GarudaPurana, and in the Naradiya purana the same process is described. As stated inBhagavad-gita, yanti deva-vrata devan. The agitated mind goes to differentplanetary systems because it is attached to different kinds of demigods, but onedoes not go to the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead by worshiping thedemigods, for this is not supported by any Vedic literature. Man is thearchitect of his own fortune. In this human life one has the facility with whichto understand one's real situation, and one can decide whether to wander aroundthe universe forever or return home, back to Godhead. This is also confirmed inBhagavad-gita (aprapya mam nivartante mrtyu-samsara-vartmani).
   There is no such thing as chance. When a tree is burning in a forest fire andalthough the nearest tree is spared a distant tree catches fire, this may appearto be chance. Similarly, one may seem to get different types of bodies bychance, but actually one receives these bodies because of the mind. The mindflickers between accepting and rejecting, and according to the acceptance andrejection of the mind, we receive different types of bodies, although wesuperficially seem to obtain these bodies by chance. Even if we accept thetheory of chance, the immediate cause for the change of body is the agitation ofthe mind.   Notes on amsa. This chapter describes that Krsna appeared amsena, with Hisparts and parcels or His partial manifestation. In this connection, SridharaSvami says that Krsna is one hundred percent Bhagavan (krsnas tu bhagavansvayam). Because of our imperfections, however, we cannot appreciate Krsna infullness, and therefore whatever Krsna exhibited when present on earth was but apartial manifestation of His opulence. Again, Krsna appeared with His plenaryexpansion Baladeva. Krsna, however, is full; there is no question of Hisappearing partially. In the Vaisnava-tosani, Srila Sanatana Gosvami says that toaccept that Krsna was partially manifested would contradict the statement krsnastu bhagavan svayam. Srila Jiva Gosvami says that the word amsena means thatKrsna appeared with all His plenary expansions. The words amsena visnoh do notmean that Krsna is a partial representative of Visnu. Rather, Krsna appeared infullness, and He manifests Himself partially in the Vaikunthalokas. In otherwords, Lord Visnu is a partial representation of Krsna; Krsna is not a partialrepresentation of Visnu. In the Caitanya-caritamrta, Adi-lila, Chapter Four,this subject matter is explained very clearly. Srila Visvanatha CakravartiThakura also notes that no one can describe Krsna in fullness. Whateverdescriptions we find in Srimad-Bhagavatam are partial explanations of Krsna. Inconclusion, therefore, the word amsena indicates that Lord Visnu is a partialrepresentation of Krsna, not that Krsna is a partial representation of Visnu.   Srila Sanatana Gosvami's Vaisnava-tosani has explained the word dharma-silasya. The exact meaning of dharma-sila is "an unadulterated devotee." Realdharma consists of full surrender to Krsna (sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekamsaranam vraja). One who has fully surrendered to Krsna is actually religious.One such religious person was Maharaja Pariksit. Anyone who accepts theprinciple of surrender to the lotus feet of the Lord, giving up all othersystems of religion, is actually dharma-sila, perfectly religious.   The word nivrtta-tarsaih refers to one who no longer has any material desires(sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam). One may have many material desires because ofcontamination in this material world, but when one is completely free from allmaterial desires, he is called nivrtta-trsna, which indicates that he no longerhas any thirst for material enjoyment. Svamin krtartho 'smi varam na yace (Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya). Materialistic persons want some material profit fromexecuting devotional service, but this is not the purpose of service. Theperfection of devotional service lies in complete surrender unto the lotus feetof Krsna, with no material desires. One who surrenders in this way is alreadyliberated. Jivan-muktah sa ucyate. One who is always busy serving Krsna, inwhatever condition he may live, is understood to be liberated even in this life.Such a person, who is a pure devotee, does not need to change his body; indeed,he does not possess a material body, for his body has already beenspiritualized. An iron rod kept constantly within a fire will ultimately becomefire, and whatever it touches will burn. Similarly, the pure devotee is in thefire of spiritual existence, and therefore his body is cin-maya; that is, it isspiritual, not material, because the pure devotee has no desire but thetranscendental desire to serve the Lord. In text four the word upagiyamanat isused: nivrtta-tarsair upagiyamanat. Who will chant the glories of the Lordunless he is a devotee? Therefore the word nivrtta-tarsaih indicates thedevotee, and no one else. These are the remarks of acaryas like ViraraghavaAcarya and Vijayadhvaja. To desire anything other than devotional service will
diminish one's freedom from material desires, but when one is free from all suchdesires one is called nivrtta-tarsaih.   Vina pasu-ghnat. The word pasu means "animal." An animal killer, pasu-ghna,cannot enter into Krsna consciousness. In our Krsna consciousness movement,therefore, animal killing is completely prohibited.   Uttamasloka-gunanuvadat. The word uttamasloka means "one who is famous as thebest of those who are good." The Lord is good in all circumstances. That is Hisnatural reputation. His goodness is unlimited, and He uses it unlimitedly. Adevotee is also sometimes described as uttamasloka, meaning that he is eager toglorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the Lord's devotees. Glorifyingthe Lord and glorifying the Lord's devotees are the same. Or, rather, glorifyingthe devotee is more important than glorifying the Lord directly. Narottama dasaThakura explains this fact: chadiya vaisnava-seva, nistara payeche keba. Onecannot be liberated from material contamination without sincerely serving adevotee of Krsna.   Bhavausadhat means "from the universal remedy." Chanting the holy name andglorifying the Supreme Lord are the universal remedy for all the miseries ofmaterialistic life. Persons who desire to be freed from this material world arecalled mumuksu. Such persons can understand the miseries of materialistic life,and by glorifying the activities of the Lord they can be released from all thesemiseries. The transcendental sound vibrations concerning the Lord's name, fame,form, qualities and paraphernalia are all nondifferent from the Lord. Thereforethe very sound vibration of the Lord's glorification and name are pleasing tothe ears, and by understanding the absolute nature of the Lord's name, form andqualities the devotee becomes joyful. Even those who are not devotees, however,enjoy the pleasing narrations of the Lord's transcendental activities. Evenordinary persons not very much advanced in Krsna consciousness take pleasure indescribing the narrations depicted in Srimad-Bhagavatam. When a materialisticperson is purified in this way, he engages in hearing and chanting the gloriesof the Lord. Because glorification of the Lord's pastimes is very pleasing tothe ear and heart of the devotee, it is simultaneously his subject and object.   In this world there are three kinds of men: those who are liberated, thosetrying to be liberated, and those entangled in sense enjoyment. Of these three,those who are already liberated chant and hear the holy name of the Lord,knowing perfectly that to glorify the Lord is the only way to keep oneself in atranscendental position. Those who are trying to be liberated, the second class,may regard the chanting and hearing of the Lord's holy name as a process ofliberation, and they too will feel the transcendental pleasure of this chanting.As for karmis and persons engaged in sense gratification, they also may takepleasure in hearing the pastimes of the Lord, like His fighting on theBattlefield of Kuruksetra and His dancing in Vrndavana with the gopis.   The word uttamasloka-gunanuvada refers to the transcendental qualities of theSupreme Lord, such as His affection for mother Yasoda and His friends thecowherd boys and His loving attitude toward the gopis. The Lord's devotees likeMaharaja Yudhisthira are also described by the qualification uttamasloka-gunanuvada. The word anuvada refers to describing the qualities of the SupremeLord or His devotees. When these qualities are described, other devotees areinterested in hearing them. The more one is interested in hearing about thesetranscendental qualities, the more one transcendentally enjoys. Everyone,therefore, including the mumuksus, the vimuktas and the karmis, should chant andhear the glories of the Lord, and in this way everyone will benefit.   Although the sound vibration of the transcendental qualities of the Lord isequally beneficial to all, for those who are muktas, liberated, it is especiallypleasing. As described in Srimad-Bhagavatam, Eighth Canto, Third Chapter, versetwenty, because pure devotees, who no longer have any material desires,surrender fully to the lotus feet of the Lord, they always merge in the ocean ofbliss by chanting and hearing the Lord's holy name. According to this verse,devotees like Narada and other residents of Svetadvipa are seen always engaged
in chanting the holy name of the Lord because by such chanting they are alwaysexternally and internally blissful. The mumuksus, persons desiring to beliberated, do not depend on the pleasures of the senses; instead, theyconcentrate fully on becoming liberated by chanting the holy name of the Lord.Karmis like to create something pleasing to their ears and hearts, and althoughthey sometimes like to chant or hear the glories of the Lord, they do not do itopenly. Devotees, however, always spontaneously hear, chant about and rememberthe activities of the Lord, and by this process they are fully satisfied, eventhough these may seem like topics of sense gratification. Simply by hearing thetranscendental narrations of the Lord's activities, Pariksit Maharaja wasliberated. He was therefore srotramano-'bhirama; that is, he glorified theprocess of hearing. This process should be accepted by all living entities.   To distinguish persons who are bereft of these transcendental pleasures,Pariksit Maharaja has used the words virajyeta puman. The word puman refers toany person, whether man, woman or in-between. Because of the bodily conceptionof life, we are subject to lamentation, but one who has no such bodilyconceptions can take pleasure in transcendental hearing and chanting. Thereforea person fully absorbed in the bodily concept of life is surely killing himselfby not making spiritual progress. Such a person is called pasu-ghna. Especiallyexcluded from spiritual life are the animal hunters, who are not interested inhearing and chanting the holy name of the Lord. Such hunters are always unhappy,both in this life and in the next. It is therefore said that a hunter shouldneither die nor live because for such persons both living and dying aretroublesome. Animal hunters are completely different from ordinary karmis, andthus they have been excluded from the process of hearing and chanting. Vinapasu-ghnat. They cannot enter into the transcendental pleasure of chanting andhearing the holy name of the Lord.   The word maha-ratha refers to a great hero who can fight alone against eleventhousand other heroes, and the word atiratha, as found in text five, refers toone who can fight against an unlimited number. This is mentioned in theMahabharata as follows:                          ekadasa-sahasrani                      yodhayed yas tu dhanvinam                       astra-sastra-pravinas ca                        maha-ratha iti smrtah                        amitan yodhayed yas tu                      samprokto 'tirathas tu sah   This is the description given in the Brhad-vaisnava-tosani by Srila SanatanaGosvami.   Maya-manusyasya (10.1.17). Because of being covered by yogamaya (nahamprakasah sarvasya yogamaya-samavrtah), Krsna is sometimes called maya-manusya,indicating that although He is the Supreme personality of Godhead, He appearslike an ordinary person. A misunderstanding arises because yogamaya covers thevision of the general public. The Lord's position is actually different fromthat of an ordinary person, for although He appears to act like an ordinary man,He is always transcendental. The word maya also indicates "mercy," and sometimesit also means "knowledge." The Lord is always full of all transcendentalknowledge, and therefore although He acts like a human being, He is the SupremePersonality of Godhead, full of knowledge. In His original identity, the Lord isthe controller of maya (mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram). Thereforethe Lord may be called maya-manusya, or the Supreme Personality of Godheadplaying like an ordinary human being, although He is the controller of both thematerial and spiritual energies. The Lord is the Supreme Person, Purusottama,but because we are deluded by yogamaya, He appears to be an ordinary person.Ultimately, however, yogamaya induces even a nondevotee to understand the Lord
as the Supreme Person, Purusottama. In Bhagavad-gita we find two statementsgiven by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For the devotees, the Lord says:                        tesam satata-yuktanam                       bhajatam priti-purvakam                       dadami buddhi-yogam tam                         yena mam upayanti te   "To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I give theunderstanding by which they can come to Me." (Bg. 10.10) Thus for the willingdevotee the Lord gives intelligence by which to understand Him and return home,back to Godhead. For others, for nondevotees, the Lord says, mrtyuh sarva-harascaham: "I am all-plundering, inevitable death." A devotee like Prahlada enjoysthe activities of Lord Nrsimhadeva, whereas nondevotees like Prahlada's father,Hiranyakasipu, meet death before Lord Nrsimhadeva. The Lord therefore acts intwo ways, by sending some onto the path of repeated birth and death and sendingothers back home, back to Godhead.   The word kala, meaning "black," indicates the color of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Krsna. Lord Krsna and Lord Ramacandra, who both lookblackish, give liberation and transcendental bliss to Their devotees. Amongpersons possessing material bodies, sometimes someone is able to subject deathto his own will. For such a person, death is almost impossible because no onewants to die. But although Bhismadeva possessed this power, Bhisma, by thesupreme will of the Lord, died very easily in the Lord's presence. There havealso been many demons who had no hope of salvation, yet Kamsa attained salvationby the supreme will of the Lord. Not to speak of Kamsa, even Putana attainedsalvation and reached the level of the Lord's mother. Pariksit Maharaja,therefore, was very eager to hear about the Lord, who has inconceivablequalities by which to give liberation to anyone. Pariksit Maharaja, at the pointof his death, was certainly interested in his liberation. When such a great andexalted personality as the Lord behaves like an ordinary human being althoughpossessing inconceivable qualities, His behavior is called maya. Therefore theLord is described as maya-manusya. This is the opinion of Srila Jiva Gosvami. Murefers to mukti, or salvation, and ku refers to that which is bad or veryobnoxious. Thus muku refers to the Supreme personality of Godhead, who saves onefrom the bad condition of material existence. The Lord is called mukunda becauseHe not only saves the devotee from material existence but offers himtranscendental bliss in love and service.   As for Kesava, ka means Brahma, and isa means Lord Siva. The personality ofGodhead captivates both Lord Brahma and Lord Mahadeva, or Siva, by Histranscendental qualities. Therefore He is called Kesava. This opinion is givenby Sanatana Gosvami in his Vaisnava-tosani commentary.   It is said that all the demigods, accompanied by Tri-nayana, Lord Siva, wentto the shore of the ocean of milk and offered their prayers through the mantraknown as purusa-sukta. From this statement it is understood that the demigodscannot directly approach Lord Visnu, who lies on the ocean of milk, or enter Hisabode. This is also clearly stated in the Mahabharata, Moksa-dharma, and thenext chapter of Srimad-Bhagavatam. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,has His abode in Goloka (goloka-namni nija-dhamni tale ca tasya). From LordKrsna come the catur-vyuha, the quadruple expansions Sankarsana, Aniruddha,Pradyumna and Vasudeva. There are innumerable brahmandas, all of which emanatefrom the pores of Karanodakasayi Visnu, and in every brahmanda there is aGarbhodakasayi Visnu, who is a partial expansion of Aniruddha. This Aniruddha isa partial expansion of Pradyumna, who is partially represented as KsirodakasayiVisnu, the Supersoul of all living entities. These Visnu expansions aredifferent from Krsna, who resides in Goloka Vrndavana. When it is said that thedemigods offered prayers to the Lord by chanting the purusa-sukta, thisindicates that they pleased the Lord by enunciating prayers of bhakti.
   The word vrsakapi refers to one who satisfies His devotee in every way andfrees His devotee from all material anxieties. Vrsa refers to religiousperformances like sacrifices. Even without the execution of sacrifices, the Lordcan still enjoy the supermost comforts of the heavenly planets. The statementthat Purusottama, Jagannatha, would appear in the house of Vasudevadistinguishes the Supreme Personality of Godhead from ordinary persons. Thestatement that He personally appeared indicates that He did not send His plenaryexpansion. The word priyartham indicates that the Lord appeared to pleaseRukmini and Radharani. Priya means "the most beloved."   In the commentary of Sri Viraraghava Acarya, the following extra verse isaccepted after text twenty-three:                         rsayo 'pi tad-adesat                       kalpyantam pasu-rupinah                         payo-dana-mukhenapi                       visnum tarpayitum surah   "O demigods, even great sages, following the order of Visnu, appeared in theforms of cows and calves to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead bydelivering milk."   Ramanujacarya sometimes accepts Baladeva as a saktyavesa-avatara, but SrilaJiva Gosvami has explained that Baladeva is an expansion of Krsna and that apart of Baladeva is Sankarsana. Although Baladeva is identical with Sankarsana,He is the origin of Sankarsana. Therefore the word svarat has been used toindicate that Baladeva always exists in His own independence. The word svaratalso indicates that Baladeva is beyond the material conception of existence.Maya cannot attract Him, but because He is fully independent, He can appear byHis spiritual potency wherever He likes. Maya is fully under the control ofVisnu. Because the material potency and yogamaya mingle in the Lord'sappearance, they are described as ekanamsa. Sometimes ekanamsa is interpreted tomean "without differentiation." Sankarsana and Sesa-naga are identical. Asstated by Yamunadevi, "O Rama, O great-armed master of the world, who haveextended Yourself throughout the entire universe by one plenary expansion, it isnot possible to understand You fully." Therefore ekamsa refers to Sesa-naga. Inother words, Baladeva, merely by His partial expansion, sustains the entireuniverse.   The word karyarthe refers to one who attracted the pregnancy of Devaki andbewildered mother Yasoda. These pastimes are very confidential. The Supremepersonality of Godhead ordered yogamaya to bewilder His associates in Hispastimes and bewilder demons like Kamsa. As stated previously, yogamayamsamadisat. To give service to the Lord, yogamaya appeared along with mahamaya.Mahamaya refers to yaya sammohitam jagat, "one who bewilders the entire materialworld." From this statement it is to be understood that yogamaya, in her partialexpansion, becomes mahamaya and bewilders the conditioned souls. In other words,the entire creation has two divisions--transcendental, or spiritual, andmaterial. Yogamaya manages the spiritual world, and by her partial expansion asmahamaya she manages the material world. As stated in the Narada-pancaratra,mahamaya is a partial expansion of yogamaya. The Narada-pancaratra clearlystates that the Supreme Personality has one potency, which is sometimesdescribed as Durga. The Brahma-samhita says, chayeva yasya bhuvanani bibhartidurga. Durga is not different from yogamaya. When one understands Durgaproperly, he is immediately liberated, for Durga is originally the spiritualpotency, hladini-sakti, by whose mercy one can understand the SupremePersonality of Godhead very easily. Radha krsna-pranaya-vikrtir hladini-saktirasmad. The mahamaya-sakti, however, is a covering of yogamaya, and she istherefore called the covering potency. By this covering potency, the entirematerial world is bewildered (yaya sammohitam jagat). In conclusion, bewilderingthe conditioned souls and liberating the devotees are both functions belonging
to yogamaya. Transferring the pregnancy of Devaki and keeping mother Yasoda indeep sleep were both done by yogamaya; mahamaya cannot act upon such devotees,for they are always liberated. But although it is not possible for mahamaya tocontrol liberated souls or the Supreme Personality of Godhead, she did bewilderKamsa. The action of yogamaya in presenting herself before Kamsa was the actionof mahamaya, not yogamaya. Yogamaya cannot even see or touch such pollutedpersons as Kamsa. In Candi, in the Markandeya Purana, Eleventh Chapter, Mahamayasays, "During the twenty-eighth yuga in the period of Vaivasvata Manu, I shalltake birth as the daughter of Yasoda and be known as Vindhyacala-vasini."   The distinction between the two mayas--yogamaya and maha-maya--is describedas follows. Krsna's rasa-lila with the gopis and the gopis' bewilderment inrespect to their husbands, fathers-in-law and other such relatives werearrangements of yogamaya in which mahamaya had no influence. The Bhagavatamgives sufficient evidence of this when it clearly says, yogamayam upasritah. Onthe other hand, there were asuras headed by Salva and ksatriyas like Duryodhanawho were bereft of devotional service in spite of seeing Krsna's carrier Garudaand the universal form, and who could not understand Krsna to be the SupremePersonality of Godhead. This was also bewilderment, but this bewilderment wasdue to mahamaya. Therefore it is to be concluded that the maya which drags aperson from the Supreme Personality of Godhead is called jadamaya, and the mayawhich acts on the transcendental platform is called yogamaya. When NandaMaharaja was taken away by Varuna, he saw Krsna's opulence, but nonetheless hethought of Krsna as his son. Such feelings of parental love in the spiritualworld are acts of yogamaya, not of jadamaya, or mahamaya. This is the opinion ofSrila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura.   Surasenams ca. The son of Kartaviryarjuna was Surasena, and the countries heruled were also called Surasena. This is noted by Sanatana Gosvami in hisVaisnava-tosani commentary.   In regard to Mathura, we find this quotation:                       mathyate tu jagat sarvam                        brahma-jnanena yena va                      tat-sara-bhutam yad yasyam                         mathura sa nigadyate   When a self-realized soul acts in his transcendental position, his situationis called Mathura. In other words, when one acts in the process of bhakti-yoga,he may live anywhere, but actually he lives in Mathura, Vrndavana. Devotion toKrsna, the son of Nanda Maharaja, is the essence of all knowledge, and whereversuch knowledge is manifested is called Mathura. Also, when one establishesbhakti-yoga, excluding all other methods, one's situation is called Mathura.Yatra nityam sannihito harih: the place where Hari, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, lives eternally is called Mathura. The word nitya indicates eternality.The Supreme Lord is eternal, and His abode is also eternal. Goloka eva nivasatyakhilatma-bhutah. Although the Lord is always stationed in His abode, GolokaVrndavana, He is present everywhere in fullness. This means that when theSupreme Lord descends on the surface of the world, His original abode is notvacant, for He can remain in His original abode and simultaneously descend uponMathura, Vrndavana, Ayodhya and other places. He does not need to descend, sinceHe is already present there; He simply manifests Himself.   Srila Sukadeva Gosvami has addressed Maharaja Pariksit as tata, or "belovedson." This is due to parental love in the heart of Sukadeva Gosvami. BecauseKrsna was soon coming as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, out of parentalaffection Sukadeva Gosvami addressed Maharaja Pariksit as tata, "my dear son."   In the Visva-kosa dictionary, the word garbha is explained: garbho bhrunearbhake kuksav ity adi. When Kamsa was about to kill Devaki, Vasudeva wanted todissuade him by the diplomacy of sama and bheda. Sama means "pacifying."Vasudeva wanted to pacify Kamsa by indicating relations, gain, welfare, identity
and glorification. Reference to these five concerns constitutes sama, andVasudeva's presentation of fear in two situations--in this life and the next--iscalled bheda. Thus Vasudeva used both sama and bheda to pacify Kamsa. praisingKamsa's qualifications was glorification, and praising him as a descendant ofthe bhoja-vamsa appealed to sambandha, relationship. Speaking of "your sister"was an appeal to identity. Speaking about killing a woman raises questions aboutfame and welfare, and arousing fear of the sinful act of killing one's sisterduring her marriage ceremony is an aspect of bheda. The Bhoja dynasty refers tothose who were simply interested in sense gratification and were therefore notvery aristocratic. Another meaning of bhoja is "fighting." These wereindications of defamation for Kamsa. When Vasudeva addressed Kamsa as dina-vatsala, this was excessive praise. Kamsa would accept calves as a form ofrevenue from his poor constituents, and therefore he was called dina-vatsala.Vasudeva knew very well that he could not by force rescue Devaki from theimminent danger. Devaki was actually the daughter of Kamsa's uncle, andtherefore she is described as suhrt, meaning "relative." It is stated that Kamsarefrained from killing his close relation Devaki because if he had killed her, agreat fight would have ensued among the other members of the family. Kamsarefrained from provoking this great danger of a family fight, for it would havecaused many persons to lose their lives.   Formerly an asura named Kalanemi had six sons, named Hamsa, Suvikrama,Kratha, Damana, Ripurmardana and Krodhahanta. They were known as the sad-garbhas, or six garbhas, and they were all equally powerful and expert inmilitary affairs. These sad-garbhas gave up the association of Hiranyakasipu,their grandfather, and underwent great austerities to satisfy Lord Brahma, who,upon being satisfied, agreed to give them whatever benediction they mightdesire. When asked by Lord Brahma to state what they wanted, the sad-garbhasreplied, "Dear Lord Brahma, if you want to give us a benediction, give us theblessing that we will not be killed by any demigod, maha-roga, Yaksa, Gandharva-pati, Siddha, Carana or human being, nor by great sages who are perfect in theirpenances and austerities." Brahma understood their purpose and fulfilled theirdesire. But when Hiranyakasipu came to know of these events, he was very angryat his grandsons. "You have given up my association and have gone to worshipLord Brahma," he said, "and therefore I no longer have any affection for you.You have tried to save yourselves from the hands of the demigods, but I curseyou in this way: Your father will take birth as Kamsa and kill all of youbecause you will take birth as sons of Devaki." Because of this curse, thegrandsons of Hiranyakasipu had to take birth from the womb of Devaki and bekilled by Kamsa, although he was previously their father. This description ismentioned in the Hari-vamsa, Visnu-parva, Second Chapter. According to thecomments of the Vaisnava-tosani, the son of Devaki known as Kirtiman was thethird incarnation. In his first incarnation he was known as Smara and was theson of Marici, and later he became the son of Kalanemi. This is mentioned in thehistories.   An additional verse in this chapter of Srimad-Bhagavatam is accepted by theMadhvacarya-sampradaya, represented by Vijayadhvaja Tirtha. The verse is asfollows:                         atha kamsam upagamya                        narado brahma-nandanah                         ekantam upasangamya                         vakyam etad uvaca haatha--in this way; kamsam--unto Kamsa; upagamya--after going; naradah--the greatsage Narada; brahma-nandanah--who is the son of Brahma; ekantam upasangamya--after going to a very solitary place; vakyam--the following instruction; etat--this; uvaca--said; ha--in the past.
   Translation: "Thereafter, Narada, the mental son of Lord Brahma, approachedKamsa and, in a very solitary place, informed him of the following news."   The great saint Narada descended from the heavenly planets to the forest ofMathura and sent his messenger to Kamsa. When the messenger approached Kamsa andinformed him of Narada's arrival, Kamsa, the leader of the asuras, was veryhappy and immediately came out of his palace to receive Narada, who was asbright as the sun, as powerful as fire, and free from all tinges of sinfulactivities. Kamsa accepted Narada as his guest, offered him respectfulobeisances and gave him a golden seat, brilliant like the sun. Narada was afriend of the King of heaven, and thus he told Kamsa, the son of Ugrasena, "Mydear hero, you have satisfied me with a proper reception, and therefore I shalltell you something secret and confidential. While I was coming here fromNandakanana through the Caitraratha forest, I saw a great meeting of thedemigods, who followed me to Sumeru Parvata. We traveled through many holyplaces, and finally we saw the holy Ganges. While Lord Brahma was consulting theother demigods at the top of Sumeru Hill, I was also present with my stringedinstrument, the vina. I shall tell you confidentially that the meeting was heldjust to plan to kill the asuras, headed by you. You have a younger sister namedDevaki, and it is a fact that her eighth son will kill you." (reference: Hari-vamsa, Visnu-parva 1.2-16)   No one can blame Naradaji for encouraging Kamsa to kill the sons of Devaki.The saint Narada is always a well-wisher for human society, and he wanted theSupreme personality of Godhead, Krsna, to descend to this world as soon aspossible so that the society of demigods would be pleased and would see Kamsaand his friends killed by Krsna. Kamsa would also attain salvation from hisnefarious activities, and this too would very much please the demigods and theirfollowers. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks in this connection thatNarada Muni sometimes did things that were beneficial to the demigods and thedemons simultaneously. Sri Viraraghava Acarya, in his commentary, has includedthe following half-verse in this regard: asurah sarva evaita lokopadrava-karinah. Asuras are always disturbing elements for human society.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, First Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "The Advent of Lord Krsna: Introduction."                             Chapter Two          Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Krsna in the Womb   As described in this chapter, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead enteredthe womb of Devaki to kill Kamsa, all the demigods understood that the Lord wasliving within Devaki's womb, and therefore in veneration they offered Him theGarbha-stuti prayers.   Kamsa, under the protection of his father-in-law, Jarasandha, and with thehelp of his demoniac friends like Pralamba, Baka, Canura, Trnavarta, Aghasura,Mustika, Bana and Bhaumasura, began oppressing the members of the Yadu dynasty.Therefore, the members of the Yadu dynasty left their homes and sought shelterin such states as Kuru, Pancala, Kekaya, Salva and Vidarbha. Only some of themstayed with Kamsa, as nominal friends.   After Kamsa killed the sad-garbhas, the six sons of Devaki, one afteranother, Anantadeva entered Devaki's womb and was transferred to the womb ofRohini by the manipulation of Yogamaya, who was following the order of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord Himself, who was soon to appear as theeighth son of Devaki, ordered Yogamaya to take birth from the womb ofYasodadevi. Because Krsna and His potency, Yogamaya, appeared simultaneously asbrother and sister, the world is full of Vaisnavas and saktas, and there iscertainly some rivalry between them. Vaisnavas worship the Supreme Lord, whereassaktas, according to their desires, worship Yogamaya in forms like Durga,Bhadrakali and Candika. Following the orders of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Yogamaya transferred Baladeva, Sankarsana, the seventh child of Devaki,
from the womb of Devaki to the womb of Rohini. Because Sankarsana appears inorder to increase love of Krsna, He is known as Baladeva. One may takeauspicious strength from Him to become a devotee of the Lord, and therefore Heis also known as Balabhadra.   After Yogamaya transferred the seventh child of Devaki to the womb of Rohini,the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared within the heart of Vasudeva andtransferred Himself into the heart of Devaki. Because the Lord was present inher heart, Devaki, as her pregnancy continued, appeared effulgent. Upon seeingthis effulgence, Kamsa was full of anxiety, but he could not harm Devaki becauseof their family relationship. Thus he began indirectly thinking of Krsna andbecame fully Krsna conscious.   Meanwhile, because of the Lord's presence within the womb of Devaki, all thedemigods came to offer the Lord their prayers. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead, they said, is eternally the Absolute Truth. The spiritual soul is moreimportant than the gross body, and the Supersoul, Paramatma, is still moreimportant than the soul. The Supreme Godhead is absolutely independent, and Hisincarnations are transcendental. The prayers of the demigods glorify and exaltdevotees and explain the fate of persons who superficially consider themselvesliberated from the conditions of material nature. A devotee is always safe. Whena devotee fully surrenders at the lotus feet of the Lord, he is completelyliberated from the fear of material existence. By explaining why the SupremePersonality of Godhead descends, the prayers of the demigods clearly confirm theLord's statement in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):                        yada yada hi dharmasya                        glanir bhavati bharata                       abhyutthanam adharmasya                        tadatmanam srjamy aham   "Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendantof Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at that time I descendMyself."                              TEXTS 1-2                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        pralamba-baka-canura-                         trnavarta-mahasanaih                        mustikarista-dvivida-                        putana-kesi-dhenukaih                       anyais casura-bhupalair                       bana-bhaumadibhir yutah                        yadunam kadanam cakre                        bali magadha-samsrayah                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; pralamba--by the asura namedPralamba; baka--by the asura named Baka; canura--by the asura named Canura;trnavarta--by the asura named Trnavarta; mahasanaih--by Aghasura; mustika--bythe asura named Mustika; arista--by the asura Arista; dvivida--by the asuranamed Dvivida; putana--by Putana; kesi--by Kesi; dhenukaih--by Dhenuka; anyaihca--and by many others; asura-bhupalaih--by demoniac kings on the surface of theglobe; bana--by King Bana; bhauma--by Bhaumasura; adibhih--and by others aswell; yutah--being assisted; yadunam--of the kings of the Yadu dynasty; kadanam-
-persecution; cakre--regularly performed; bali--very powerful; magadha-samsrayah--under the protection of Jarasandha, the King of Magadha.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: Under the protection of Magadharaja, Jarasandha, thepowerful Kamsa began persecuting the kings of the Yadu dynasty. In this he hadthe cooperation of demons like Pralamba, Baka, Canura, Trnavarta, Aghasura,Mustika, Arista, Dvivida, Putana, Kesi, Dhenuka, Banasura, Narakasura and manyother demoniac kings on the surface of the earth.                               PURPORT   This verse supports the following statement given by the Lord in Bhagavad-gita (4.7-8):                        yada yada hi dharmasya                        glanir bhavati bharata                       abhyutthanam adharmasya                        tadatmanam srjamy aham                         paritranaya sadhunam                         vinasaya ca duskrtam                       dharma-samsthapanarthaya                         sambhavami yuge yuge   "Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendantof Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at that time I descend Myself.To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablishthe principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium."   The Lord's purpose in maintaining this material world is to give everyone achance to go back home, back to Godhead, but kings and political leadersunfortunately try to hinder the purpose of the Lord, and therefore the Lordappears, either personally or with His plenary portions, to set things right. Itis therefore said:                      garbham sancarya rohinyam                          devakya yogamayaya                      tasyah kuksim gatah krsno                       dvitiyo vibudhaih stutah   "Krsna appeared in the womb of Devaki after transferring Baladeva to the wombof Rohini by the power of Yogamaya." Yadubhih sa vyarudhyata. The kings of theYadu dynasty were all devotees, but there were many powerful demons, such asSalva, who began to persecute them. At that time, Jarasandha, who was Kamsa'sfather-in-law, was extremely powerful, and therefore Kamsa took advantage of hisprotection and the help of the demons in persecuting the kings of the Yadudynasty. The demons naturally appeared more powerful than the demigods, butultimately, because of help received from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,the demons were defeated and the demigods triumphant.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT                         te pidita nivivisuh                         kuru-pancala-kekayan                      salvan vidarbhan nisadhan
                         videhan kosalan api                               SYNONYMS   te--they (the kings of the Yadu dynasty); piditah--being persecuted;nivivisuh--took shelter or entered (the kingdoms); kuru-pancala--the countriesoccupied by the Kurus and Pancalas; kekayan--the countries of the Kekayas;salvan--the countries occupied by the Salvas; vidarbhan--the countries occupiedby the Vidarbhas; nisadhan--the countries occupied by the Nisadhas; videhan--thecountry of Videha; kosalan api--as well as the countries occupied by theKosalas.                             TRANSLATION   Persecuted by the demoniac kings, the Yadavas left their own kingdom andentered various others, like those of the Kurus, Pancalas, Kekayas, Salvas,Vidarbhas, Nisadhas, Videhas and Kosalas.                              TEXTS 4-5                                 TEXT                         eke tam anurundhana                         jnatayah paryupasate                         hatesu satsu balesu                         devakya augrasenina                       saptamo vaisnavam dhama                        yam anantam pracaksate                        garbho babhuva devakya                        harsa-soka-vivardhanah                               SYNONYMS   eke--some of them; tam--unto Kamsa; anurundhanah--exactly following hispolicy; jnatayah--relatives; paryupasate--began to agree with him; hatesu--having been killed; satsu--six; balesu--children; devakyah--born of Devaki;augrasenina--by the son of Ugrasena (Kamsa); saptamah--the seventh; vaisnavam--of Lord Visnu; dhama--a plenary expansion; yam--unto whom; anantam--by the nameAnanta; pracaksate--is celebrated; garbhah--embryo; babhuva--there was;devakyah--of Devaki; harsa-soka-vivardhanah--simultaneously arousing pleasureand lamentation.                             TRANSLATION   Some of their relatives, however, began to follow Kamsa's principles and actin his service. After Kamsa, the son of Ugrasena, killed the six sons of Devaki,a plenary portion of Krsna entered her womb as her seventh child, arousing herpleasure and her lamentation. That plenary portion is celebrated by great sagesas Ananta, who belongs to Krsna's second quadruple expansion.                               PURPORT   Some of the chief devotees, such as Akrura, stayed with Kamsa to satisfy him.This they did for various purposes. They all expected the Supreme Personality ofGodhead to appear as the eighth child as soon as Devaki's other children werekilled by Kamsa, and they were eagerly awaiting His appearance. By remaining inKamsa's association, they would be able to see the Supreme Personality of
Godhead take birth and display His childhood pastimes, and Akrura would later goto Vrndavana to bring Krsna and Balarama to Mathura. The word paryupasate issignificant because it indicates that some devotees wanted to stay near Kamsa inorder to see all these pastimes of the Lord. The six children killed by Kamsahad formerly been sons of Marici, but because of having been cursed by abrahmana, they were obliged to take birth as grandsons of Hiranyakasipu. Kamsahad taken birth as Kalanemi, and now he was obliged to kill his own sons. Thiswas a mystery. As soon as the sons of Devaki were killed, they would return totheir original place. The devotees wanted to see this also. Generally speaking,no one kills his own nephews, but Kamsa was so cruel that he did so withouthesitation. Ananta, Sankarsana, belongs to the second catur-vyuha, or quadrupleexpansion. This is the opinion of experienced commentators.                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                        bhagavan api visvatma                       viditva kamsajam bhayam                        yadunam nija-nathanam                         yogamayam samadisat                               SYNONYMS   bhagavan--Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api--also; visvatma--who is the Supersoul of everyone; viditva--understanding the position of theYadus and His other devotees; kamsa-jam--because of Kamsa; bhayam--fear;yadunam--of the Yadus; nija-nathanam--who had accepted Him, the Supreme Lord, astheir supreme shelter; yogamayam--unto Yogamaya, the spiritual potency of Krsna;samadisat--ordered as follows.                             TRANSLATION   To protect the Yadus, His personal devotees, from Kamsa's attack, thePersonality of Godhead, Visvatma, the Supreme Soul of everyone, ordered Yogamayaas follows.                               PURPORT   The words bhagavan api visvatma viditva kamsajam bhayam are commented upon bySrila Sanatana Gosvami. Bhagavan svayam is Krsna (krsnas tu bhagavan svayam). Heis Visvatma, the original Supersoul of everyone, because his plenary portionexpands as the Supersoul. This is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (13.3): ksetra jnamcapi mam viddhi sarva-ksetresu bharata. Lord Krsna is the ksetra jna, orSupersoul, of all living entities. He is the original source of all expansionsof the Personality of Godhead. There are hundreds and thousands of plenaryexpansions of Visnu, such as Sankarsana, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Vasudeva, buthere in this material world, the Visvatma, the Supersoul for all livingentities, is Ksirodakasayi Visnu. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.61), isvarahsarva-bhutanam hrd-dese'rjuna tisthati: "The Supreme Lord is situated in theheart of all living entities, O Arjuna." Krsna is actually Visvatma by Hisplenary expansion as visnu-tattva, yet because of His affection for Hisdevotees, He acts as Supersoul to give them directions (sarvasya caham hrdisannivisto mattah smrtir jnanam apohanam ca).   The affairs of the Supersoul pertain to Ksirodakasayi Visnu, but Krsna tookcompassion on Devaki, His devotee, because He understood her fear of Kamsa'spersecution. A pure devotee is always fearful of material existence. No oneknows what will happen next, for one may have to change his body at any moment
(tatha dehantara-praptih). Knowing this fact, a pure devotee acts in such a waythat he will not have his life spoiled by being obliged to accept another bodyand undergo the tribulations of material existence. This is bhayam, or fear.Bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syat (Bhag. 11.2.37). This fear is due to materialexistence. Properly speaking, everyone should always be alert and fearful ofmaterial existence, but although everyone is prone to be affected by theignorance of material existence, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, isalways alert to the protection of His devotees. Krsna is so kind andaffectionate toward His devotees that He helps them by giving them theintelligence by which to exist in this material world without forgetting Himeven for a moment. The Lord says:                        tesam evanukampartham                        aham ajnana-jam tamah                       nasayamy atma-bhavastho                        jnana-dipena bhasvata   "Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with theshining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance." (Bg. 10.11)   The word yoga means "link." Any system of yoga is an attempt to reconnect ourbroken relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There are differenttypes of yoga, of which bhakti-yoga is the best. In other yoga systems, one mustundergo various processes before attaining perfection, but bhakti-yoga isdirect. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (6.47):                         yoginam api sarvesam                         mad-gatenantaratmana                      sraddhavan bhajate yo mam                        sa me yuktatamo matah   "Of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith, worshiping Me intranscendental loving service, is most intimately united with Me in yoga and isthe highest of all." For the bhakti-yogi, a human body is guaranteed in his nextexistence, as stated by Lord Krsna (sucinam srimatam gehe yoga-bhrasto'bhijayate). Yogamaya is the spiritual potency of the Lord. Out of affection forHis devotees, the Lord always stays in spiritual touch with them, althoughotherwise His maya potency is so strong that she bewilders even exalted demigodslike Brahma. Therefore the Lord's potency is called yogamaya. Since the Lord isVisvatma, He immediately ordered Yogamaya to give protection to Devaki.                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT                      gaccha devi vrajam bhadre                        gopa-gobhir alankrtam                          rohini vasudevasya                        bharyaste nanda-gokule                       anyas ca kamsa-samvigna                         vivaresu vasanti hi                               SYNONYMS   gaccha--now go; devi--O you who are worshipable for the whole world; vrajam--to the land of Vraja; bhadre--O you who are auspicious for all living entities;gopa-gobhih--with cowherds and cows; alankrtam--decorated; rohini--by the nameRohini; vasudevasya--of Vasudeva, Krsna's father; bharya--one of the wives;aste--is living; nanda-gokule--in the estate of Nanda Maharaja known as Gokula,
where hundreds and thousands of cows are maintained; anyah ca--and other wives;kamsa-samvignah--being afraid of Kamsa; vivaresu--in secluded places; vasanti--are living; hi--indeed.                             TRANSLATION   The Lord ordered Yogamaya: O My potency, who are worshipable for the entireworld and whose nature is to bestow good fortune upon all living entities, go toVraja, where there live many cowherd men and their wives. In that very beautifulland, where many cows reside, Rohini, the wife of Vasudeva, is living at thehome of Nanda Maharaja. Other wives of Vasudeva are also living there incognitobecause of fear of Kamsa. Please go there.                               PURPORT   Nanda-gokula, the residence of King Nanda, was itself very beautiful, andwhen Yogamaya was ordered to go there and encourage the devotees withfearlessness, it became even more beautiful and safe. Because Yogamaya had theability to create such an atmosphere, the Lord ordered her to go to Nanda-gokula.                                TEXT 8                                 TEXT                       devakya jathare garbham                       sesakhyam dhama mamakam                        tat sannikrsya rohinya                          udare sannivesaya                               SYNONYMS   devakyah--of Devaki; jathare--within the womb; garbham--the embryo; sesa-akhyam--known as Sesa, the plenary expansion of Krsna; dhama--the plenaryexpansion; mamakam--of Me; tat--Him; sannikrsya--attracting; rohinyah--ofRohini; udare--within the womb; sannivesaya--transfer without difficulty.                             TRANSLATION   Within the womb of Devaki is My partial plenary expansion known as Sankarsanaor Sesa. Without difficulty, transfer Him into the womb of Rohini.                               PURPORT   The first plenary expansion of Krsna is Baladeva, also known as Sesa. TheSesa incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead supports the entireuniverse, and the eternal mother of this incarnation is mother Rohini. "BecauseI am going into the womb of Devaki," the Lord told Yogamaya, "the Sesaincarnation has already gone there and made suitable arrangements so that I maylive there. Now He should enter the womb of Rohini, His eternal mother."   In this connection, one may ask how the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whois always situated transcendentally, could enter the womb of Devaki, which hadpreviously been entered by the six asuras, the sad-garbhas. Does this mean thatthe Sad-garbhasuras were equal to the transcendental body of the SupremePersonality of Godhead? The following answer is given by Srila VisvanathaCakravarti Thakura.   The entire creation, as well as its individual parts, is an expansion of theenergy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, even though the Lord
enters the material world, He does not do so. This is explained by the LordHimself in Bhagavad-gita (9.4-5):                        maya tatam idam sarvam                        jagad avyakta-murtina                       mat-sthani sarva-bhutani                       na caham tesv avasthitah                       na ca mat-sthani bhutani                       pasya me yogam aisvaram                     bhuta-bhrn na ca bhuta-stho                        mamatma bhuta-bhavanah   "By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beingsare in Me, but I am not in them. And yet everything that is created does notrest in Me. Behold My mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of allliving entities, and although I am everywhere, My Self is the very source ofcreation." Sarvam khalv idam brahma. Everything is an expansion of Brahman, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, yet everything is not the Supreme Godhead, andHe is not everywhere. Everything rests upon Him and yet does not rest upon Him.This can be explained only through the acintya-bhedabheda philosophy. Suchtruths cannot be understood, however, unless one is a pure devotee, for the Lordsays in Bhagavad-gita (18.55), bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah:"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by devotionalservice." Even though the Lord cannot be understood by ordinary persons, thisprinciple should be understood from the statement of the sastras.   A pure devotee is always transcendentally situated because of executing ninedifferent processes of bhakti-yoga (sravanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam. arcanam vandanam dasyam sakhyam atma-nivedanam). Thus situated indevotional service, a devotee, although in the material world, is not in thematerial world. Yet a devotee always fears, "Because I am associated with thematerial world, so many contaminations affect me." Therefore he is always alertin fear, which gradually diminishes his material association.   Symbolically, mother Devaki's constant fear of Kamsa was purifying her. Apure devotee should always fear material association, and in this way all theasuras of material association will be killed, as the sad-garbhasuras werekilled by Kamsa. It is said that from the mind, Marici appears. In other words,Marici is an incarnation of the mind. Marici has six sons: Kama, Krodha, Lobha,Moha, Mada and Matsarya (lust, anger, greed, illusion, madness and envy). TheSupreme Personality of Godhead appears in pure devotional service. This isconfirmed in the Vedas: bhaktir evainam darsayati. Only bhakti can bring one incontact with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality ofGodhead appeared from the womb of Devaki, and therefore Devaki symbolicallyrepresents bhakti, and Kamsa symbolically represents material fear. When a puredevotee always fears material association, his real position of bhakti ismanifested, and he naturally becomes uninterested in material enjoyment. Whenthe six sons of Marici are killed by such fear and one is freed from materialcontamination, within the womb of bhakti the Supreme Personality of Godheadappears. Thus the seventh pregnancy of Devaki signifies the appearance of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. After the six sons Kama, Krodha, Lobha, Moha,Mada and Matsarya are killed, the Sesa incarnation creates a suitable situationfor the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In other words, whenone awakens his natural Krsna consciousness, Lord Krsna appears. This is theexplanation given by Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura.                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT
                         athaham amsa-bhagena                       devakyah putratam subhe                       prapsyami tvam yasodayam                       nanda-patnyam bhavisyasi                               SYNONYMS   atha--therefore; aham--I; amsa-bhagena--by My plenary expansion; devakyah--ofDevaki; putratam--the son; subhe--O all-auspicious Yogamaya; prapsyami--I shallbecome; tvam--you; yasodayam--in the womb of mother Yasoda; nanda-patnyam--inthe wife of Maharaja Nanda; bhavisyasi--shall also appear.                             TRANSLATION   O all-auspicious Yogamaya, I shall then appear with My full six opulences asthe son of Devaki, and you will appear as the daughter of mother Yasoda, thequeen of Maharaja Nanda.                               PURPORT   The word amsa-bhagena is important in this verse. In Bhagavad-gita (10.42)the Lord says:                          athava bahunaitena                        kim jnatena tavarjuna                      vistabhyaham idam krtsnam                        ekamsena sthito jagat   "But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With asingle fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe."Everything is situated as a part of the Supreme Lord's potency. In regard toLord Krsna's appearance in the womb of Devaki, Brahma played a part also becauseon the bank of the milk ocean he requested the Supreme Personality of Godhead toappear. A part was also played by Baladeva, the first expansion of Godhead.Similarly, Yogamaya, who appeared as the daughter of mother Yasoda, also playeda part. Thus jiva-tattva, visnu-tattva and sakti-tattva are all integrated withthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, and when Krsna appears, He appears with allHis integrated parts. As explained in previous verses, Yogamaya was requested toattract Sankarsana, Baladeva, from the womb of Devaki to the womb of Rohini, andthis was a very heavy task for her. Yogamaya naturally could not see how it waspossible for her to attract Sankarsana. Therefore Krsna addressed her as subhe,auspicious, and said, "Be blessed. Take power from Me, and you will be able todo it." By the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, anyone can doanything, for the Lord is present in everything, all things being His parts andparcels (amsa-bhagena) and increasing or decreasing by His supreme will.Balarama was only fifteen days older than Krsna. By the blessings of Krsna,Yogamaya became the daughter of mother Yasoda, but by the supreme will she wasnot able to enjoy the parental love of her father and mother. Krsna, however,although not actually born from the womb of mother Yasoda, enjoyed the parentallove of mother Yasoda and Nanda. By the blessings of Krsna, Yogamaya was able toachieve the reputation of being the daughter of mother Yasoda, who also becamefamous by the blessings of Krsna. Yasoda means "one who gives fame."                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT
                       arcisyanti manusyas tvam                        sarva-kama-varesvarim                         dhupopahara-balibhih                        sarva-kama-vara-pradam                               SYNONYMS   arcisyanti--will worship; manusyah--human society; tvam--unto you; sarva-kama-vara-isvarim--because you are the best of the demigods who can fulfill allmaterial desires; dhupa--by incense; upahara--by presentations; balibhih--bydifferent types of worship through sacrifice; sarva-kama--of all materialdesires; vara--the blessings; pradam--one who can bestow.                             TRANSLATION   By sacrifices of animals, ordinary human beings will worship you gorgeously,with various paraphernalia, because you are supreme in fulfilling the materialdesires of everyone.                               PURPORT   As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.20), kamais tais tair hrta jnanah prapadyante'nya-devatah: "Those whose minds are distorted by material desires surrenderunto demigods." Therefore the word manusya, meaning "human being," here refersto one who does not know the actual goal of life. Such a person wants to enjoythe material world by taking birth in a highly elevated family with the benefitsof education, beauty and immense wealth, which in this material world aredesirable. One who has forgotten the real aim of life may worship goddess Durga,maya-sakti, under various names, for different purposes, and in differentplaces. As there are many holy places for the worship of Krsna, there are alsomany holy places in India for the worship of Durgadevi, or Mayadevi, who tookbirth as the daughter of Yasoda. After cheating Kamsa, Mayadevi dispersedherself to various places, especially in Vindhyacala, to accept regular worshipfrom ordinary men. A human being should actually be interested in understandingatma-tattva, the truth of atma, the spirit soul, and Paramatma, the supremesoul. Those who are interested in atma-tattva worship the Supreme Personality ofGodhead (yasmin vijnate sarvam evam vijnatam bhavati). However, as explained inthe next verse of this chapter, those who cannot understand atma-tattva(apasyatam atma-tattvam) worship Yogamaya in her different features. ThereforeSrimad-Bhagavatam (2.1.2) says:                        srotavyadini rajendra                        nrnam santi sahasrasah                        apasyatam atma-tattvam                         grhesu grha-medhinam   "Those persons who are materially engrossed, being blind to the knowledge ofultimate truth, have many subject matters for hearing in human society, OEmperor." Those who are interested in remaining in this material world and arenot interested in spiritual salvation have many duties, but for one who isinterested in spiritual salvation, the only duty is to surrender fully untoKrsna (sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja). Such a person is notinterested in material enjoyment.                             TEXTS 11-12                                 TEXT
                         namadheyani kurvanti                        sthanani ca nara bhuvi                         durgeti bhadrakaliti                         vijaya vaisnaviti ca                         kumuda candika krsna                         madhavi kanyaketi ca                          maya narayanisani                         saradety ambiketi ca                               SYNONYMS   namadheyani--different names; kurvanti--will give; sthanani--in differentplaces; ca--also; narah--persons interested in material enjoyment; bhuvi--on thesurface of the globe; durga iti--the name Durga; bhadrakali iti--the nameBhadrakali; vijaya--the name Vijaya; vaisnavi iti--the name Vaisnavi; ca--also;kumuda--the name Kumuda; candika--the name Candika; krsna--the name Krsna;madhavi--the name Madhavi; kanyaka iti--the name Kanyaka or Kanya-kumari; ca--also; maya--the name Maya; narayani--the name Narayani; isani--the name Isani;sarada--the name Sarada; iti--thus; ambika--the name Ambika; iti--also; ca--and.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Krsna blessed Mayadevi by saying: In different places on the surface ofthe earth, people will give you different names, such as Durga, Bhadrakali,Vijaya, Vaisnavi, Kumuda, Candika, Krsna, Madhavi, Kanyaka, Maya, Narayani,Isani, Sarada and Ambika.                               PURPORT   Because Krsna and His energy appeared simultaneously, people have generallyformed two groups--the saktas and the Vaisnavas--and sometimes there is rivalrybetween them. Essentially, those who are interested in material enjoyment aresaktas, and those interested in spiritual salvation and attaining the spiritualkingdom are Vaisnavas. Because people are generally interested in materialenjoyment, they are interested in worshiping Mayadevi, the energy of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Vaisnavas, however, are suddha-saktas, or pure bhaktas,because the Hare Krsna maha-mantra indicates worship of the Supreme Lord'senergy, Hara. A Vaisnava prays to the energy of the Lord for the opportunity toserve the Lord along with His spiritual energy. Thus Vaisnavas all worship suchDeities as Radha-Krsna, Sita-Rama, Laksmi-Narayana and Rukmini-Dvarakadhisa,whereas durga-saktas worship the material energy under different names.   The names by which Mayadevi is known in different places have been listed byVallabhacarya as follows. In Varanasi she is known as Durga, in Avanti she isknown as Bhadrakali, in Orissa she is known as Vijaya, and in Kulahapura she isknown as Vaisnavi or Mahalaksmi. (The representatives of Mahalaksmi and Ambikaare present in Bombay.) In the country known as Kamarupa she is known asCandika, in Northern India as Sarada, and in Cape Comorin as Kanyaka. Thus sheis distributed according to various names in various places.   Srila Vijayadhvaja Tirthapada, in his pada-ratnavali-tika, has explained themeanings of the different representations. Maya is known as Durga because she isapproached with great difficulty, as Bhadra because she is auspicious, and asKali because she is deep blue. Because she is the most powerful energy, she isknown as Vijaya; because she is one of the different energies of Visnu, she isknown as Vaisnavi; and because she enjoys in this material world and givesfacilities for material enjoyment, she is known as Kumuda. Because she is verysevere to her enemies, the asuras, she is known as Candika, and because shegives all sorts of material facilities, she is called Krsna. In this way the
material energy is differently named and situated in different places on thesurface of the globe.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT                      garbha-sankarsanat tam vai                       prahuh sankarsanam bhuvi                         rameti loka-ramanad                       balabhadram balocchrayat                               SYNONYMS   garbha-sankarsanat--because He will be taken from the womb of Devaki to thatof Rohini; tam--Him (Rohini-nandana, the son of Rohini); vai--indeed; prahuh--people will call; sankarsanam--by the name Sankarsana; bhuvi--in the world; ramaiti--He will also be called Rama; loka-ramanat--because of His special mercy inenabling people in general to become devotees; balabhadram--He will also becalled Balabhadra; bala-ucchrayat--because of extensive bodily strength.                             TRANSLATION   The son of Rohini will also be celebrated as Sankarsana because of being sentfrom the womb of Devaki to the womb of Rohini. He will be called Rama because ofHis ability to please all the inhabitants of Gokula, and He will be known asBalabhadra because of His extensive physical strength.                               PURPORT   These are some of the reasons why Balarama is known as Sankarsana, Balaramaor sometimes Rama. In the maha-mantra--Hare Krsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, HareHare. Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare--people sometimes object whenRama is accepted as Balarama. But although devotees of Lord Rama may object,they should know that there is no difference between Balarama and Lord Rama.Here Srimad-Bhagavatam clearly states that Balarama is also known as Rama(rameti). Therefore, it is not artificial for us to speak of Lord Balarama asLord Rama. Jayadeva Gosvami also speaks of three Ramas: Parasurama, RaghupatiRama and Balarama. All of them are Ramas.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                        sandistaivam bhagavata                       tathety om iti tad-vacah                        pratigrhya parikramya                       gam gata tat tathakarot                               SYNONYMS   sandista--having been ordered; evam--thus; bhagavata--by the SupremePersonality of Godhead; tatha iti--so be it; om--affirmation by the mantra om;iti--thus; tat-vacah--His words; pratigrhya--accepting the order; parikramya--after circumambulating Him; gam--to the surface of the globe; gata--sheimmediately went; tat--the order, as given by the Supreme Personality ofGodhead; tatha--just so; akarot--executed.
                             TRANSLATION   Thus instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yogamaya immediatelyagreed. With the Vedic mantra om, she confirmed that she would do what He asked.Thus having accepted the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, shecircumambulated Him and started for the place on earth known as Nanda-gokula.There she did everything just as she had been told.                               PURPORT   After receiving the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yogamayatwice confirmed her acceptance by saying, "Yes, sir, I shall do as You order,"and then saying om. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that omsignifies Vedic confirmation. Thus Yogamaya very faithfully received the Lord'sorder as a Vedic injunction. It is a fact that whatever is spoken by the SupremePersonality of Godhead is a Vedic injunction that no one should neglect. InVedic injunctions there are no mistakes, illusions, cheating or imperfection.Unless one understands the authority of the Vedic version, there is no purposein quoting sastra. No one should violate the Vedic injunctions. Rather, oneshould strictly execute the orders given in the Vedas. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (16.24):                     tasmac chastram pramanam te                       karyakarya-vyavasthitau                      jnatva sastra-vidhanoktam                        karma kartum iharhasi   "One should understand what is duty and what is not duty by the regulationsof the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should act so thatone may gradually be elevated."                               TEXT 15                                 TEXT                        garbhe pranite devakya                         rohinim yoga-nidraya                        aho visramsito garbha                         iti paura vicukrusuh                               SYNONYMS   garbhe--when the embryo; pranite--was carried from the womb; devakyah--ofDevaki; rohinim--to the womb of Rohini; yoga-nidraya--by the spiritual energycalled Yogamaya; aho--alas; visramsitah--is lost; garbhah--the embryo; iti--thus; paurah--all the inhabitants of the house; vicukrusuh--lamented.                             TRANSLATION   When the child of Devaki was attracted and transferred into the womb ofRohini by Yogamaya, Devaki seemed to have a miscarriage. Thus all theinhabitants of the palace loudly lamented, "Alas, Devaki has lost her child!"                               PURPORT   "All the inhabitants of the palace" includes Kamsa. When everyone lamented,Kamsa joined in compassion, thinking that perhaps because of drugs or some otherexternal means, Devaki had undergone this abortion. The real story of what
happened after Yogamaya attracted the child of Devaki into the womb of Rohini inthe seventh month of Rohini's pregnancy is described as follows in the Hari-vamsa. At midnight, while Rohini was deeply sleeping, she experienced, as if ina dream, that she had undergone a miscarriage. After some time, when she awoke,she saw that this had indeed happened, and she was in great anxiety. ButYogamaya then informed her, "O auspicious lady, your child is now beingreplaced. I am attracting a child from the womb of Devaki, and therefore yourchild will be known as Sankarsana."   The word yoga-nidra is significant. When one is spiritually reconnectedthrough self-realization, one regards his material life as having been like adream. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.69):                        ya nisa sarva-bhutanam                        tasyam jagarti samyami                        yasyam jagrati bhutani                        sa nisa pasyato muneh   "What is night for all beings is the time of awakening for the self-controlled; and the time of awakening for all beings is night for theintrospective sage." The stage of self-realization is called yoga-nidra. Allmaterial activities appear to be a dream when one is spiritually awakened. Thusyoga-nidra may be explained to be Yogamaya.                               TEXT 16                                 TEXT                        bhagavan api visvatma                        bhaktanam abhayankarah                          avivesamsa-bhagena                         mana anakadundubheh                               SYNONYMS   bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api--also; visvatma--theSupersoul of all living entities; bhaktanam--of His devotees; abhayam-karah--always killing the causes of fear; avivesa--entered; amsa-bhagena--with all ofHis potential opulences (Sad-aisvarya-purna); manah--in the mind;anakadundubheh--of Vasudeva.                             TRANSLATION   Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul of all livingentities and who vanquishes all the fear of His devotees, entered the mind ofVasudeva in full opulence.                               PURPORT   The word visvatma refers to one who is situated in everyone's heart (isvarahsarva-bhutanam hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati). Another meaning of visvatma is "theonly lovable object for everyone." Because of forgetfulness of this object,people are suffering in this material world, but if one fortunately revives hisold consciousness of loving Krsna and connects with Visvatma, one becomesperfect. The Lord is described in the Third Canto (3.2.15) as follows:paravareso mahad-amsa-yukto hy ajo 'pi jato bhagavan. Although unborn, the Lord,the master of everything, appears like a born child by entering the mind of adevotee. The Lord is already there within the mind, and consequently it is notastonishing for Him to appear as if born from a devotee's body. The word avivesa
signifies that the Lord appeared within the mind of Vasudeva. There was no needfor a discharge of semen. That is the opinion of Sripada Sridhara Svami andSrila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura. In the Vaisnava-tosani, Srila SanatanaGosvami says that consciousness was awakened within the mind of Vasudeva. SrilaViraraghava Acarya also says that Vasudeva was one of the demigods and thatwithin his mind the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as an awakening ofconsciousness.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                      sa bibhrat paurusam dhama                        bhrajamano yatha ravih                        durasado 'tidurdharso                        bhutanam sambabhuva ha                               SYNONYMS   sah--he (Vasudeva); bibhrat--carried; paurusam--pertaining to the SupremePerson; dhama--the spiritual effulgence; bhrajamanah--illuminating; yatha--as;ravih--the sunshine; durasadah--very difficult even to look at, difficult tounderstand by sensory perception; ati-durdharsah--approachable with greatdifficulty; bhutanam--of all living entities; sambabhuva--so he became; ha--positively.                             TRANSLATION   While carrying the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead within the coreof his heart, Vasudeva bore the Lord's transcendentally illuminating effulgence,and thus he became as bright as the sun. He was therefore very difficult to seeor approach through sensory perception. Indeed, he was unapproachable andunperceivable even for such formidable men as Kamsa, and not only for Kamsa butfor all living entities.                               PURPORT   The word dhama is significant. Dhama refers to the place where the SupremePersonality of Godhead resides. In the beginning of Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.1.1) itis said, dhamna svena sada nirasta-kuhakam satyam param dhimahi. In the abode ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no influence of material energy(dhamna svena sada nirasta-kuhakam). Any place where the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is present by His name, form, qualities or paraphernalia immediatelybecomes a dhama. For example, we speak of Vrndavana-dhama, Dvaraka-dhama andMathura-dhama because in these places the name, fame, qualities andparaphernalia of the Supreme Godhead are always present. Similarly, if one isempowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to do something, the core of hisheart becomes a dhama, and thus he becomes so extraordinarily powerful that notonly his enemies but also people in general are astonished to observe hisactivities. Because he is unapproachable, his enemies are simply struck withwonder, as explained here by the words durasado 'tidurdharsah.   The words paurusam dhama have been explained by various acaryas. SriViraraghava Acarya says that these words refer to the effulgence of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Vijayadhvaja says that they signify visnu-tejas, andSukadeva says bhagavat-svarupa. The Vaisnava-tosani says that these wordsindicate the influence of the Supreme Lord's effulgence, and VisvanathaCakravarti Thakura says that they signify the appearance of the SupremePersonality of Godhead.
                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                    tato jagan-mangalam acyutamsam                      samahitam sura-sutena devi                   dadhara sarvatmakam atma-bhutam                   kastha yathananda-karam manastah                               SYNONYMS   tatah--thereafter; jagat-mangalam--auspiciousness for all living entities inall the universes of the creation; acyuta-amsam--the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, who is never bereft of the six opulences, all of which are present inall His plenary expansions; samahitam--fully transferred; sura-sutena--byVasudeva, the son of Surasena; devi--Devaki-devi; dadhara--carried; sarva-atmakam--the Supreme Soul of everyone; atma-bhutam--the cause of all causes;kastha--the east; yatha--just as; ananda-karam--the blissful (moon); manastah--being placed within the mind.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, accompanied by plenary expansions, the fully opulent SupremePersonality of Godhead, who is all-auspicious for the entire universe, wastransferred from the mind of Vasudeva to the mind of Devaki. Devaki, having thusbeen initiated by Vasudeva, became beautiful by carrying Lord Krsna, theoriginal consciousness for everyone, the cause of all causes, within the core ofher heart, just as the east becomes beautiful by carrying the rising moon.                               PURPORT   As indicated here by the word manastah, the Supreme Personality of Godheadwas transferred from the core of Vasudeva's mind or heart to the core of theheart of Devaki. We should note carefully that the Lord was transferred toDevaki not by the ordinary way for a human being, but by diksa, initiation. Thusthe importance of initiation is mentioned here. Unless one is initiated by theright person, who always carries within his heart the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, one cannot acquire the power to carry the Supreme Godhead within thecore of one's own heart.   The word acyutamsam is used because the Supreme Personality of Godhead isSad-aisvarya-purna, full in the opulences of wealth, strength, fame, knowledge,beauty and renunciation. The Supreme Godhead is never separated from Hispersonal opulences. As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.39), ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan: the Lord is always situated with all His plenary expansions,such as Rama, Nrsimha and Varaha. Therefore the word acyutamsam is specificallyused here, signifying that the Lord is always present with His plenaryexpansions and opulences. There is no need to think of the Lord artificially asyogis do. Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa pasyanti yam yoginah (Bhag. 12.13.1).Yogis meditate upon the Supreme person within the mind. For a devotee, however,the Lord is present, and His presence need only be awakened through initiationby a bona fide spiritual master. The Lord did not need to live within the wombof Devaki, for His presence within the core of her heart was sufficient to carryHim. One is here forbidden to think that Krsna was begotten by Vasudeva withinthe womb of Devaki and that she carried the child within her womb.   When Vasudeva was sustaining the form of the Supreme Personality of Godheadwithin his heart, he appeared just like the glowing sun, whose shining rays arealways unbearable and scorching to the common man. The form of the Lord situated
in the pure, unalloyed heart of Vasudeva is not different from the original formof Krsna. The appearance of the form of Krsna anywhere, and specifically withinthe heart, is called dhama. Dhama refers not only to Krsna's form, but to Hisname, His form, His quality and His paraphernalia. Everything becomes manifestsimultaneously.   Thus the eternal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with fullpotencies was transferred from the mind of Vasudeva to the mind of Devaki,exactly as the setting sun's rays are transferred to the full moon rising in theeast.   Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, entered the body of Devaki fromthe body of Vasudeva. He was beyond the conditions of the ordinary livingentity. When Krsna is there, it is to be understood that all His plenaryexpansions, such as Narayana, and incarnations like Lord Nrsimha and Varaha, arewith Him, and they are not subject to the conditions of material existence. Inthis way, Devaki became the residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whois one without a second and the cause of all creation. Devaki became theresidence of the Absolute Truth, but because she was within the house of Kamsa,she looked just like a suppressed fire, or like misused education. When fire iscovered by the walls of a pot or is kept in a jug, the illuminating rays of thefire cannot be very much appreciated. Similarly, misused knowledge, which doesnot benefit the people in general, is not very much appreciated. So Devaki waskept within the prison walls of Kamsa's palace, and no one could see hertranscendental beauty, which resulted from her conceiving the SupremePersonality of Godhead.   Commenting upon this verse, Sri Viraraghava Acarya writes, vasudeva-devakijatharayor hrdayayor bhagavatah sambandhah. The Supreme Lord's entrance into thewomb of Devaki from the heart of Vasudeva was a heart-to-heart relationship.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                    sa devaki sarva-jagan-nivasa-                     nivasa-bhuta nitaram na reje                  bhojendra-gehe 'gni-sikheva ruddha                   sarasvati jnana-khale yatha sati                               SYNONYMS   sa devaki--that Devakidevi; sarva-jagat-nivasa--of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, the sustainer of all the universes (mat-sthani sarva-bhutani); nivasa-bhuta--the womb of Devaki has now become the residence; nitaram--extensively;na--not; reje--became illuminated; bhojendra-gehe--within the limits of thehouse of Kamsa; agni-sikha iva--like the flames of a fire; ruddha--covered;sarasvati--knowledge; jnana-khale--in a person known as jnana-khala, one whopossesses knowledge but cannot distribute it; yatha--or just as; sati--so being.                             TRANSLATION   Devaki then kept within herself the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the causeof all causes, the foundation of the entire cosmos, but because she was underarrest in the house of Kamsa, she was like the flames of a fire covered by thewalls of a pot, or like a person who has knowledge but cannot distribute it tothe world for the benefit of human society.                               PURPORT
   In this verse the word jnana-khala is most significant. Knowledge is meantfor distribution. Although there is already much scientific knowledge, wheneverscientists or philosophers awaken to a particular type of knowledge, they try todistribute it throughout the world, for otherwise the knowledge gradually driesup and no one benefits from it. India has the knowledge of Bhagavad-gita, butunfortunately, for some reason or other, this sublime knowledge of the scienceof God was not distributed throughout the world, although it is meant for all ofhuman society. Therefore Krsna Himself appeared as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu andordered all Indians to take up the cause of distributing the knowledge ofBhagavad-gita throughout the entire world.                yare dekha, tare kaha 'krsna'-upadesa                 amara ajnaya guru hana tara' ei desa   "Instruct everyone to follow the orders of Lord Sri Krsna as they are givenin Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam. In this way become a spiritual masterand try to liberate everyone in this land." (Cc. Madhya 7.128) Although Indiahas the sublime knowledge of Bhagavad-gita, Indians have not done their properduty of distributing it. Now, therefore, the Krsna consciousness movement hasbeen set up to distribute this knowledge as it is, without distortion. Althoughpreviously there were attempts to distribute the knowledge of Bhagavad-gita,these attempts involved distortion and compromise with mundane knowledge. Butnow the Krsna consciousness movement, without mundane compromises, isdistributing Bhagavad-gita as it is, and people are deriving the benefits ofawakening to Krsna consciousness and becoming devotees of Lord Krsna. Thereforethe proper distribution of knowledge has begun by which not only will the wholeworld benefit, but India's glory will be magnified in human society. Kamsa triedto arrest Krsna consciousness within his house (bhojendra-gehe), with the resultthat Kamsa, with all his opulences, was later vanquished. Similarly, the realknowledge of Bhagavad-gita was being choked by unscrupulous Indian leaders, withthe result that India's culture, and knowledge of the Supreme were being lost.Now, however, because Krsna consciousness is spreading, the proper use ofBhagavad-gita is being attempted.                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                 tam viksya kamsah prabhayajitantaram                  virocayantim bhavanam suci-smitam                   ahaisa me prana-haro harir guham                  dhruvam srito yan na pureyam idrsi                               SYNONYMS   tam--her (Devaki); viksya--after seeing; kamsah--her brother Kamsa; prabhaya--with the enhancement of her beauty and influence; ajita-antaram--because ofkeeping Ajita, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, within herself;virocayantim--illuminating; bhavanam--the whole atmosphere of the house; suci-smitam--smiling and brilliant; aha--said to himself; esah--this (SupremePerson); me--my; prana-harah--who will kill me; harih--Lord Visnu; guham--withinthe womb of Devaki; dhruvam--certainly; sritah--has taken shelter; yat--because;na--was not; pura--formerly; iyam--Devaki; idrsi--like this.                             TRANSLATION   Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead was within her womb, Devakiilluminated the entire atmosphere in the place where she was confined. Seeing
her jubilant, pure and smiling, Kamsa thought, "The Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Visnu, who is now within her, will kill me. Devaki has never beforelooked so brilliant and jubilant."                               PURPORT   The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):                        yada yada hi dharmasya                        glanir bhavati bharata                       abhyutthanam adharmasya                        tadatmanam srjamy aham   "Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendantof Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at that time I descendMyself." In this age, at the present moment, there are inordinate discrepanciesin the discharge of human duties. Human life is meant for God realization, butunfortunately the materialistic civilization is stressing only the senses of thebody, not understanding the living force within the body. As clearly stated inBhagavad-gita (dehino 'smin yatha dehe), within the body is the body'sproprietor, the living force, which is more important. But human society hasbecome so fallen that instead of understanding the living force within the body,people have become busy with external things. This is a discrepancy in humanduties. Therefore Krsna has taken birth or taken shelter within the womb of theKrsna consciousness movement. Men of Kamsa's class, therefore, are very muchafraid and are busy trying to stop this movement, especially in the Westerncountries. One politician has remarked that the Krsna consciousness movement isspreading like an epidemic and that if not checked immediately, within ten yearsit may capture governmental power. There is, of course, such potency in theKrsna consciousness movement. As stated by authorities (Cc. Adi 17.22), kali-kale nama-rupe krsna-avatara: in this age, Krsna has appeared in the Hare Krsnamaha-mantra. The Krsna consciousness movement is spreading like wildfire allover the world, and it will go on doing so. Men who are like Kamsa are very muchafraid of the movement's progress and acceptance by the younger generation, butas Krsna could not be killed by Kamsa, this movement cannot be checked by men ofKamsa's class. The movement will go on increasing more and more, provided theleaders of the movement remain firmly Krsna conscious by following theregulative principles and the primary activities of chanting the Hare Krsnamantra regularly.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                   kim adya tasmin karaniyam asu me                 yad artha-tantro na vihanti vikramam                 striyah svasur gurumatya vadho 'yam                   yasah sriyam hanty anukalam ayuh                               SYNONYMS   kim--what; adya--now, immediately; tasmin--in this situation; karaniyam--isto be done; asu--without delay; me--my duty; yat--because; artha-tantrah--theSupreme Personality of Godhead, who is always determined to protect the sadhusand kill the asadhus; na--does not; vihanti--give up; vikramam--His prowess;striyah--of a woman; svasuh--of my sister; guru-matyah--especially when she ispregnant; vadhah ayam--the killing; yasah--fame; sriyam--opulence; hanti--willvanquish; anukalam--forever; ayuh--and the duration of life.
                             TRANSLATION   Kamsa thought: What is my duty now? The Supreme Lord, who knows His purpose[paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam], will not give up His prowess.Devaki is a woman, she is my sister, and moreover she is now pregnant. If I killher, my reputation, opulence and duration of life will certainly be vanquished.                               PURPORT   According to Vedic principles, a woman, a brahmana, an old man, a child and acow should never be killed. It appears that Kamsa, although a great enemy of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, was aware of the Vedic culture and conscious ofthe fact that the soul transmigrates from one body to another and that onesuffers in the next life according to the karmas of this life. Therefore he wasafraid of killing Devaki, since she was a woman, she was his sister, and she waspregnant. A ksatriya becomes famous by performing heroic acts. But what would beheroic about killing a woman who, while confined in his custody, was under hisshelter? Therefore, he did not want to act drastically by killing Devaki.Kamsa's enemy was within Devaki's womb, but killing an enemy in such a nescientstate would not be an exhibition of prowess. According to ksatriya rules, anenemy should be fought face to face and with proper weapons. Then if the enemyis killed, the victor becomes famous. Kamsa very conscientiously deliberatedupon these facts and therefore refrained from killing Devaki, although he wascompletely confident that his enemy had already appeared within her womb.                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT                     sa esa jivan khalu sampareto                    varteta yo 'tyanta-nrsamsitena                    dehe mrte tam manujah sapanti                ganta tamo 'ndham tanu-manino dhruvam                               SYNONYMS   sah--he; esah--that jealous person; jivan--while living; khalu--even;samparetah--is dead; varteta--continues to live; yah--anyone who; atyanta--verymuch; nrsamsitena--by executing cruel activities; dehe--when the body; mrte--isfinished; tam--him; manujah--all human beings; sapanti--condemn; ganta--he willgo; tamah andham--to hellish life; tanu-maninah--of a person in the bodilyconcept of life; dhruvam--without a doubt.                             TRANSLATION   A person who is very cruel is regarded as dead even while living, for whilehe is living or after his death, everyone condemns him. And after the death of aperson in the bodily concept of life, he is undoubtedly transferred to the hellknown as Andhatama.                               PURPORT   Kamsa considered that if he killed his sister, while living he would becondemned by everyone, and after death he would go to the darkest region ofhellish life because of his cruelty. It is said that a cruel person like abutcher is advised not to live and not to die. While living, a cruel personcreates a hellish condition for his next birth, and therefore he should not
live; but he is also advised not to die, because after death he must go to thedarkest region of hell. Thus in either circumstance he is condemned. Kamsa,therefore, having good sense about the science of the soul's transmigration,deliberately refrained from killing Devaki.   In this verse the words ganta tamo 'ndham tanu-manino dhruvam are veryimportant and require extensive understanding. Srila Jiva Gosvami, in hisVaisnava-tosani-tika, says: tatra tanu-maninah papina iti dehatma-buddhyaivapapabhiniveso bhavati. One who lives in the bodily concept, thinking, "I am thisbody," involves himself, by the very nature of this conception, in a life ofsinful activities. Anyone living in such a conception is to be considered acandidate for hell.                    adanta-gobhir visatam tamisram                    punah punas carvita-carvananam   (Bhag. > 7.5.30)   One who is in a bodily concept of life has no control over sensegratification. Such a person can do anything sinful to eat, drink, be merry andenjoy a life of sense gratification, not knowing of the soul's transmigrationfrom one body to another. Such a person does whatever he likes, whatever heimagines, and therefore, being subject to the laws of nature, he suffersmiserably again and again in different material bodies.                   yavat kriyas tavad idam mano vai                   karmatmakam yena sarira-bandhah   (Bhag. 5.5.5)   In the bodily concept of life, a person is karmanubandha, or conditioned bykarma, and as long as the mind is absorbed in karma, one must accept a materialbody. Sarira-bandha, bondage to the material body, is a source of misery (klesa-da).                   na sadhu manye yata atmano 'yam                     asann api klesada asa dehah   Although the body is temporary, it always gives one trouble in many ways, buthuman civilization is now unfortunately based on tanu-mani, the bodily conceptof life, by which one thinks, "I belong to this nation," "I belong to thisgroup," "I belong to that group," and so on. Each of us has his own ideas, andwe are becoming increasingly involved, individually, socially, communally andnationally, in the complexities of karmanubandha, sinful activities. For themaintenance of the body, men are killing so many other bodies and becomingimplicated in karmanubandha. Therefore Srila Jiva Gosvami says that tanu-mani,those in the bodily concept of life, are papi, sinful persons. For such sinfulpersons, the ultimate destination is the darkest region of hellish life (gantatamo 'ndham). In particular, a person who wants to maintain his body by killinganimals is most sinful and cannot understand the value of spiritual life. InBhagavad-gita (16.19-20) the Lord says:                       tan aham dvisatah kruran                         samsaresu naradhaman                       ksipamy ajasram asubhan                          asurisv eva yonisu                         asurim yonim apanna                        mudha janmani janmani                       mam aprapyaiva kaunteya                       tato yanty adhamam gatim
   "Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, arecast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac speciesof life. Attaining repeated birth among the species of demoniac life, suchpersons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most abominabletype of existence." A human being is meant to understand the value of humanlife, which is a boon obtained after many, many births. Therefore one must freeoneself from tanu-mani, the bodily concept of life, and realize the SupremePersonality of Godhead.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                        iti ghoratamad bhavat                      sannivrttah svayam prabhuh                      aste pratiksams taj-janma                       harer vairanubandha-krt                               SYNONYMS   iti--thus (thinking in the above-mentioned way); ghora-tamat bhavat--from themost ghastly contemplation of how to kill his sister; sannivrttah--refrained;svayam--personally deliberating; prabhuh--one who was in full knowledge (Kamsa);aste--remained; pratiksan--awaiting the moment; tat-janma--until the birth ofHim; hareh--of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari; vaira-anubandha-krt--determined to continue such enmity.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: Deliberating in this way, Kamsa, although determinedto continue in enmity toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead, refrained fromthe vicious killing of his sister. He decided to wait until the Lord was bornand then do what was needed.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                       asinah samvisams tisthan                       bhunjanah paryatan mahim                         cintayano hrsikesam                        apasyat tanmayam jagat                               SYNONYMS   asinah--while sitting comfortably in his sitting room or on the throne;samvisan--or lying on his bed; tisthan--or staying anywhere; bhunjanah--whileeating; paryatan--while walking or moving; mahim--on the ground, going hitherand thither; cintayanah--always inimically thinking of; hrsikesam--the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the controller of everything; apasyat--observed; tat-mayam--consisting of Him (Krsna), and nothing more; jagat--the entire world.                             TRANSLATION   While sitting on his throne or in his sitting room, while lying on his bed,or, indeed, while situated anywhere, and while eating, sleeping or walking,
Kamsa saw only his enemy, the Supreme Lord, Hrsikesa. In other words, bythinking of his all-pervading enemy, Kamsa became unfavorably Krsna conscious.                               PURPORT   Srila Rupa Gosvami has described the finest pattern of devotional service asanukulyena krsnanusilanam, or cultivating Krsna consciousness favorably. Kamsa,of course, was also Krsna conscious, but because he regarded Krsna as his enemy,even though he was fully absorbed in Krsna consciousness, his Krsnaconsciousness was not favorable for his existence. Krsna consciousness,favorably cultivated, makes one completely happy, so much so that a Krsnaconscious person does not consider kaivalya-sukham, or merging into theexistence of Krsna, to be a great gain. Kaivalyam narakayate. For a Krsnaconscious person, even merging into the existence of Krsna, or Brahman, asimpersonalists aspire to do, is uncomfortable. Kaivalyam narakayate tridasa-purakasa-puspayate. Karmis hanker to be promoted to the heavenly planets, but aKrsna conscious person considers such promotion a will-o'-the-wisp, good fornothing. Durdantendriya-kala-sarpa-patali protkhata-damstrayate. Yogis try tocontrol their senses and thus become happy, but a Krsna conscious personneglects the methods of yoga. He is unconcerned with the greatest of enemies,the senses, which are compared to snakes. For a Krsna conscious person who iscultivating Krsna consciousness favorably, the happiness conceived by thekarmis, jnanis and yogis is treated as less than a fig. Kamsa, however, becauseof cultivating Krsna consciousness in a different way--that is, inimically--wasuncomfortable in all the affairs of his life; whether sitting, sleeping, walkingor eating, he was always in danger. This is the difference between a devotee anda nondevotee. A nondevotee or atheist also cultivates God consciousness--bytrying to avoid God in everything. For example, so-called scientists who want tocreate life by a combination of chemicals regard the external, material elementsas supreme. Such scientists do not like the idea that life is part and parcel ofthe Supreme Lord. As clearly stated in Bhagavad-gita (mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhutah), the living entities do not arise from a combination of materialelements, such as earth, water, air and fire, but are separated portions of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. If one can understand the position of the livingentity as a separated portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by studyingthe nature of the living entity one can understand the nature of the SupremeGodhead, since the living entity is a fragmental sample of the Godhead. Butbecause atheists are not interested in God consciousness, they try to be happyby cultivating Krsna consciousness in various unfavorable ways.   Although Kamsa was always absorbed in thoughts of Hari, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, he was not happy. A devotee, however, whether sitting ona throne or beneath a tree, is always happy. Srila Rupa Gosvami resigned fromoffice as a government minister to sit beneath a tree, yet he was happy. Tyaktvaturnam asesa-mandalapati-srenim sada tucchavat (Sad-gosvamy-astaka 4). He didnot care for his comfortable position as minister; he was happy even beneath atree in Vrndavana, favorably serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This isthe difference between a devotee and a nondevotee. For a nondevotee, the worldis full of problems, whereas for a devotee the entire world is full ofhappiness.         visvam purna-sukhayate vidhi-mahendradis ca kitayate       yat-karunya-kataksa-vaibhavavatam tam gauram eva stumah   (Caitanya-candramrta 95)   This comfortable position of a devotee can be established by the mercy ofLord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Yasmin sthito na duhkhena gurunapi vicalyate (Bg.6.22). Even when a devotee is superficially put into great difficulty, he isnever disturbed.
                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT                      brahma bhavas ca tatraitya                        munibhir naradadibhih                       devaih sanucaraih sakam                       girbhir vrsanam aidayan                               SYNONYMS   brahma--the supreme four-headed demigod; bhavah ca--and Lord Siva; tatra--there; etya--arriving; munibhih--accompanied by great sages; narada-adibhih--byNarada and others; devaih--and by demigods like Indra, Candra and Varuna; sa-anucaraih--with their followers; sakam--all together; girbhih--by theirtranscendental prayers; vrsanam--the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who canbestow blessings upon everyone; aidayan--pleased.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, accompanied by great sages like Narada, Devala andVyasa and by other demigods like Indra, Candra and Varuna, invisibly approachedthe room of Devaki, where they all joined in offering their respectfulobeisances and prayers to please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who canbestow blessings upon everyone.                               PURPORT   Dvau bhuta-sargau loke 'smin daiva asura eva ca (Padma Purana). There are twoclasses of men--the daivas and the asuras--and there is a great differencebetween them. Kamsa, being an asura, was always planning how to kill the SupremePersonality of Godhead or His mother, Devaki. Thus he was also Krsna conscious.But devotees are Krsna conscious favorably (visnu-bhaktah smrto daivah). Brahmais so powerful that he is in charge of creating an entire universe, yet hepersonally came to receive the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Bhava, Lord Siva,is always jubilant in chanting the holy name of the Lord. And what to speak ofNarada? Narada-muni, bajaya vina, radhika-ramana-name. Narada Muni is alwayschanting the glories of the Lord, and his engagement is to travel all over theuniverse and find a devotee or make someone a devotee. Even a hunter was made adevotee by the grace of Narada. Srila Sanatana Gosvami, in his Tosani, says thatthe word narada-adibhih means that Narada and the demigods were accompanied byother saintly persons, like Sanaka and Sanatana, all of whom came tocongratulate or welcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Even though Kamsawas planning to kill Devaki, he too awaited the arrival of the SupremePersonality of Godhead (pratiksams taj janma).                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                 satya-vratam satya-param tri-satyam                   satyasya yonim nihitam ca satye                   satyasya satyam rta-satya-netram                  satyatmakam tvam saranam prapannah                               SYNONYMS
   satya-vratam--the Personality of Godhead, who never deviates from His vow   ).   To honor this vow, the Lord appeared.   *; satya-param--who is the Absolute Truth (as stated in the beginning ofSrimad-Bhagavatam, satyam param dhimahi); tri-satyam--He is always present asthe Absolute Truth, before the creation of this cosmic manifestation, during itsmaintenance, and even after its annihilation; satyasya--of all relative truths,which are emanations from the Absolute Truth, Krsna; yonim--t;he cause; nihitam--entered). Therefore He is called antaryami, the inner force. *; ca--and; satye--in the factors that create this material world (namely, the five elements--earth, water, fire, air and ether); satyasya--of all that is accepted as thetruth; satyam--the Lord is the original truth; rta-satya-netram--He is theorigin of whatever truth is pleasing (sunetram); satya-atmakam--everythingpertaining to the Lord is truth (sac-cid-ananda: His body is truth, Hisknowledge is truth, and His pleasure is truth); tvam--unto you, O Lord; saranam--offering our full surrender; prapannah--we are completely under Yourprotection.                             TRANSLATION   The demigods prayed: O Lord, You never deviate from Your vow, which is alwaysperfect because whatever You decide is perfectly correct and cannot be stoppedby anyone. Being present in the three phases of cosmic manifestation--creation,maintenance and annihilation--You are the Supreme Truth. Indeed, unless one iscompletely truthful, one cannot achieve Your favor, which therefore cannot beachieved by hypocrites. You are the active principle, the real truth, in all theingredients of creation, and therefore you are known as antaryami, the innerforce. You are equal to everyone, and Your instructions apply for everyone, forall time. You are the beginning of all truth. Therefore, offering ourobeisances, we surrender unto You. Kindly give us protection.                               PURPORT   The demigods or devotees know perfectly well that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead is the true substance, whether within this material world or in thespiritual world. Srimad-Bhagavatam begins, therefore, with the words om namobhagavate vasudevaya. .. satyam param dhimahi. Vasudeva, Krsna, is the paramsatyam, the Supreme Truth. The Supreme Truth can be approached or understood bythe supreme method, as declared by the Supreme Truth: bhaktya mam abhijanatiyavan yas casmi tattvatah (Bg. 18.55). Bhakti, devotional service, is the onlyway to understand the Absolute Truth. For protection, therefore, the demigodssurrender to the Supreme Truth, not to the relative truth. There are persons whoworship various demigods, but the Supreme Truth, Krsna, declares in Bhagavad-gita (7.23), antavat tu phalam tesam tad bhavaty alpa-medhasam: "Men of smallintelligence worship the demigods, and their fruits are limited and temporary."Worship of demigods may be useful for a limited time, but the result is antavat,perishable. This material world is impermanent, the demigods are impermanent,and the benedictions derived from the demigods are also impermanent, whereas theliving entity is eternal (nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam). Every livingentity, therefore, must search for eternal happiness, not temporary happiness.
The words satyam param dhimahi indicate that one should search for the AbsoluteTruth, not the relative truth.   While offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nrsimhadeva,Prahlada Maharaja said:                 balasya neha saranam pitarau nrsimha                nartasya cagadam udanvati majjato nauh   Generally it is understood that the protectors for a child are his parents,but this is not actually the fact. The real protector is the Supreme Personalityof Godhead.               taptasya tat-pratividhir ya ihanjasestas               tavad vibho tanu-bhrtam tvad-upeksitanam   (Bhag. 7.9.19)   If neglected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a child, despite thepresence of his parents, will suffer, and a diseased person, despite all medicalhelp, will die. In this material world, where there is a struggle for existence,men have invented many means for protection, but these are useless if theSupreme Personality of Godhead rejects them. Therefore the demigods purposefullysay, satyatmakam tvam saranam prapannah: "Real protection can be obtained fromYou, O Lord, and therefore we surrender unto You,"   The Lord demands that one surrender unto Him (sarva-dharman parityajya mamekam saranam vraja), and He further says:                        sakrd eva prapanno yas                         tavasmiti ca yacate                        abhayam sarvada tasmai                       dadamy etad vratam mama   "If one surrenders unto Me sincerely, saying, 'My Lord, from this day I amfully surrendered unto You,' I always give him protection. That is My vow."(Ramayana, Yuddha-kanda 18.33) The demigods offered their prayers to the SupremePersonality of Godhead because He had now appeared in the womb of His devoteeDevaki to protect all the devotees harassed by Kamsa and his lieutenants. Thusthe Lord acts as satyavrata. The protection given by the Supreme Personality ofGodhead cannot be compared to the protection given by the demigods. It is saidthat Ravana was a great devotee of Lord Siva, but when Lord Ramacandra went tokill him, Lord Siva could not give him protection.   Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, accompanied by great sages like Narada andfollowed by many other demigods, had now invisibly appeared in the house ofKamsa. They began to pray for the Supreme Personality of Godhead in selectprayers which are very pleasing to the devotees and which award fulfillment ofdevotional desires. The first words they spoke acclaimed that the Lord is trueto His vow. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita, Krsna descends upon this materialworld just to protect the pious and destroy the impious. That is His vow. Thedemigods could understand that the Lord had taken His residence within the wombof Devaki to fulfill this vow. They were very glad that the Lord was appearingto fulfill His mission, and they addressed Him as satyam param, or the SupremeAbsolute Truth.   Everyone is searching after the truth. That is the philosophical way of life.The demigods give information that the Supreme Absolute Truth is Krsna. One whobecomes fully Krsna conscious can attain the Absolute Truth. Krsna is theAbsolute Truth. Relative truth is not truth in all the three phases of eternaltime. Time is divided into past, present and future. Krsna is Truth always,past, present and future. In the material world, everything is being controlledby supreme time, in the course of past, present and future. But before the
creation, Krsna was existing, and when there is creation, everything is restingin Krsna, and when this creation is finished, Krsna will remain. Therefore, Heis Absolute Truth in all circumstances, If there is any truth within thismaterial world, it emanates from the Supreme Truth, Krsna. If there is anyopulence within this material world, the cause of the opulence is Krsna. Ifthere is any reputation within this material world, the cause of the reputationis Krsna. If there is any strength within this material world, the cause of suchstrength is Krsna. If there is any wisdom and education within this materialworld, the cause of such wisdom and education is Krsna. Therefore Krsna is thesource of all relative truths.   Devotees, therefore, following in the footsteps of Lord Brahma, pray,govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami, worshiping the adi-purusa, the supremetruth, Govinda. Everything, everywhere, is performed in terms of threeprinciples, jnana-bala-kriya--knowledge, strength and activity. In every field,if there is not full knowledge, full strength and full activity, an endeavor isnever successful. Therefore, if one wants success in everything, one must bebacked by these three principles. In the Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8) thereis this statement about the Supreme Personality of Godhead:                  na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate                 na tat samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate                  parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate                    svabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca   The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not need to do anything personally,for He has such potencies that anything He wants done will be done perfectlywell through the control of material nature (svabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca).Similarly, those who are engaged in the service of the Lord are not meant tostruggle for existence. The devotees who are fully engaged in spreading theKrsna consciousness movement, more than ten thousand men and women all over theworld, have no steady or permanent occupation, yet we actually see that they aremaintained very opulently. The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.22):                        ananyas cintayanto mam                         ye janah paryupasate                        tesam nityabhiyuktanam                       yoga-ksemam vahamy aham   "For those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My transcendentalform, I carry to them what they lack and preserve what they have." The devoteeshave no anxiety over what will happen next, where they will stay or what theywill eat, for everything is maintained and supplied by the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, who has promised, kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati: "Oson of Kunti, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes." (Bg. 9.31) Fromall angles of vision, therefore, in all circumstances, if one fully surrendersunto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no question of one'sstruggling for existence. In this connection, the commentary by SripadaMadhvacarya, who quotes from the Tantra-bhagavata, is very meaningful:                      sac-chadba uttamam bruyad                        anandantiti vai vadet                        yetijnanam samuddistam                        purnananda-drsis tatah                        attrtvac ca tada danat                       satyattya cocyate vibhuh
   Explaining the words satyasya yonim, Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura saysthat Krsna is the avatari, the origin of all incarnations. All incarnations arethe Absolute Truth, yet the Supreme Personality of Godhead Krsna is the originof all incarnations. Diparcir eva hi dasantaram abhyupetya dipayate (Brahma-samhita 5.46). There may be many lamps, all equal in power, yet there is a firstlamp, a second lamp, a third lamp and so on. Similarly, there are manyincarnations, who are compared to lamps, but the first lamp, the originalPersonality of Godhead, is Krsna. Govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami.   The demigods must offer worship in obedience to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, but one might argue that since the Supreme Godhead was within the wombof Devaki, He was also coming in a material body. Why then should He beworshiped? Why should one make a distinction between an ordinary living entityand the Supreme Personality of Godhead? These questions are answered in thefollowing verses.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                  ekayano 'sau dvi-phalas tri-mulas                   catu-rasah panca-vidhah sad-atma                    sapta-tvag asta-vitapo navakso                 dasa-cchadi dvi-khago hy adi-vrksah                               SYNONYMS   eka-ayanah--the body of an ordinary living being is fully dependent on thematerial elements; asau--that; dvi-phalah--in this body we are subject tomaterial happiness and distress, which result from karma; tri-mulah--havingthree roots, the three modes of nature (goodness, passion and ignorance), uponwhich the body is created; catuh-rasah--four rasas, or tastes; panca-vidhah--consisting of five senses for acquiring knowledge (the eyes, ears, nose, tongueand touch); sat-atma--six circumstances (lamentation, illusion, old age, death,hunger and thirst); sapta-tvak--having seven coverings (skin, blood, muscle,fat, bone, marrow and semen); asta-vitapah--eight branches (the five grosselements--earth, water, fire, air and ether--and also the mind, intelligence andego); nava-aksah--nine holes; dasa-chadi--ten kinds of life air, resembling theleaves of a tree; dvi-khagah--two birds (the individual soul and the Supersoul);hi--indeed; adi-vrksah --this is the original tree or construction of thematerial body, whether individual or universal.                             TRANSLATION   The body [the total body and the individual body are of the same composition]may figuratively be called "the original tree." From this tree, which fullydepends on the ground of material nature, come two kinds of fruit--the enjoymentof happiness and the suffering of distress. The cause of the tree, forming itsthree roots, is association with the three modes of material nature--goodness,passion and ignorance. The fruits of bodily happiness have four tastes--religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation--which areexperienced through five senses for acquiring knowledge in the midst of sixcircumstances: lamentation, illusion, old age, death, hunger and thirst. Theseven layers of bark covering the tree are skin, blood, muscle, fat, bone,marrow and semen, and the eight branches of the tree are the five gross andthree subtle elements--earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence andfalse ego. The tree of the body has nine hollows--the eyes, the ears, thenostrils, the mouth, the rectum and the genitals--and ten leaves, the ten airs
passing through the body. In this tree of the body there are two birds: one isthe individual soul, and the other is the Supersoul.                               PURPORT   This material world is composed of five principal elements--earth, water,fire, air and ether--all of which are emanations from Krsna. Althoughmaterialistic scientists may accept these five primary elements as the cause ofthe material manifestation, these elements in their gross and subtle states areproduced by Krsna, whose marginal potency also produces the living entitiesworking within this material world. The Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita clearlystates that the entire cosmic manifestation is a combination of two of Krsna'senergies--the superior energy and the inferior energy. The living entities arethe superior energy, and the inanimate material elements are His inferiorenergy. In the dormant stage, everything rests in Krsna.   Material scientists cannot give such a thorough analysis of the materialstructure of the body. The analysis of the material scientists concerns itselfonly with inanimate matter, but this is inadequate because the living entity iscompletely separate from the material bodily structure. In Bhagavad-gita (7.5)the Lord says:                        apareyam itas tv anyam                       prakrtim viddhi me param                        jiva-bhutam maha-baho                        yayedam dharyate jagat   "Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superiorenergy of Mine, which consists of all the living entities who are strugglingwith material nature and are sustaining the universe." Although the materialelements emanate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, they areseparated elements and are sustained by the living elements.   As indicated by the word dvi-khagah, the living elements within the bodyresemble two birds in a tree. Kha means "sky," and ga means "one who flies."Thus the word dvi-khagah refers to birds. In the tree of the body there are twobirds, or two living elements, and they are always different. In Bhagavad-gita(13.3), the Lord says, ksetra jnam capi mam viddhi sarva-ksetresu bharata: "Oscion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in allbodies." The ksetra jna, the owner of the body, is also called the khaga, theliving entity. Within the body there are two such ksetra jnas--the individualsoul and the Supersoul. The individual soul is the owner of his individual body,but the Supersoul is present within the bodies of all living entities. Such athorough analysis and understanding of the bodily structure cannot be obtainedanywhere but in the Vedic literature.   When two birds enter a tree, one may foolishly think that the birds becomeone or merge with the tree, but actually they do not. Rather, each bird keepsits individual identity. Similarly, the individual soul and the Supersoul do notbecome one, nor do they merge with matter. The living entity lives close tomatter, but this does not mean that he merges or mixes with it (asango hy ayampurusah), although material scientists mistakenly see the organic and inorganic,or animate and inanimate, to be mixed.   Vedic knowledge has been kept imprisoned or concealed, but every human beingneeds to understand it in truth. The modern civilization of ignorance is simplyengaged in analyzing the body, and thus people come to the erroneous conclusionthat the living force within the body is generated under certain materialconditions. People have no information of the soul, but this verse gives theperfect explanation that there are two living forces (dvi-khaga): the individualsoul and the Supersoul. The Supersoul is present in every body (isvarah sarva-
bhutanam hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati), whereas the individual soul is situated onlyin his own body (dehi) and is transmigrating from one body to another.                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                    tvam eka evasya satah prasutis                  tvam sannidhanam tvam anugrahas ca                   tvan-mayaya samvrta-cetasas tvam                    pasyanti nana na vipascito ye                               SYNONYMS   tvam--You (O Lord); ekah--being one without a second, You are everything;eva--indeed; asya satah--of this cosmic manifestation now visible; prasutih--theoriginal source; tvam--Your Lordship; sannidhanam--the conservation of all suchenergy when everything is annihilated; tvam--Your Lordship; anugrahah ca--andthe maintainer; tvat-mayaya--by Your illusory, external energy; samvrta-cetasah--those whose intelligence is covered by such illusory energy; tvam--unto You;pasyanti--observe; nana--many varieties; na--not; vipascitah--learned scholarsor devotees; ye--who are.                             TRANSLATION   The efficient cause of this material world, manifested with its manyvarieties as the original tree, is You, O Lord. You are also the maintainer ofthis material world, and after annihilation You are the one in whom everythingis conserved. Those who are covered by Your external energy cannot see Youbehind this manifestation, but theirs is not the vision of learned devotees.                               PURPORT   Various demigods, beginning from Lord Brahma, Lord Siva and even Visnu, aresupposed to be the creator, maintainer and annihilator of this material world,but actually they are not. The fact is that everything is the SupremePersonality of Godhead, manifested in varieties of energy. Ekam evadvitiyambrahma. There is no second existence. Those who are truly vipascit, learned, arethose who have reached the platform of understanding and observing the SupremePersonality of Godhead in any condition of life. premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti (Brahma-samhita 5.38). Learneddevotees accept even conditions of distress as representing the presence of theSupreme Lord. When a devotee is in distress, he sees that the Lord has appearedas distress just to relieve or purify the devotee from the contamination of thematerial world. While one is within this material world, one is in variousconditions, and therefore a devotee sees a condition of distress as but anotherfeature of the Lord. Tat te'nukampam susamiksamanah (Bhag. 10.14.8). A devotee,therefore, regards distress as a great favor of the Lord because he understandsthat he is being cleansed of contamination. Tesam aham samuddharta mrtyu-samsara-sagarat (Bg. 12.7). The appearance of distress is a negative processintended to give the devotee relief from this material world, which is calledmrtyu-samsara, or the constant repetition of birth and death. To save asurrendered soul from repeated birth and death, the Lord purifies him ofcontamination by offering him a little distress. This cannot be understood by anondevotee, but a devotee can see this because he is vipascit, or learned. Anondevotee, therefore, is perturbed in distress, but a devotee welcomes distressas another feature of the Lord. Sarvam khalv idam brahma. A devotee can actuallysee that there is only the Supreme Personality of Godhead and no second entity.
Ekam evadvitiyam. There is only the Lord, who presents Himself in differentenergies.   Persons who are not in real knowledge think that Brahma is the creator, Visnuthe maintainer and Siva the annihilator and that the different demigods areintended to fulfill diverse purposes. Thus they create diverse purposes andworship various demigods to have these purposes fulfilled (kamais tais tair hrtajnanah prapadyante 'nya-devatah). A devotee, however, knows that these variousdemigods are but different parts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and thatthese parts need not be worshiped. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (9.23):                      ye 'py anya-devata bhakta                       yajante sraddhayanvitah                       te 'pi mam eva kaunteya                       yajanty avidhi-purvakam   "Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunti, is really meantfor Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding." There is no need toworship the demigods, for this is avidhi, not in order. Simply by surrenderingoneself at the lotus feet of Krsna, one can completely discharge one's duties;there is no need to worship various deities or demigods. These variousdivinities are observed by the mudhas, fools, who are bewildered by the threemodes of material nature (tribhir gunamayair bhavair ebhih sarvam idam jagat).Such fools cannot understand that the real source of everything is the SupremePersonality of Godhead (mohitam nabhijanati mam ebhyah param avyayam). Not beingdisturbed by the Lord's various features, one should concentrate upon andworship the Supreme Lord (mam ekam saranam vraja). This should be the guidingprinciple of one's life.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                    bibharsi rupany avabodha atma                     ksemaya lokasya caracarasya                     sattvopapannani sukhavahani                    satam abhadrani muhuh khalanam                               SYNONYMS   bibharsi--You accept; rupani--varieties of forms, such as Matsya, Kurma,Varaha, Rama and Nrsimha; avabodhah atma--in spite of having differentincarnations, You remain the Supreme, full of knowledge; ksemaya--for thebenefit of everyone, and especially the devotees; lokasya--of all livingentities; cara-acarasya--moving and nonmoving; sattva-upapannani--all suchincarnations are transcendental (suddha-sattva); sukha-avahani--full oftranscendental bliss; satam--of the devotees; abhadrani--all inauspiciousness orannihilation; muhuh--again and again; khalanam--of the nondevotees.                             TRANSLATION   O Lord, You are always in full knowledge, and to bring all good fortune toall living entities, You appear in different incarnations, all of themtranscendental to the material creation. When You appear in these incarnations,You are pleasing to the pious and religious devotees, but for nondevotees Youare the annihilator.                               PURPORT
   This verse explains why the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears as anincarnation again and again. The incarnations of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead all function differently, but their main purpose is paritranaya sadhunamvinasaya ca duskrtam--to protect the devotees and annihilate the miscreants. Yeteven though the duskrtis, or miscreants, are annihilated, this is ultimatelygood for them.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                  tvayy ambujaksakhila-sattva-dhamni                      samadhinavesita-cetasaike                    tvat-pada-potena mahat-krtena                  kurvanti govatsa-padam bhavabdhim                               SYNONYMS   tvayi--in You; ambuja-aksa--O lotus-eyed Lord; akhila-sattva-dhamni--who arethe original cause of all existence, from whom everything emanates and in whomall potencies reside; samadhina--by constant meditation and complete absorption(in thoughts of You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead); avesita--fullyabsorbed, fully engaged; cetasa--but by such a mentality; eke--the one processof always thinking of Your lotus feet; tvat-pada-potena--by boarding such a boatas Your lotus feet; mahat-krtena--by that action which is considered the mostpowerful original existence or which is executed by mahajanas; kurvanti--theymake; govatsa-padam--like the hoofprint of a calf; bhava-abdhim--the great oceanof nescience.                             TRANSLATION   O lotus-eyed Lord, by concentrating one's meditation on Your lotus feet,which are the reservoir of all existence, and by accepting those lotus feet asthe boat by which to cross the ocean of nescience, one follows in the footstepsof mahajanas [great saints, sages and devotees]. By this simple process, one cancross the ocean of nescience as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of acalf.                               PURPORT   The true mission in life is to cross the ocean of nescience, of repeatedbirth and death. Those in the darkness of ignorance, however, do not know thismission. Instead, being carried away by the waves of material nature (prakrtehkriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah), they are undergoing the tribulations ofmrtyu-samsara-vartmani, repeated birth and death. But persons who have achievedknowledge by the association of devotees follow the mahajanas (mahat-krtena).Such a person always concentrates his mind upon the lotus feet of the Lord andexecutes one or more of the nine varieties of devotional service (sravanamkirtanam visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam). Simply by this process, one can crossthe insurmountable ocean of nescience.   Devotional service is powerful in any form. Sri-visnoh sravane pariksidabhavad vaiyasakih kirtane (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.265). According to thisverse, Maharaja Pariksit became liberated by fully concentrating his mind onhearing the Lord's holy name, attributes and pastimes. Similarly, SukadevaGosvami simply glorified the Lord, and by speaking on the subject matters ofKrsna that constitute the entire Srimad-Bhagavatam, he too was liberated. Onemay also be liberated simply by sakhya, friendly behavior with the Lord. Such is
the power of devotional service, as we learn from the examples set by the Lord'smany pure devotees.                      svayambhur naradah sambhuh                         kumarah kapilo manuh                        prahlado janako bhismo                        balir vaiyasakir vayam   (Bhag. 6.3.20)   We have to follow in the footsteps of such devotees, for by this one easyprocess one can cross the great ocean of nescience just as one might cross asmall hole created by the hoof of a calf.   Here the Lord is described as ambujaksa, or lotus-eyed. By seeing the eyes ofthe Lord, which are compared to lotus flowers, one becomes so satisfied that onedoes not want to turn his eyes to anything else. Simply by seeing thetranscendental form of the Lord, a devotee is at once fully absorbed in the Lordin his heart. This absorption is called samadhi. Dhyanavasthita-tad-gatenamanasa pasyanti yam yoginah (Bhag. 12.13.1). A yogi is fully absorbed inthoughts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for he has no other businessthan to think of the Lord always within the heart. It is also said:                   samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavam                    mahat-padam punya-yaso murareh                 bhavambudhir vatsa-padam param padam                   padam padam yad vipadam na tesam   "For one who has accepted the boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is theshelter of the cosmic manifestation and is famous as Murari, the enemy of thedemon Mura, the ocean of the material world is like the water contained in acalf's hoofprint. His goal is param padam, or Vaikuntha, the place where thereare no material miseries, not the place where there is danger at every step."(Bhag. 10.14.58) This process is recommended here by authorities like LordBrahma and Lord Siva (svayambhur naradah sambhuh), and therefore we must take tothis process in order to transcend nescience. This is very easy, but we mustfollow in the footsteps of great personalities, and then success will bepossible.   In regard to the word mahat-krtena, it is also significant that the processshown by great devotees is not only for them but also for others. If things aremade easy, this affords facility for the person who has made them easy and alsofor others who follow the same principles. The process recommended in this versefor crossing the ocean of nescience is easy not only for the devotee but alsofor common persons who follow the devotee (mahajano yena gatah sa panthah).“Srimad-Bhagavatam – Canto Ten” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada.Summary: Srimad-Bhagavatam is compared to the ripened fruit of Vedic knowledge.Also known as the Bhagavata Purana, this multi-volume work elaborates on thepastimes of Lord Krishna and His devotees, and includes detailed descriptionsof, among other phenomena, the process of creation and annihilation of theuniverse. His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada considered thetranslation of the Bhagavatam his life’s work.COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of thisbook, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines established byinternational copyright laws. You may use this electronic file to evaluate theprinted version of this book, for your own private use, or for short excerpts
used in academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the like.You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more than tenpercent (10%) of this book in any media without the express written permissionfrom the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Srimad-Bhagavatam” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book TrustInternational, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluatedozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,www.Krishna.com.                               TEXT 31                                 TEXT                 svayam samuttirya sudustaram dyuman                 bhavarnavam bhimam adabhra-sauhrdah                  bhavat-padambhoruha-navam atra te                  nidhaya yatah sad-anugraho bhavan                               SYNONYMS   svayam--personally; samuttirya--perfectly crossing; su-dustaram--which isvery difficult to cross; dyuman--O Lord, who appear exactly like the sun,illuminating the darkness of this world of ignorance; bhava-arnavam--the oceanof nescience; bhimam--which is extremely fierce; adabhra-sauhrdah--devotees whoare incessantly friendly to the fallen souls; bhavat-pada-ambhoruha--Your lotusfeet; navam--the boat for crossing; atra--in this world; te--they (theVaisnavas); nidhaya--leaving behind; yatah--on to the ultimate destination,Vaikuntha; sat-anugrahah--who are always kind and merciful to the devotees;bhavan--You.                             TRANSLATION   O Lord, who resemble the shining sun, You are always ready to fulfill thedesire of Your devotee, and therefore You are known as a desire tree [vancha-kalpataru]. When acaryas completely take shelter under Your lotus feet in orderto cross the fierce ocean of nescience, they leave behind on earth the method bywhich they cross, and because You are very merciful to Your other devotees, Youaccept this method to help them.                               PURPORT   This statement reveals how the merciful acaryas and the merciful SupremePersonality of Godhead together help the serious devotee who wants to returnhome, back to Godhead. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in His teachings to RupaGosvami, said:                brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva               guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija   (Cc. Madhya 19.151)
   One can achieve the seed of bhakti-lata, devotional service, by the mercy ofguru and Krsna. The duty of the guru is to find the means, according to thetime, the circumstances and the candidate, by which one can be induced to renderdevotional service, which Krsna accepts from a candidate who wants to besuccessful in going back home, back to Godhead. After wandering throughout theuniverse, a fortunate person within this material world seeks shelter of such aguru, or acarya, who trains the devotee in the suitable ways to render serviceaccording to the circumstances so that the Supreme Personality of Godhead willaccept the service. This makes it easier for the candidate to reach the ultimatedestination. The acarya's duty, therefore, is to find the means by whichdevotees may render service according to references from sastra. Rupa Gosvami,for example, in order to help subsequent devotees, published such devotionalbooks as Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu. Thus it is the duty of the acarya to publishbooks that will help future candidates take up the method of service and becomeeligible to return home, back to Godhead, by the mercy of the Lord. In our Krsnaconsciousness movement, this same path is being prescribed and followed. Thusthe devotees have been advised to refrain from four sinful activities--illicitsex, intoxication, meat-eating and gambling--and to chant sixteen rounds a day.These are bona fide instructions. Because in the Western countries constantchanting is not possible, one should not artificially imitate Haridasa Thakura,but should follow this method. Krsna will accept a devotee who strictly followsthe regulative principles and the method prescribed in the various books andliteratures published by the authorities. The acarya gives the suitable methodfor crossing the ocean of nescience by accepting the boat of the Lord's lotusfeet, and if this method is strictly followed, the followers will ultimatelyreach the destination, by the grace of the Lord. This method is called acarya-sampradaya. It is therefore said, sampradaya-vihina ye mantras te nisphala matah(Padma Purana). The acarya-sampradaya is strictly bona fide. Therefore one mustaccept the acarya-sampradaya; otherwise one's endeavor will be futile. SrilaNarottama dasa Thakura therefore sings:                 tandera carana sevi bhakta sane vasa                   janame janame haya, ei abhilasa   One must worship the lotus feet of the acarya and live within the society ofdevotees. Then one's endeavor to cross over nescience will surely be successful.                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                 ye 'nye 'ravindaksa vimukta-maninas                tvayy asta-bhavad avisuddha-buddhayah                  aruhya krcchrena param padam tatah                patanty adho 'nadrta-yusmad-anghrayah                               SYNONYMS   ye anye--anyone, or all others; aravinda-aksa--O lotus-eyed one; vimukta-maninah--falsely considering themselves free from the bondage of materialcontamination; tvayi--unto You; asta-bhavat--speculating in various ways but notknowing or desiring more information of Your lotus feet; avisuddha-buddhayah--whose intelligence is still not purified and who do not know the goal of life;aruhya--even though achieving; krcchrena--by undergoing severe austerities,penances and hard labor; param padam--the highest position (according to theirimagination and speculation); tatah--from that position; patanti--they fall;adhah--down into material existence again; anadrta--neglecting devotion to;yusmat--Your; anghrayah--lotus feet.
                             TRANSLATION   [Someone may say that aside from devotees, who always seek shelter at theLord's lotus feet, there are those who are not devotees but who have accepteddifferent processes for attaining salvation. What happens to them? In answer tothis question, Lord Brahma and the other demigods said:] O lotus-eyed Lord,although nondevotees who accept severe austerities and penances to achieve thehighest position may think themselves liberated, their intelligence is impure.They fall down from their position of imagined superiority because they have noregard for Your lotus feet.                               PURPORT   Aside from devotees, there are many others, nondevotees, known as karmis,jnanis or yogis, philanthropists, altruists, politicians, impersonalists andvoidists. There are many varieties of nondevotees who have their respective waysof liberation, but simply because they do not know the shelter of the Lord'slotus feet, although they falsely think that they have been liberated andelevated to the highest position, they fall down. As clearly stated by the LordHimself in Bhagavad-gita (9.3):                         asraddadhanah purusa                        dharmasyasya parantapa                        aprapya mam nivartante                        mrtyu-samsara-vartmani   "Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attainMe, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this material world."It doesn't matter whether one is a karmi, jnani, yogi, philanthropist,politician or whatever; if one has no love for the lotus feet of the Lord, onefalls down. That is the verdict given by Lord brahma in this verse.   There are persons who advocate accepting any process and who say thatwhatever process one accepts will lead to the same goal, but that is refuted inthis verse, where such persons are referred to as vimukta-maninah, signifyingthat although they think they have attained the highest perfection, in fact theyhave not. In the present day, big, big politicians all over the world think thatby scheming they can occupy the highest political post, that of president orprime minister, but we actually see that even in this life such big primeministers, presidents and other politicians, because of being nondevotees, falldown (patanty adhah). To become president or prime minister is not easy; onemust work very hard (aruhya krcchrena) to achieve the post. And even though onemay reach his goal, at any moment one may be kicked down by material nature. Inhuman society there have been many instances in which great, exalted politicianshave fallen from government and become lost in historical oblivion. The cause ofthis is avisuddha-buddhayah: their intelligence is impure. The sastra says, nate viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum (Bhag. 7.5.31). One achieves the perfection oflife by becoming a devotee of Visnu, but people do not know this. Therefore, asstated in Bhagavad-gita (12.5), kleso 'dhikataras tesam avyaktasakta-cetasam.Persons who do not ultimately accept the Supreme Personality of Godhead and taketo devotional service, but who instead are attached to impersonalism andvoidism, must undergo great labor to achieve their goals.                 sreyah-srtim bhaktim udasya te vibho                  klisyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye   (Bhag. 10.14.4)
   To achieve understanding, such persons work very hard and undergo severeausterities, but their hard labor and austerities themselves are their onlyachievement, for they do not actually achieve the real goal of life.   Dhruva Maharaja at first wanted to achieve the greatest material kingdom andgreater material possessions than his father, but when he was actually favoredby the Lord, who appeared before him to give him the benediction he desired,Dhruva Maharaja refused it, saying, svamin krtartho'smi varam na yace: "Now I amfully satisfied. I do not want any material benediction." (Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya7.28) This is the perfection of life. Yam labdhva caparam labham manyatenadhikam tatah (Bg. 6.22). If one achieves the shelter of the Lord's lotus feet,one is fully satisfied and does not need to ask for any material benediction.   At night, no one can see a lotus, for lotuses blossom only during thedaytime. Therefore the word aravindaksa is significant. One who is notcaptivated by the lotus eyes or transcendental form of the Supreme Lord is indarkness, exactly like one who cannot see a lotus. One who has not come to thepoint of seeing the lotus eyes and transcendental form of Syamasundara is afailure. premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesuvilokayanti. Those who are attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead inlove always see the Lord's lotus eyes and lotus feet, whereas others cannot seethe Lord's beauty and are therefore classified as anadrta-yusmad-anghrayah, orneglectful of the Lord's personal form. Those who neglect the Lord's form aresurely failures on every path in life, but if one develops even a little lovefor the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is liberated without difficulty(svalpam apy asya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat). Therefore the SupremePersonality of Godhead recommends in Bhagavad-gita (9.34), man-mana bhava mad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru: "Simply think of Me, become My devotee, worshipMe and offer some slight homage to Me." Simply by this process, one isguaranteed to return home, back to Godhead, and thus attain the highestperfection. The Lord further affirms in Bhagavad-gita (18.54-55):                      brahma-bhutah prasannatma                        na socati na kanksati                        samah sarvesu bhutesu                      mad-bhaktim labhate param                        bhaktya mam abhijanati                      yavan yas casmi tattvatah                       tato mam tattvato jnatva                         visate tad-anantaram   "One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the SupremeBrahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments nor desires to have anything;he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains puredevotional service unto Me. One can understand the Supreme Personality as He isonly by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the SupremeLord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God."                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                  tatha na te madhava tavakah kvacid               bhrasyanti margat tvayi baddha-sauhrdah                   tvayabhigupta vicaranti nirbhaya                    vinayakanikapa-murdhasu prabho                               SYNONYMS
   tatha--like them (the nondevotees); na--not; te--they (the devotees);madhava--O Lord, husband of the goddess of fortune; tavakah--the followers ofthe devotional path, the devotees; kvacit--in any circumstances; bhrasyanti--fall down; margat--from the path of devotional service; tvayi--unto You; baddha-sauhrdah--because of being fully attached to Your lotus feet; tvaya--by You;abhiguptah--always protected from all dangers; vicaranti--they move; nirbhayah--without fear; vinayaka-anikapa--the enemies who maintain paraphernalia to opposethe bhakti cult; murdhasu--on their heads; prabho--O Lord.                             TRANSLATION   O Madhava, Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord of the goddess of fortune, ifdevotees completely in love with You sometimes fall from the path of devotion,they do not fall like nondevotees, for You still protect them. Thus theyfearlessly traverse the heads of their opponents and continue to progress indevotional service.                               PURPORT   Devotees generally do not fall down, but if circumstantially they do, theLord, because of their strong attachment to Him, gives them protection in allcircumstances. Thus even if devotees fall down, they are still strong enough totraverse the heads of their enemies. We have actually seen that our Krsnaconsciousness movement has many opponents, such as the "deprogrammers," whoinstituted a strong legal case against the devotees. We thought that this casewould take a long time to settle, but because the devotees were protected by theSupreme Personality of Godhead, we unexpectedly won the case in one day. Thus acase that was expected to continue for years was settled in a day because of theprotection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has promised in Bhagavad-gita (9.31), kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati: "O son of Kunti,declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes." In history there are manyinstances of devotees like Citraketu, Indradyumna and Maharaja Bharata whocircumstantially fell down but were still protected. Maharaja Bharata, forexample, because of his attachment to a deer, thought of the deer at the time ofdeath, and therefore in his next life he became a deer (yam yam vapi smaranbhavam tyajaty ante kalevaram). Because of protection by the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, however, the deer remembered his relationship with the Lord and nexttook birth in a good brahminical family and performed devotional service(sucinam srimatam gehe yoga-bhrasto 'bhijayate). Similarly, Citraketu fell downand became a demon, Vrtrasura, but he too was protected. Thus even if one fallsdown from the path of bhakti-yoga, one is ultimately saved. If a devotee isstrongly situated in devotional service, the Supreme Personality of Godhead haspromised to protect him (kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhaktah pranasyati). Buteven if a devotee circumstantially falls down, he is protected by Madhava.   The word Madhava is significant. Ma, mother Laksmi, the mother of allopulences, is always with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and if a devoteeis in touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all the opulences of theLord are ready to help him.                        yatra yogesvarah krsno                      yatra partho dhanur-dharah                       tatra srir vijayo bhutir                       dhruva nitir matir mama   (Bg. 18.78)   Wherever there is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, and His devoteeArjuna, Partha, there is victory, opulence, extraordinary power and morality.The opulences of a devotee are not a result of karma-kanda-vicara. A devotee is
always protected by all of the Supreme Lord's opulences, of which no one candeprive him (tesam nityabhiyuktanam yoga-ksemam vahamy aham). Thus a devoteecannot be defeated by any opponents. A devotee, therefore, should not deviateknowingly from the path of devotion. The adherent devotee is assured allprotection from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.                               TEXT 34                                 TEXT               sattvam visuddham srayate bhavan sthitau                    saririnam sreya-upayanam vapuh                  veda-kriya-yoga-tapah-samadhibhis                    tavarhanam yena janah samihate                               SYNONYMS   sattvam--existence; visuddham--transcendental, beyond the three modes ofmaterial nature; srayate--accepts; bhavan--Your Lordship; sthitau--during themaintenance of this material world; saririnam--of all living entities; sreyah--of supreme auspiciousness; upayanam--for the benefit; vapuh--a transcendentalform or body; veda-kriya--by ritualistic ceremonies according to the directionsof the Vedas; yoga--by practice of devotion; tapah--by austerities; samadhibhih--by becoming absorbed in transcendental existence; tava--Your; arhanam--worship;yena--by such activities; janah--human society; samihate--offers (its obligationunto You).                             TRANSLATION   O Lord, during the time of maintenance You manifest several incarnations, allwith transcendental bodies, beyond the material modes of nature. When You appearin this way, You bestow all good fortune upon the living entities by teachingthem to perform Vedic activities such as ritualistic ceremonies, mystic yoga,austerities, penances, and ultimately samadhi, ecstatic absorption in thoughtsof You. Thus You are worshiped by the Vedic principles.                               PURPORT   As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.3), yajna-dana-tapah-karma na tyajyam: theVedic ritualistic ceremonies, charity, austerity and all such prescribed dutiesare never to be given up. Yajno danam tapas caiva pavanani manisinam (18.5):even one who is very much advanced in spiritual realization must still executethe Vedic principles. Even in the lowest stage, the karmis are advised to workfor the sake of the Lord.                      yajnarthat karmano 'nyatra                      loko 'yam karma-bandhanah   "Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise work bindsone to this material world." (Bg. 3.9) The words yajnarthat karmanah indicatethat while performing all kinds of duties, one should remember that these dutiesshould be performed to satisfy the Supreme Lord (sva-karmana tam abhyarcya).According to Vedic principles, there must be divisions of human society (catur-varnyam maya srstam). There should be brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras,and everyone should learn to worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead (tamabhyarcya). This is real human society, and without this system we are left withanimal society.
   The modern activities of human society are described in Srimad-Bhagavatam asthe activities of go-khara, cows and asses (sa eva go-kharah). Everyone isacting in a bodily concept of life involving society, friendship and love forthe improvement of economic and political conditions, and thus all activitiesare enacted in ignorance. The Supreme Personality therefore comes to teach ushow to act according to the Vedic principles. In this age of Kali, the SupremePersonality of Godhead appeared as Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and preached that inthis age the Vedic activities cannot be systematically performed because peopleare so fallen. He gave this recommendation from the sastras:                        harer nama harer nama                        harer namaiva kevalam                      kalau nasty eva nasty eva                       nasty eva gatir anyatha   "In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy the only means of deliverance ischanting the holy name of the Lord. There is no other way. There is no otherway. There is no other way." The Krsna consciousness movement is thereforeteaching people all over the world how to chant the Hare Krsna mantra, and thishas proved very much effective in all places at all times. The SupremePersonality of Godhead appears in order to teach us Vedic principles intendedfor understanding Him (vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah). We should always knowthat when Krsna and Lord Caitanya appeared, They appeared in suddha-sattvabodies. One should not mistake the body of Krsna or Caitanya Mahaprabhu to be amaterial body like ours, for Krsna and Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared as neededfor the benefit of the entire human society. Out of causeless mercy, the Lordappears in different ages in His original suddha-sattva transcendental body toelevate human society to the spiritual platform upon which they can trulybenefit. Unfortunately, modern politicians and other leaders stress the bodilycomforts of life (yasyatma-buddhih kunape tri-dhatuke) and concentrate on theactivities of this ism and that ism, which they describe in different kinds offlowery language. Essentially such activities are the activities of animals (saeva go-kharah). We should learn how to act from Bhagavad-gita, which explainseverything for human understanding. Thus we can become happy even in this age ofKali.                               TEXT 35                                 TEXT               sattvam na ced dhatar idam nijam bhaved                   vijnanam ajnana-bhidapamarjanam                   guna-prakasair anumiyate bhavan                   prakasate yasya ca yena va gunah                               SYNONYMS   sattvam--suddha-sattva, transcendental; na--not; cet--if; dhatah--O reservoirof all energies, cause of all causes; idam--this; nijam--personal, spiritual;bhavet--could have been; vijnanam--transcendental knowledge; ajnana-bhida--whichdrives away the ignorance of the material modes; apamarjanam--completelyvanquished; guna-prakasaih--by the awakening of such transcendental knowledge;anumiyate--becomes manifested; bhavan--Your Lordship; prakasate--exhibit; yasya--whose; ca--and; yena--by which; va--either; gunah--quality or intelligence.                             TRANSLATION
   O Lord, cause of all causes, if Your transcendental body were not beyond themodes of material nature, one could not understand the difference between matterand transcendence. Only by Your presence can one understand the transcendentalnature of Your Lordship, who are the controller of material nature. Yourtranscendental nature is very difficult to understand unless one is influencedby the presence of Your transcendental form.                               PURPORT   It is said, traigunya-visaya veda nistraigunyo bhavarjuna. Unless one issituated in transcendence, one cannot understand the transcendental nature ofthe Lord. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.14.29):                   athapi te deva padambuja-dvaya-                     prasada-lesanugrhita eva hi                   janati tattvam bhagavan-mahimno                   na canya eko 'pi ciram vicinvan   Only by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead can one understandHim. Those who are in the modes of material nature, although speculating forthousands of years, cannot understand Him. The Lord has innumerable forms(ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan), and unless these forms, such as LordRamacandra, Nrsimhadeva, Krsna and Balarama, were transcendental, how could theybe worshiped by devotees since time immemorial? Bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yascasmi tattvatah (Bg. 18.55). Devotees who awaken their transcendental nature inthe presence of the Lord and who follow the rules and regulations of devotionalservice can understand Lord Krsna, Lord Ramacandra and other incarnations, whoare not of this material world but who come from the spiritual world for thebenefit of people in general. If one does not take to this process, one imaginesor manufactures some form of God according to material qualities and can neverawaken a real understanding of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The wordsbhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah signify that unless oneworships the Lord according to the regulative devotional principles, one cannotawaken the transcendental nature. Deity worship, even in the absence of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, awakens the transcendental nature of thedevotee, who thus becomes increasingly attached to the Lord's lotus feet.   The appearance of Krsna is the answer to all imaginative iconography of theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone imagines the form of the SupremePersonality of Godhead according to his mode of material nature. In the Brahma-samhita it is said that the Lord is the oldest person. Therefore a section ofreligionists imagine that God must be very old, and therefore they depict a formof the Lord like a very old man. But in the same Brahma-samhita, that iscontradicted; although He is the oldest of all living entities, He has Hiseternal form as a fresh youth. The exact words used in this connection in theSrimad-Bhagavatam are vijnanam ajnana-bhidapamarjanam. Vijnana meanstranscendental knowledge of the Supreme Personality; vijnana is also experiencedknowledge. Transcendental knowledge has to be accepted by the descending processof disciplic succession as Brahma presents the knowledge of Krsna in the Brahma-samhita. Brahma-samhita is vijnana as realized by Brahma's transcendentalexperience, and in that way he presented the form and the pastimes of Krsna inthe transcendental abode. Ajnana-bhida means "that which can match all kinds ofspeculation." In ignorance, people are imagining the form of the Lord; sometimesHe has no form and sometimes He has form, according to their differentimaginations. But the presentation of Krsna in the Brahma-samhita is vijnana--scientific, experienced knowledge given by Lord Brahma and accepted by LordCaitanya. There is no doubt about it. Sri Krsna's form, Sri Krsna's flute,Krsna's color--everything is reality. Here it is said that this vijnanam isalways defeating all kinds of speculative knowledge. "Therefore," the demigods
prayed, "without Your appearing as Krsna, as You are, neither ajnana-bhida (thenescience of speculative knowledge) nor vijnanam would be realized. Ajnana-bhidapamarjanam--by Your appearance the speculative knowledge of ignorance willbe vanquished, and the real, experienced knowledge of authorities like LordBrahma will be established. Men influenced by the three modes of material natureimagine their own God according to the modes of material nature. In this way Godis presented in various ways, but Your appearance will establish what the realform of God is."   The highest blunder committed by the impersonalist is to think that when theincarnation of God comes, He accepts a form of matter in the mode of goodness.Actually the form of Krsna or Narayana is transcendental to any material idea.Even the greatest impersonalist, Sankaracarya, has admitted, narayanah paro'vyaktat: the material creation is caused by the avyakta, the impersonalmanifestation of matter or the nonphenomenal total reservoir of matter, andKrsna is transcendental to that material conception. This is expressed in theSrimad-Bhagavatam as suddha-sattva, or transcendental. The Lord does not belongto the material mode of goodness, for He is above the position of materialgoodness. He belongs to the transcendental, eternal status of bliss andknowledge.   "Dear Lord," the demigods prayed, "when You appear in Your differentincarnations, You take different names and forms according to differentsituations. Lord Krsna is Your name because You are all-attractive; You arecalled Syamasundara because of Your transcendental beauty. Syama means blackish,yet they say that You are more beautiful than thousands of cupids. Kandarpa-koti-kamaniya. Although You appear in a color which is compared to that of ablackish cloud, You are the transcendental Absolute, and therefore Your beautyis many, many times more attractive than the delicate body of Cupid. SometimesYou are called Giridhari because You lifted the hill known as Govardhana. Youare sometimes called Nanda-nandana or Vasudeva or Devaki-nandana because Youappear as the son of Maharaja Nanda or Devaki or Vasudeva. Impersonalists thinkthat Your many names or forms are according to a particular type of work andquality because they accept You from the position of a material observer.   "Our dear Lord, the way of understanding is not to study Your absolutenature, form and activities by mental speculation. One must engage himself indevotional service; then one can understand Your absolute nature and Yourtranscendental form, name and quality. Actually, only a person who has a littletaste for the service of Your lotus feet can understand Your transcendentalnature or form and quality. Others may go on speculating for millions of years,but it is not possible for them to understand even a single part of Your actualposition." In other words, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, cannot beunderstood by the nondevotees because there is a curtain of yogamaya whichcovers Krsna's actual features. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita (7.25), nahamprakasah sarvasya. The Lord says, "I am not exposed to anyone and everyone."When Krsna came, He was actually present on the battlefield of Kuruksetra, andeveryone saw Him. But not everyone could understand that He was the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Still, everyone who died in His presence attainedcomplete liberation from material bondage and was transferred to the spiritualworld.   Because foolish mudhas do not awaken their spiritual nature, they do notunderstand Krsna or Rama (avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam). Even bigacademic scholars, not considering the endeavors of the acaryas who haverecommended devotional service in many elaborate commentaries and notes, thinkthat Krsna is fictitious. This is due to a lack of transcendental knowledge anda failure to awaken Krsna consciousness. One should have the common sense to askwhy, if Krsna or Rama were fictitious, stalwart scholars like Sridhara Svami,Rupa Gosvami, Sanatana Gosvami, Viraraghava, Vijayadhvaja, Vallabhacarya andmany other recognized acaryas would have spent so much time to write about Krsnain notes and commentaries on Srimad-Bhagavatam.
                               TEXT 36                                 TEXT                  na nama-rupe guna-janma-karmabhir                   nirupitavye tava tasya saksinah                   mano-vacobhyam anumeya-vartmano                  deva kriyayam pratiyanty athapi hi                               SYNONYMS   na--not; nama-rupe--the name and form; guna--with attributes; janma--appearance; karmabhih--activities or pastimes; nirupitavye--are not able to beascertained; tava--Your; tasya--of Him; saksinah--who is the direct observer;manah--of the mind; vacobhyam--words; anumeya--hypothesis; vartmanah--the path;deva--O Lord; kriyayam--in devotional activities; pratiyanti--they realize; athaapi--still; hi--indeed (You can be realized by the devotees).                             TRANSLATION   O Lord, Your transcendental name and form are not ascertained by those whomerely speculate on the path of imagination. Your name, form and attributes canbe ascertained only through devotional service.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Padma Purana:                        atah sri-krsna-namadi                     na bhaved grahyam indriyaih                        sevonmukhe hi jihvadau                       svayam eva sphuraty adah   "One cannot understand the transcendental nature of the name, form, qualityand pastimes of Sri Krsna through one's materially contaminated senses. Onlywhen one becomes spiritually saturated by transcendental service to the Lord arethe transcendental name, form, quality and pastimes of the Lord revealed tohim." Since Krsna and His transcendental name, form and activities are all of atranscendental nature, ordinary persons or those who are only slightly advancedcannot understand them. Even big scholars who are nondevotees think that Krsnais fictitious. Yet although so-called scholars and commentators do not believethat Krsna was factually a historical person whose presence on the Battlefieldof Kuruksetra is recorded in the history of Mahabharata, they feel compelled towrite commentaries on Bhagavad-gita and other historical records. Sevonmukhe hijihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah: Krsna's transcendental name, form, attributesand activities can be revealed only when one engages in His service in fullconsciousness. This confirms Krsna's own words in Bhagavad-gita (18.55):                        bhaktya mam abhijanati                      yavan yas casmi tattvatah                       tato mam tattvato jnatva                         visate tad-anantaram   "One can understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is only bydevotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the Supreme Lord bysuch devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God." Only by sevonmukha, by
engaging oneself in the Lord's service, can one realize the name, form andqualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.   "O Lord," the demigods say, "the impersonalists, who are nondevotees, cannotunderstand that Your name is identical with Your form." Since the Lord isabsolute, there is no difference between His name and His actual form. In thematerial world there is a difference between form and name. The mango fruit isdifferent from the name of the mango. One cannot taste the mango fruit simply bychanting, "Mango, mango, mango." But the devotee who knows that there is nodifference between the name and the form of the Lord chants Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare. Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, andrealizes that he is always in Krsna's company.   For persons who are not very advanced in absolute knowledge of the Supreme,Lord Krsna exhibits His transcendental pastimes. They can simply think of thepastimes of the Lord and get the full benefit. Since there is no differencebetween the transcendental name and form of the Lord, there is no differencebetween the transcendental pastimes and the form of the Lord. For those who areless intelligent (like women, laborers or the mercantile class), the great sageVyasadeva wrote Mahabharata. In the Mahabharata, Krsna is present in Hisdifferent activities. Mahabharata is history, and simply by studying, hearing,and memorizing the transcendental activities of Krsna, the less intelligent canalso gradually rise to the standard of pure devotees.   The pure devotees, who are always absorbed in the thought of thetranscendental lotus feet of Krsna and who are always engaged in devotionalservice in full Krsna consciousness, are never to be considered to be in thematerial world. Srila Rupa Gosvami has explained that those who are alwaysengaged in Krsna consciousness by body, mind and activities are to be consideredliberated even within this body. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita:those who are engaged in the devotional service of the Lord have alreadytranscended the material position.   Krsna appears in order to give a chance to both the devotees and thenondevotees for realization of the ultimate goal of life. The devotees get thedirect chance to see Him and worship Him. Those who are not on that platform getthe chance to become acquainted with His activities and thus become elevated tothe same position.   The Brahma-samhita (5.38) says:                premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena                 santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti               yam syamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupam                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   Although Krsna's transcendental form is presented as black, devotees who arein love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead appreciate the Lord asSyamasundara, having a very beautiful blackish form. The Lord's form is sobeautiful that the Brahma-samhita (5.30) also states:                venum kvanantam aravinda-dalayataksam                 barhavatamsam asitambuda-sundarangam                 kandarpa-koti-kamaniya-visesa-sobham                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   "I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who plays on His transcendental flute.His eyes are like lotus flowers, He is decorated with peacock plumes, and Hisbodily color resembles the color of a fresh black cloud, although His bodilyfeatures are more beautiful than millions of Cupids." This beauty of the SupremeLord can be seen by devotees who are in love with Him, devotees whose eyes areanointed with love of Godhead (premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena).
   The Lord is also known as Giridhari or Girivara-dhari. Because Krsna, for thesake of His devotees, lifted Govardhana Hill, the devotees appreciate the Lord'sinconceivable strength; but nondevotees, in spite of directly perceiving theLord's inconceivable strength and power, regard the Lord's activities asfictitious. This is the difference between a devotee and a nondevotee.Nondevotees cannot give any nomenclature for the Supreme Personality of Godhead,yet the Lord is known as Syamasundara and Giridhari. Similarly, the Lord isknown as Devaki-nandana and Yasoda-nandana because He accepted the role of sonfor mother Devaki and mother Yasoda, and He is known as Gopala because Heenjoyed the sport of maintaining the cows and calves. Therefore, although He hasno mundane name, He is addressed by devotees as Devaki-nandana, Yasoda-nandana,Gopala and Syamasundara. These are all transcendental names that only devoteescan appreciate and nondevotees cannot.   The history of Krsna the person has been openly seen by everyone, yet onlythose who are in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead can appreciatethis history, whereas nondevotees, who have not developed their lovingqualities, think that the activities, form and attributes of the SupremePersonality of Godhead are fictitious. Therefore this verse explains, na nama-rupe guna janma-karmabhir nirupitavye tava tasya saksinah. In this connection,Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura has given the example that persons sufferingfrom jaundice cannot taste the sweetness of sugar candy, although everyone knowsthat sugar candy is sweet. Similarly, because of the material disease,nondevotees cannot understand the transcendental name, form, attributes andactivities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although they actually see theLord's activities, either through authority or through history. The Puranas areold, authentic histories, but nondevotees cannot understand them, especiallySrimad-Bhagavatam, which is the essence of Vedic knowledge. Nondevotees cannotunderstand even the preliminary study of transcendental knowledge, Bhagavad-gita. They simply speculate and present commentaries with absurd distortions. Inconclusion, unless one elevates himself to the transcendental platform bypracticing bhakti-yoga, one cannot understand the Supreme Personality of Godheador His name, form, attributes or activities. But if by chance, by theassociation of devotees, one can actually understand the Lord and His features,one immediately becomes a liberated person. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita(4.9):                       janma karma ca me divyam                       evam yo vetti tattvatah                      tyaktva deham punar janma                       naiti mam eti so 'rjuna   "One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities doesnot, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, butattains My eternal abode, O Arjuna."   Srila Rupa Gosvami has therefore said that by affection and love for theSupreme Personality of Godhead, devotees can express their mind to Him withtheir words. Others, however, cannot do this, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita(bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah).                               TEXT 37                                 TEXT                srnvan grnan samsmarayams ca cintayan                    namani rupani ca mangalani te                  kriyasu yas tvac-caranaravindayor                    avista-ceta na bhavaya kalpate
                               SYNONYMS   srnvan--constantly hearing about the Lord (sravanam kirtanam visnoh); grnan--chanting or reciting (the holy name of the Lord and His activities);samsmarayan--remembering (constantly thinking of the Lord's lotus feet and Hisform); ca--and; cintayan--contemplating (the transcendental activities of theLord); namani--His transcendental names; rupani--His transcendental forms; ca--also; mangalani--which are all transcendental and therefore auspicious; te--ofYour Lordship; kriyasu--in being engaged in the devotional service; yah--he who;tvat-carana-aravindayoh--at Your lotus feet; avista-cetah--the devotee who iscompletely absorbed (in such activities); na--not; bhavaya--for the materialplatform; kalpate--is fit.                             TRANSLATION   Even while engaged in various activities, devotees whose minds are completelyabsorbed at Your lotus feet, and who constantly hear, chant, contemplate andcause others to remember Your transcendental names and forms, are always on thetranscendental platform, and thus they can understand the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.                               PURPORT   How bhakti-yoga can be practiced is explained in this verse. Srila RupaGosvami has said that anyone who has dedicated his life to the service of theLord (iha yasya harer dasye) by his activities, his mind and his words (karmanamanasa gira) may stay in any condition of life (nikhilasv apy avasthasu) and yetis no longer actually conditioned but is liberated (jivan-muktah sa ucyate).Even though such a devotee is in a material body, he has nothing to do with thisbody, for he is transcendentally situated. Narayana-parah sarve na kutascanabibhyati: because a devotee is engaged in transcendental activities, he is notafraid of being materially embodied. (Bhag. 6.17.28) Illustrating this liberatedposition, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu prayed, mama janmani janmanisvare bhavatadbhaktir ahaituki tvayi: "All I want is Your causeless devotional service in Mylife, birth after birth." (Siksastaka 4) Even if a devotee, by the supreme willof the Lord, takes birth in this material world, he continues his devotionalservice. When King Bharata made a mistake and in his next life became a deer,his devotional service did not stop, although some slight chastisement was givento him because of his negligence. Narada Muni says that even if one falls fromthe platform of devotional service, he is not lost, whereas nondevotees are lostentirely because they are not engaged in service. Bhagavad-gita (9.14) thereforerecommends that one always engage at least in chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra:                        satatam kirtayanto mam                       yatantas ca drdha-vratah                      namasyantas ca mam bhaktya                         nitya-yukta upasate   "Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowingdown before Me, the great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion."   One should not give up the process of devotional service, which is performedin nine different ways (sravanam kirtanam visnoh smaranam pada-sevanam, etc.).The most important process is hearing (sravanam) from the guru, sadhu andsastra--the spiritual master, the saintly acaryas and the Vedic literature.Sadhu-sastra-guru-vakya, cittete kariya aikya. We should not hear thecommentaries and explanations of nondevotees, for this is strictly forbidden bySrila Sanatana Gosvami, who quotes from the padma purana:
                        avaisnava-mukhodgirnam                        putam hari-kathamrtam                       sravanam naiva kartavyam                      sarpocchistam yatha payah   We should strictly follow this injunction and never try to hear fromMayavadis, impersonalists, voidists, politicians or so-called scholars. Strictlyavoiding such inauspicious association, we should simply hear from puredevotees. Srila Rupa Gosvami therefore recommends, sri-guru-padasrayah: one mustseek shelter at the lotus feet of a pure devotee who can be one's guru. CaitanyaMahaprabhu advises that a guru is one who strictly follows the instructions ofBhagavad-gita: yare dekha, tare kaha, 'krsna'--upadesa (Cc. Madhya 7.128). Ajuggler, a magician or one who speaks nonsense as an academic career is not aguru. Rather, a guru is one who presents Bhagavad-gita, Krsna's instructions, asit is. Sravana is very important; one must hear from the Vaisnava sadhu, guruand sastra.   The word kriyasu, meaning "by manual labor" or "by work," is important inthis verse. One should engage in practical service to the Lord. In our Krsnaconsciousness movement, all our activities are concentrated upon distributingKrsna literature. This is very important. One may approach any person and inducehim to read Krsna literature so that in the future he also may become a devotee.Such activities are recommended in this verse. Kriyasu yas tvac-caranaravindayoh. Such activities will always remind the devotees of the Lord'slotus feet. By fully concentrating on distributing books for Krsna, one is fullyabsorbed in Krsna. This is samadhi.                               TEXT 38                                 TEXT                 distya hare 'sya bhavatah pado bhuvo                   bharo 'panitas tava janmanesituh                distyankitam tvat-padakaih susobhanair                 draksyama gam dyam ca tavanukampitam                               SYNONYMS   distya--by fortune; hare--O Lord; asyah--of this (world); bhavatah--of YourLordship; padah--of the place; bhuvah--on this earth; bharah--the burden createdby the demons; apanitah--now removed; tava--of Your Lordship; janmana--byappearance as an incarnation; isituh--You, the controller of everything; distya--and by fortune; ankitam--marked; tvat-padakaih--by Your lotus feet; su-sobhanaih--which are transcendentally decorated with the marks of conchshell,disc, lotus and club; draksyama--we shall surely observe; gam--upon this earth;dyam ca--in heaven also; tava anukampitam--due to Your causeless mercy upon us.                             TRANSLATION   O Lord, we are fortunate because the heavy burden of the demons upon thisearth is immediately removed by Your appearance. Indeed, we are certainlyfortunate, for we shall be able to see upon this earth and in the heavenlyplanets the marks of lotus, conchshell, club and disc that adorn Your lotusfeet.                               PURPORT
   The soles of the Lord's lotus feet are marked with sankha-cakra-gada-padma--conchshell, disc, club and lotus--and also by a flag and a thunderbolt. WhenKrsna walks on this earth or in the heavenly planets, these marks are visiblewherever He goes. Vrndavana-dhama is a transcendental place because of Krsna'swalking on this land frequently. The inhabitants of Vrndavana were fortunate tosee these marks here and there. When Akrura went to Vrndavana to take Krsna andBalarama away to the festival arranged by Kamsa, upon seeing the marks of theLord's lotus feet on the ground of Vrndavana, he fell down and began to groan.These marks are visible to devotees who receive the causeless mercy of theSupreme Personality of Godhead (tavanukampitam). The demigods were jubilant notonly because the appearance of the Supreme Lord would do away with theburdensome demons, but also because they would be able to see upon the groundthe transcendental marks from the soles of the Lord's lotus feet. The gopisalways thought of the Lord's lotus feet when He was walking in the pasturinggrounds, and, as described in the previous verse, simply by thinking of theLord's lotus feet, the gopis were fully absorbed in transcendence (avista-cetana bhavaya kalpate). Like the gopis, one who is always absorbed in thought ofthe Lord is beyond the material platform and will not remain in this materialworld. It is our duty, therefore, always to hear, chant and think about theLord's lotus feet, as actually done by Vaisnavas who have decided to live inVrndavana always and think of the Lord's lotus feet twenty-four hours a day.                               TEXT 39                                 TEXT                  na te 'bhavasyesa bhavasya karanam                    vina vinodam bata tarkayamahe                 bhavo nirodhah sthitir apy avidyaya                  krta yatas tvayy abhayasrayatmani                               SYNONYMS   na--not; te--of Your Lordship; abhavasya--of whom there is no birth, death ormaintenance as for an ordinary being; isa--O Supreme Lord; bhavasya--of Yourappearance, Your birth; karanam--the cause; vina--without; vinodam--the pastimes(despite what is said, You are not forced to come to this world by any cause);bata--however; tarkayamahe--we cannot argue (but must simply understand thatthese are Your pastimes); bhavah--birth; nirodhah--death; sthitih--maintenance;api--also; avidyaya--by the external, illusory energy; krtah--done; yatah--because; tvayi--unto You; abhaya-asraya--O fearless shelter of all; atmani--ofthe ordinary living entity.                             TRANSLATION   O Supreme Lord, You are not an ordinary living entity appearing in thismaterial world as a result of fruitive activities. Therefore Your appearance orbirth in this world has no other cause than Your pleasure potency. Similarly,the living entities, who are part of You, have no cause for miseries like birth,death and old age, except when these living entities are conducted by Yourexternal energy.                               PURPORT   As stated in Bhagavad-gita (15.7), mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhutahsanatanah: the living entities are parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord, andthus they are qualitatively one with the Lord. We can understand that when theSupreme Lord appears or disappears as an incarnation, there is no other cause
than His pleasure potency. We cannot force the Supreme Personality of Godhead toappear. As He says in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):                        yada yada hi dharmasya                        glanir bhavati bharata                       abhyutthanam adharmasya                        tadatmanam srjamy aham   "Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendantof Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at that time I descendMyself." When there is a need to diminish a burden created by the demons, theSupreme Godhead can do it in many ways because He has multifarious energies.There is no need for Him to come as an incarnation, since He is not forced to doanything like ordinary living entities. The living entities come to thismaterial world in the spirit of enjoyment, but because they want to enjoywithout Krsna (krsna-bahirmukha haiya bhoja-vancha kare), they suffer birth,death, old age and disease under the control of the illusory energy. When theSupreme Personality of Godhead appears, however, no such causes are involved;His descent is an act of His pleasure potency. We should always remember thisdistinction between the Lord and the ordinary living entity and not uselesslyargue that the Lord cannot come. There are philosophers who do not believe inthe Lord's incarnation and who ask, "Why should the Supreme Lord come?" But theanswer is, "Why should He not come? Why should He be controlled by the desire ofthe living entity?" The Lord is free to do whatever He likes. Therefore thisverse says, vina vinodam bata tarkayamahe. It is only for His pleasure that Hecomes although He does not need to come.   When the living entities come to this world for material enjoyment, they areentangled in karma and karma-phala by the Lord's illusory energy. But if oneseeks shelter at the Lord's lotus feet, one is again situated in his original,liberated state. As stated here, krta yatas tvayy abhayasrayatmani: one whoseeks shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord is always fearless. Because we aredependent on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we should give up the idea thatwithout Krsna we can enjoy freedom in this material world. This idea is thereason we have become entangled. Now it is our duty to seek shelter again at theLord's lotus feet. This shelter is described as abhaya, or fearless. Since Krsnais not subject to birth, death, old age or disease, and since we are part andparcel of Krsna, we also are not subject to birth, death, old age and disease,but we have become subject to these illusory problems because of ourforgetfulness of Krsna and our position as His eternal servants (jivera'svarupa' haya--krsnera 'nitya-dasa'). Therefore, if we practice devotionalservice by always thinking of the Lord, always glorifying Him and alwayschanting about Him, as described in text 37 (srnvan grnan samsmarayams cacintayan), we will be reinstated in our original, constitutional position andthus be saved. The demigods, therefore, encouraged Devaki not to fear Kamsa, butto think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was already within her womb.                               TEXT 40                                 TEXT               matsyasva-kacchapa-nrsimha-varaha-hamsa-                 rajanya-vipra-vibudhesu krtavatarah              tvam pasi nas tri-bhuvanam ca yathadhunesa               bharam bhuvo hara yaduttama vandanam te                               SYNONYMS
   matsya--the fish incarnation; asva--the horse incarnation; kacchapa--thetortoise incarnation; nrsimha--the Narasimha incarnation; varaha--the Varahaincarnation; hamsa--the swan incarnation; rajanya--incarnations as LordRamacandra and other ksatriyas; vipra--incarnations as brahmanas likeVamanadeva; vibudhesu--among the demigods; krta-avatarah--appeared asincarnations; tvam--Your Lordship; pasi--please save; nah--us; tri-bhuvanam ca--and the three worlds; yatha--as well as; adhuna--now; isa--O Supreme Lord;bharam--burden; bhuvah--of the earth; hara--please diminish; yadu-uttama--O LordKrsna, best of the Yadus; vandanam te--we offer our prayers unto You.                             TRANSLATION   O supreme controller, Your Lordship previously accepted incarnations as afish, a horse, a tortoise, Narasimhadeva, a boar, a swan, Lord Ramacandra,Parasurama and, among the demigods, Vamanadeva, to protect the entire world byYour mercy. Now please protect us again by Your mercy by diminishing thedisturbances in this world. O Krsna, best of the Yadus, we respectfully offerour obeisances unto You.                               PURPORT   In every incarnation, the Supreme Personality of Godhead has a particularmission to execute, and this was true in His appearance as the son of Devaki inthe family of the Yadus. Thus all the demigods offered their prayers to theLord, bowing down before Him, and requested the Lord to do the needful. Wecannot order the Supreme personality of Godhead to do anything for us. We cansimply offer Him our obeisances, as advised in Bhagavad-gita (man-mana bhavamad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru), and pray to Him for annihilation of dangers.                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT                 distyamba te kuksi-gatah parah puman                  amsena saksad bhagavan bhavaya nah                  mabhud bhayam bhoja-pater mumursor                   gopta yadunam bhavita tavatmajah                               SYNONYMS   distya--by fortune; amba--O mother; te--your; kuksi-gatah--in the womb;parah--the Supreme; puman--Personality of Godhead; amsena--with all Hisenergies, His parts and parcels; saksat--directly; bhagavan--the SupremePersonality of Godhead; bhavaya--for the auspiciousness; nah--of all of us; maabhut--never be; bhayam--fearful; bhoja-pateh--from Kamsa, King of the Bhojadynasty; mumursoh--who has decided to be killed by the Lord; gopta--theprotector; yadunam--of the Yadu dynasty; bhavita--will become; tava atmajah--your son.                             TRANSLATION   O mother Devaki, by your good fortune and ours, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead Himself, with all His plenary portions, such as Baladeva, is now withinyour womb. Therefore you need not fear Kamsa, who has decided to be killed bythe Lord. Your eternal son, Krsna, will be the protector of the entire Yadudynasty.                               PURPORT
   The words parah puman amsena signify that Krsna is the original SupremePersonality of Godhead. This is the verdict of the sastra (krsnas tu bhagavansvayam). Thus the demigods assured Devaki, "Your son is the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, and He is appearing with Baladeva, His plenary portion. He will giveyou all protection and kill Kamsa, who has decided to continue his enmity towardthe Lord and thus be killed by Him."                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        ity abhistuya purusam                        yad-rupam anidam yatha                        brahmesanau purodhaya                        devah pratiyayur divam                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti--in this way; abhistuya--offering prayers; purusam--unto the Supreme Personality; yat-rupam--whose form;anidam--transcendental; yatha--as; brahma--Lord Brahma; isanau--and Lord Siva;purodhaya--keeping them in front; devah--all the demigods; pratiyayuh--returned;divam--to their heavenly homes.                             TRANSLATION   After thus offering prayers to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, LordVisnu, the Transcendence, all the demigods, with Lord Brahma and Lord Sivabefore them, returned to their homes in the heavenly planets.                               PURPORT   It is said:                 adyapiha caitanya ei saba lila kare              yan'ra bhagye thake, se dekhaye nirantare   (Caitanya-bhagavata, Madhya 23.513)   The incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead appear continuously,like the waves of a river or an ocean. There is no limit to the Lord'sincarnations, but they can be perceived only by devotees who are fortunate. Thedevatas, the demigods, fortunately understood the incarnation of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, and thus they offered their prayers. Then Lord Siva andLord Brahma led the demigods in returning to their homes.   The word kuksi-gatah, meaning "within the womb of Devaki," has been discussedby Sri Jiva Gosvami in his Krama-sandarbha commentary. Since it was said atfirst that Krsna was present within the heart of Vasudeva and was transferred tothe heart of Devaki, Sri Jiva Gosvami writes, how is it that Krsna was now inthe womb? He replies that there is no contradiction. From the heart the Lord cango to the womb, or from the womb He can go to the heart. Indeed, He can go orstay anywhere. As confirmed in the Brahma-samhita (5.35), andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami. The Lord canstay wherever He likes. Devaki, therefore, in accordance with the desire of herformer life, now had the opportunity to seek the benediction of having theSupreme Personality of Godhead as her son, Devaki-nandana.
Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Second Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Krsna in theWomb."                            Chapter Three                       The Birth of Lord Krsna   As described in this chapter, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, Hariin His original form, appeared as Visnu so that His father and mother couldunderstand that their son was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because theywere afraid of Kamsa, when the Lord appeared as an ordinary child they took Himto Gokula, the home of Nanda Maharaja.   Mother Devaki, being fully transcendental, sac-cid-ananda, does not belong tothis material world. Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared with fourhands, as if born from her womb. Upon seeing the Lord in that Visnu form,Vasudeva was struck with wonder, and in transcendental happiness he and Devakimentally gave ten thousand cows in charity to the brahmanas. Vasudeva thenoffered prayers to the Lord, addressing Him as the Supreme Person, Parabrahman,the Supersoul, who is beyond duality and who is internally and externally all-pervading. The Lord, the cause of all causes, is beyond material existence,although He is the creator of this material world. When He enters this world asParamatma, He is all-pervading (andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham), yet Heis transcendentally situated. For the creation, maintenance and annihilation ofthis material world, the Lord appears as the guna-avataras--Brahma, Visnu andMahesvara. Thus Vasudeva offered prayers full of meaning to the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Devaki followed her husband by offering prayersdescribing the transcendental nature of the Lord. Fearing Kamsa and desiringthat the Lord not be understood by atheistic and materialistic nondevotees, sheprayed that the Lord withdraw His transcendental four-armed form and appear likean ordinary child with two hands.   The Lord reminded Vasudeva and Devaki of two other incarnations in which Hehad appeared as their son. He had appeared as Prsnigarbha and Vamanadeva, andnow this was the third time He was appearing as the son of Devaki to fulfilltheir desire. The Lord then decided to leave the residence of Vasudeva andDevaki, in the prison house of Kamsa, and at this very time, Yogamaya took birthas the daughter of Yasoda. By the arrangement of Yogamaya, Vasudeva was able toleave the prison house and save the child from the hands of Kamsa. When Vasudevabrought Krsna to the house of Nanda Maharaja, he saw that by Yogamaya'sarrangement, Yasoda, as well as everyone else, was deeply asleep. Thus heexchanged the babies, taking Yogamaya from Yasoda's lap and placing Krsna thereinstead. Then Vasudeva returned to his own place, having taken Yogamaya as hisdaughter. He placed Yogamaya on Devaki's bed and prepared to be a prisoner asbefore. In Gokula, Yasoda could not understand whether she had given birth to amale or a female child.                              TEXTS 1-5                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                         atha sarva-gunopetah                        kalah parama-sobhanah                       yarhy evajana-janmarksam                       santarksa-graha-tarakam                        disah prasedur gaganam                         nirmalodu-ganodayam                       mahi mangala-bhuyistha-                         pura-grama-vrajakara
                        nadyah prasanna-salila                        hrada jalaruha-sriyah                        dvijali-kula-sannada-                         stavaka vana-rajayah                      vavau vayuh sukha-sparsah                       punya-gandhavahah sucih                        agnayas ca dvijatinam                       santas tatra samindhata                       manamsy asan prasannani                        sadhunam asura-druham                        jayamane 'jane tasmin                       nedur dundubhayah samam                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; atha--on the occasion of theLord's appearance; sarva--all around; guna-upetah--endowed with materialattributes or facilities; kalah--a favorable time; parama-sobhanah--all-auspicious and very favorable from all points of view; yarhi--when; eva--certainly; ajana janma-rksam--the constellation of stars known as Rohini; santa-rksa--none of the constellations were fierce (all of them were peaceful); graha-tarakam--and the planets and stars like Asvini; disah--all directions; praseduh--appeared very auspicious and peaceful; gaganam--all of outer space or the sky;nirmala-udu-gana-udayam--in which all the auspicious stars were visible (in theupper strata of the universe); mahi--the earth; mangala-bhuyistha-pura-grama-vraja-akarah--whose many cities, towns, pasturing grounds and mines becameauspicious and very neat and clean; nadyah--the rivers; prasanna-salilah--thewaters became clear; hradah--the lakes or large reservoirs of water; jalaruha-sriyah--appeared very beautiful because of blooming lotuses all around; dvija-ali-kula-sannada-stavakah--the birds, especially the cuckoos, and swarms of beesbegan to chant in sweet voices, as if praying to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead; vana-rajayah--the green trees and plants were also very pleasing tosee; vavau--blew; vayuh--the breeze; sukha-sparsah--very pleasing to the touch;punya-gandha-vahah--which was full of fragrance; sucih--without pollution bydust; agnayah ca--and the fires (at the places of sacrifice); dvijatinam--of thebrahmanas; santah--undisturbed, steady, calm and quiet; tatra--there;samindhata--blazed; manamsi--the minds of the brahmanas (who because of Kamsahad always been afraid); asan--became; prasannani--fully satisfied and free fromdisturbances; sadhunam--of the brahmanas, who were all Vaisnava devotees; asura-druham--who had been oppressed by Kamsa and other demons disturbing thedischarge of religious rituals; jayamane--because of the appearance or birth;ajane--of Lord Visnu, who is always unborn; tasmin--in that situation; neduh--resounded; dundubhayah--kettledrums; samam--simultaneously (from the upperplanets).                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, at the auspicious time for the appearance of the Lord, the entireuniverse was surcharged with all the qualities of goodness, beauty and peace.The constellation Rohini appeared, as did stars like Asvini. The sun, the moonand the other stars and planets were very peaceful. All directions appearedextremely pleasing, and the beautiful stars twinkled in the cloudless sky.Decorated with towns, villages, mines and pasturing grounds, the earth seemedall-auspicious. The rivers flowed with clear water, and the lakes and vastreservoirs, full of lilies and lotuses, were extraordinarily beautiful. In the
trees and green plants, full of flowers and leaves, pleasing to the eyes, birdslike cuckoos and swarms of bees began chanting with sweet voices for the sake ofthe demigods. A pure breeze began to blow, pleasing the sense of touch andbearing the aroma of flowers, and when the brahmanas engaging in ritualisticceremonies ignited their fires according to Vedic principles, the fires burnedsteadily, undisturbed by the breeze. Thus when the birthless Lord Visnu, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, was about to appear, the saints and brahmanas,who had always been disturbed by demons like Kamsa and his men, felt peacewithin the core of their hearts, and kettledrums simultaneously vibrated fromthe upper planetary system.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord says that His appearance, birth, andactivities are all transcendental and that one who factually understands them isimmediately eligible to be transferred to the spiritual world. The Lord'sappearance or birth is not like that of an ordinary man, who is forced to accepta material body according to his past deeds. The Lord's appearance is explainedin the previous chapter: He appears out of His own sweet pleasure.   When the time was mature for the appearance of the Lord, the constellationsbecame very auspicious. The astrological influence of the constellation known asRohini was also predominant because this constellation is considered veryauspicious. Rohini is under the direct supervision of Brahma, who is born ofVisnu, and it appears at the birth of Lord Visnu, who in fact is birthless.According to the astrological conclusion, besides the proper situation of thestars, there are auspicious and inauspicious moments due to the differentsituations of the different planetary systems. At the time of Krsna's birth, theplanetary systems were automatically adjusted so that everything becameauspicious.   At that time, in all directions, east, west, south, north, everywhere, therewas an atmosphere of peace and prosperity. Auspicious stars were visible in thesky, and on the surface in all towns and villages or pasturing grounds andwithin the mind of everyone there were signs of good fortune. The rivers wereflowing full of water, and the lakes were beautifully decorated with lotusflowers. The forests were full with beautiful birds and peacocks. All the birdswithin the forests began to sing with sweet voices, and the peacocks began todance with their consorts. The wind blew very pleasantly, carrying the aroma ofdifferent flowers, and the sensation of bodily touch was very pleasing. At home,the brahmanas, who were accustomed to offer sacrifices in the fire, found theirhomes very pleasant for offerings. Because of disturbances created by thedemoniac kings, the sacrificial fire had been almost stopped in the houses ofbrahmanas, but now they could find the opportunity to start the fire peacefully.Being forbidden to offer sacrifices, the brahmanas were very distressed in mind,intelligence and activities. But just on the point of Krsna's appearance,automatically their minds became full of joy because they could hear loudvibrations in the sky of transcendental sounds proclaiming the appearance of theSupreme Personality of Godhead.   On the occasion of Lord Krsna's birth, seasonal changes took place throughoutthe entire universe. Krsna was born during the month of September, yet itappeared like springtime. The atmosphere, however, was very cool, although notchilly, and the rivers and reservoirs appeared just as they would in sarat, thefall. Lotuses and lilies blossom during the day, but although Krsna appeared attwelve o'clock midnight, the lilies and lotuses were in bloom, and thus the windblowing at that time was full of fragrance. Because of Kamsa's disturbances, theVedic ritualistic ceremonies had almost stopped. The brahmanas and saintlypersons could not execute the Vedic rituals with peaceful minds. But now thebrahmanas were very pleased to perform their daily ritualistic ceremoniesundisturbed. The business of the asuras is to disturb the suras, the devotees
and brahmanas, but at the time of Krsna's appearance these devotees andbrahmanas were undisturbed.                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                       jaguh kinnara-gandharvas                       tustuvuh siddha-caranah                       vidyadharyas ca nanrtur                        apsarobhih samam muda                               SYNONYMS   jaguh--recited auspicious songs; kinnara-gandharvah--the Kinnaras andGandharvas, inhabitants of various planets in the heavenly planetary system;tustuvuh--offered their respective prayers; siddha-caranah--the Siddhas andCaranas, other inhabitants of the heavenly planets; vidyadharyah ca--and theVidyadharis, another group of inhabitants of the heavenly planets; nanrtuh--danced in transcendental bliss; apsarobhih--the Apsaras, beautiful dancers inthe heavenly kingdom; samam--along with; muda--in great jubilation.                             TRANSLATION   The Kinnaras and Gandharvas began to sing auspicious songs, the Siddhas andCaranas offered auspicious prayers, and the Vidyadharis, along with the Apsaras,began to dance in jubilation.                              TEXTS 7-8                                 TEXT                         mumucur munayo devah                         sumanamsi mudanvitah                       mandam mandam jaladhara                         jagarjur anusagaram                         nisithe tama-udbhute                          jayamane janardane                        devakyam deva-rupinyam                       visnuh sarva-guha-sayah                        avirasid yatha pracyam                        disindur iva puskalah                               SYNONYMS   mumucuh--showered; munayah--all the great sages and saintly persons; devah--and the demigods; sumanamsi--very beautiful and fragrant flowers; muda anvitah--being joyous in their attitude; mandam mandam--very mildly; jala-dharah--theclouds; jagarjuh--vibrated; anusagaram--following the vibrations of the seawaves; nisithe--late at night; tamah-udbhute--when it was densely dark;jayamane--on the appearance of; janardane--the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Visnu; devakyam--in the womb of Devaki; deva-rupinyam--who was in the samecategory as the Supreme Personality of Godhead (ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhih); visnuh--Lord Visnu, the Supreme Lord; sarva-guha-sayah--whois situated in the core of everyone's heart; avirasit--appeared; yatha--as;pracyam disi--in the east; induh iva--like the full moon; puskalah--complete inevery respect.
                             TRANSLATION   The demigods and great saintly persons showered flowers in a joyous mood, andclouds gathered in the sky and very mildly thundered, making sounds like thoseof the ocean's waves. Then the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, who issituated in the core of everyone's heart, appeared from the heart of Devaki inthe dense darkness of night, like the full moon rising on the eastern horizon,because Devaki was of the same category as Sri Krsna.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.37):                 ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis                 tabhir ya eva nija-rupataya kalabhih                 goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhuto                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   This verse indicates that Krsna and His entourage are of the same spiritualpotency (ananda-cinmaya-rasa). Krsna's father, His mother, His friends thecowherd boys, and the cows are all expansions of Krsna, as will be explained inthe brahma-vimohana-lila. When Brahma took away Krsna's associates to test thesupremacy of Lord Krsna, the Lord expanded Himself again in the forms of themany cowherd boys and calves, all of whom, as Brahma saw, were visnu-murtis.Devaki is also an expansion of Krsna, and therefore this verse says, devakyamdeva-rupinyam visnuh sarva-guha-sayah.   At the time for the Lord's appearance, the great sages and the demigods,being pleased, began to shower flowers. At the seashore, there was the sound ofmild waves, and above the sea there were clouds in the sky which began tothunder very pleasingly.   When things were adjusted like this, Lord Visnu, who is residing within theheart of every living entity, appeared in the darkness of night as the SupremePersonality of Godhead before Devaki, who appeared as one of the demigoddesses.The appearance of Lord Visnu at that time could be compared to the rising of thefull moon in the sky on the eastern horizon. The objection may be raised thatsince Lord Krsna appeared on the eighth day of the waning moon, there could beno rising of the full moon. In answer to this it may be said that Lord Krsnaappeared in the dynasty which is in the hierarchy of the moon; therefore,although the moon was incomplete on that night, because of the Lord's appearancein the dynasty wherein the moon is himself the original person, the moon was inan overjoyous condition, so by the grace of Krsna he could appear as a fullmoon. To welcome the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the waning moon became afull moon in jubilation.   Instead of deva-rupinyam, some texts of Srimad-Bhagavatam clearly say visnu-rupinyam. In either case, the meaning is that Devaki has the same spiritual formas the Lord. The Lord is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, and Devaki is also sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. Therefore no one can find any fault in the way the SupremePersonality of Godhead, sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, appeared from the womb ofDevaki.   Those who are not in full knowledge that the appearance and disappearance ofthe Lord are transcendental (janma karma ca me divyam) are sometimes surprisedthat the Supreme Personality of Godhead can take birth like an ordinary child.Actually, however, the Lord's birth is never ordinary. The Supreme Personalityof Godhead is already situated within the core of everyone's heart as antaryami,the Supersoul. Thus because He was present in full potency in Devaki's heart, Hewas also able to appear outside her body.
   One of the twelve great personalities is Bhismadeva (svayambhur naradahsambhuh kumarah kapilo manuh prahlada, janako bhismah). In Srimad-Bhagavatam(1.9.42), Bhisma, a great authority to be followed by devotees, says that theSupreme Personality of Godhead is situated in the core of everyone's heart, justas the sun may be on everyone's head. Yet although the sun may be on the headsof millions and millions of people, this does not mean that the sun is variouslysituated. Similarly, because the Supreme Personality of Godhead hasinconceivable potencies, He can be within everyone's heart and yet not besituated variously. Ekatvam anupasyatah (Isopanisad 7). The Lord is one, but Hecan appear in everyone's heart by His inconceivable potency. Thus although theLord was within the heart of Devaki, He appeared as her child. According to theVisnu purana, therefore, as quoted in the Vaisnava-tosani, the Lord appearedlike the sun (anugrahasaya). The Brahma-samhita (5.35) confirms that the Lord issituated even within the atom (andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham). He issituated in Mathura, in Vaikuntha and in the core of the heart. Therefore oneshould clearly understand that He did not live like an ordinary child in theheart or the womb of Devaki. Nor did He appear like an ordinary human child,although He seemed to do so in order to bewilder asuras like Kamsa. I he asuraswrongly think that Krsna took birth like an ordinary child and passed away fromthis world like an ordinary man. Such asuric conceptions are rejected by personsin knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Ajo 'pi sann avyayatmabhutanam isvaro 'pi san (Bg. 4.6). As stated in Bhagavad-gita, the Lord is aja,unborn, and He is the supreme controller of everything. Nonetheless, He appearedas the child of Devaki. This verse describes the inconceivable potency of theLord, who appeared like the full moon. Understanding the special significance ofthe appearance of the Supreme Godhead, one should never regard Him as havingtaken birth like an ordinary child.                              TEXTS 9-10                                 TEXT                  tam adbhutam balakam ambujeksanam                 catur-bhujam sankha-gadady-udayudham                srivatsa-laksmam gala-sobhi-kaustubham                  pitambaram sandra-payoda-saubhagam                   maharha-vaidurya-kirita-kundala-                  tvisa parisvakta-sahasra-kuntalam                  uddama-kancy-angada-kankanadibhir                     virocamanam vasudeva aiksata                               SYNONYMS   tam--that; adbhutam--wonderful; balakam--child; ambuja-iksanam--with eyesresembling lotuses; catuh-bhujam--with four hands; sankha-gada-adi--bearing aconchshell, club, disc and lotus (in those four hands); udayudham--differentweapons; srivatsa-laksmam--decorated with a particular type of hair calledSrivatsa, which is visible only on the chest of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead; gala-sobhi-kaustubham--on His neck was the Kaustubha gem, which isparticularly available in Vaikunthaloka; pita-ambaram--His garments were yellow;sandra-payoda-saubhagam--very beautiful, being present with the hue of blackishclouds; maha-arha-vaidurya-kirita-kundala--of His helmet and earrings, whichwere studded with very valuable Vaidurya gems; tvisa--by the beauty; parisvakta-sahasra-kuntalam--brilliantly illuminated by scattered, fully grown hair;uddama-kanci-angada-kankana-adibhih--with a brilliant belt on His waist,armbands on His arms, bracelets on His wrists, etc.; virocamanam--verybeautifully decorated; vasudevah--Vasudeva, the father of Krsna; aiksata--saw.
                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva then saw the newborn child, who had very wonderful lotuslike eyesand who bore in His four hands the four weapons sankha, cakra, gada and padma.On His chest was the mark of Srivatsa and on His neck the brilliant Kaustubhagem. Dressed in yellow, His body blackish like a dense cloud, His scattered hairfully grown, and His helmet and earrings sparkling uncommonly with the valuablegem Vaidurya, the child, decorated with a brilliant belt, armlets, bangles andother ornaments, appeared very wonderful.                               PURPORT   To support the word adbhutam, meaning "wonderful," the decorations andopulences of the newborn child are fully described. As confirmed in the Brahma-samhita (5.30), barhavatamsam asitambuda-sundarangam: the hue of the Lord'sbeautiful form resembles the blackish color of dense clouds (asita means"blackish," and ambuda means "cloud"). It is clear from the word catur-bhujamthat Krsna first appeared with four hands, as Lord Visnu. No ordinary child inhuman society has ever been born with four hands. And when is a child born withfully grown hair? The descent of the Lord, therefore, is completely distinctfrom the birth of an ordinary child. The Vaidurya gem, which sometimes appearsbluish, sometimes yellow and sometimes red, is available in Vaikunthaloka. TheLord's helmet and earrings were decorated with this particular gem.                               TEXT 11                                 TEXT                   sa vismayotphulla-vilocano harim                   sutam vilokyanakadundubhis tada                  krsnavatarotsava-sambhramo 'sprsan                  muda dvijebhyo 'yutam apluto gavam                               SYNONYMS   sah--he (Vasudeva, also known as Anakadundubhi); vismaya-utphulla-vilocanah--his eyes being struck with wonder at the beautiful appearance of the SupremePersonality of Godhead; harim--Lord Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;sutam--as his son; vilokya--observing; anakadundubhih--Vasudeva; tada--at thattime; krsna-avatara-utsava--for a festival to be observed because of Krsna'sappearance; sambhramah--wishing to welcome the Lord with great respect; asprsat--took advantage by distributing; muda--with great jubilation; dvijebhyah--to thebrahmanas; ayutam--ten thousand; aplutah--overwhelmed, surcharged; gavam--cows.                             TRANSLATION   When Vasudeva saw his extraordinary son, his eyes were struck with wonder. Intranscendental jubilation, he mentally collected ten thousand cows anddistributed them among the brahmanas as a transcendental festival.                               PURPORT   Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura has analyzed the wonder of Vasudeva uponseeing his extraordinary child. Vasudeva was shivering with wonder to see anewborn child decorated so nicely with valuable garments and gems. He couldimmediately understand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead had appeared, notas an ordinary child but in His original, fully decorated, four-handed form. The
first wonder was that the Lord was not afraid to appear within the prison houseof Kamsa, where Vasudeva and Devaki were interned. Second, although the Lord,the Supreme Transcendence, is all-pervading, He had appeared from the womb ofDevaki. The third point of wonder, therefore, was that a child could take birthfrom the womb so nicely decorated. Fourth, the Supreme Personality of Godheadwas Vasudeva's worshipable Deity yet had taken birth as his son. For all thesereasons, Vasudeva was transcendentally jubilant, and he wanted to perform afestival, as ksatriyas do to celebrate the birth of a child, but because of hisimprisonment he was unable to do it externally, and therefore he performed thefestival within his mind. This was just as good. If one cannot externally servethe Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can serve the Lord within one's mind,since the activities of the mind are as good as those of the other senses. Thisis called the nondual or absolute situation (advaya jnana). People generallyperform ritualistic ceremonies for the birth of a child. Why then shouldVasudeva not have performed such a ceremony when the Supreme Lord appeared ashis son?                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                  athainam astaud avadharya purusam                 param natangah krta-dhih krtanjalih                   sva-rocisa bharata sutika-grham                 virocayantam gata-bhih prabhava-vit                               SYNONYMS   atha--thereafter; enam--to the child; astaut--offered prayers; avadharya--understanding surely that the child was the Supreme Personality of Godhead;purusam--the Supreme Person; param--transcendental; nata-angah--falling down;krta-dhih--with concentrated attention; krta-anjalih--with folded hands; sva-rocisa--by the brilliance of His personal beauty; bharata--O Maharaja Pariksit,descendant of Maharaja Bharata; sutika-grham--the place where the Lord was born;virocayantam--illuminating all around; gata-bhih--all his fear disappeared;prabhava-vit--he could now understand the influence (of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead).                             TRANSLATION   O Maharaja Pariksit, descendant of King Bharata, Vasudeva could understandthat this child was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Narayana. Havingconcluded this without a doubt, he became fearless. Bowing down with foldedhands and concentrating his attention, he began to offer prayers to the child,who illuminated His birthplace by His natural influence.                               PURPORT   Struck with such great wonder, Vasudeva now concentrated his attention on theSupreme Personality of Godhead. Understanding the influence of the Supreme Lord,he was surely fearless, since he understood that the Lord had appeared to givehim protection (gata-bhih prabhava-vit). Understanding that the SupremePersonality of Godhead was present, he appropriately offered prayers as follows.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT
                          sri-vasudeva uvaca                       vidito 'si bhavan saksat                        purusah prakrteh parah                         kevalanubhavananda-                      svarupah sarva-buddhi-drk                               SYNONYMS   sri-vasudevah uvaca--Sri Vasudeva prayed; viditah asi--now I am fullyconscious of You; bhavan--Your Lordship; saksat--directly; purusah--the SupremePerson; prakrteh--to material nature; parah--transcendental, beyond everythingmaterial; kevala-anubhava-ananda-svarupah--Your form is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha,and whoever perceives You becomes transcendentally blissful; sarva-buddhi-drk--the supreme observer, the Supersoul, the intelligence of everyone.                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva said: My Lord, You are the Supreme Person, beyond materialexistence, and You are the Supersoul. Your form can be perceived bytranscendental knowledge, by which You can be understood as the SupremePersonality of Godhead. I now understand Your position perfectly.                               PURPORT   Within Vasudeva's heart, affection for his son and knowledge of the SupremeLord's transcendental nature both awakened In the beginning Vasudeva thought,"Such a beautiful child has been born, but now Kamsa will come and kill Him."But when he understood that this was not an ordinary child but the SupremePersonality of Godhead, he became fearless. Regarding his son as the SupremeLord, wonderful in everything, he began offering prayers appropriate for theSupreme Lord. Completely free from fear of Kamsa's atrocities, he accepted thechild simultaneously as an object of affection and as an object of worship byprayers.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                        sa eva svaprakrtyedam                       srstvagre tri-gunatmakam                      tad anu tvam hy apravistah                        pravista iva bhavyase                               SYNONYMS   sah--He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); eva--indeed; sva-prakrtya--byYour personal energy (mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram); idam--thismaterial world; srstva--after creating; agre--in the beginning; tri-guna-atmakam--made of three modes of energy (sattva-rajas-tamo-guna); tat anu--thereafter; tvam--Your Lordship; hi--indeed; apravistah--although You did notenter; pravistah iva--You appear to have entered; bhavyase--are so understood.                             TRANSLATION   My Lord, You are the same person who in the beginning created this materialworld by His personal external energy. After the creation of this world of threegunas [sattva, rajas and tamas], You appear to have entered it, although in factYou have not.
                               PURPORT   In Bhagavad-gita (7.4) the Supreme Personality of Godhead clearly explains:                        bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh                       kham mano buddhir eva ca                          ahankara itiyam me                       bhinna prakrtir astadha   This material world of three modes of nature--sattva-guna, rajo-guna andtamo-guna--is a composition of earth, water, fire, air, mind, intelligence andfalse ego, all of which are energies coming from Krsna, yet Krsna, being alwaystranscendental, is aloof from this material world. Those who are not in pureknowledge think that Krsna is a product of matter and that His body is materiallike ours (avajananti mam mudhah). In fact, however, Krsna is always aloof fromthis material world.   In the Vedic literature, we find the creation described in relationship toMaha-Visnu. As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.35):               eko 'py asau racayitum jagad-anda-kotim              yac-chaktir asti jagad-anda-caya yad-antah               andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   "I worship the primeval Lord, Govinda, the original Personality of Godhead.By His partial plenary expansion as Maha-Visnu, He enters into material nature.Then He enters every universe as Garbhodakasayi Visnu, and He enters all theelements, including every atom of matter, as Ksirodakasayi Visnu. Suchmanifestations of cosmic creation are innumerable, both in the universes and inthe individual atoms." Govinda is partially exhibited as antaryami, theSupersoul, who enters this material world (andantara-stha) and who is alsowithin the atom. The Brahma-samhita (5.48) further says:                yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya                jivanti loma-vilaja jagad-anda-nathah                visnur mahan sa iha yasya kala-viseso                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   This verse describes Maha-Visnu as a plenary expansion of Krsna. Maha-Visnulies on the Causal Ocean, and when He exhales, millions of brahmandas, oruniverses, come from the pores of His body. Then, when Maha-Visnu inhales, allthese brahmandas disappear. Thus the millions of brahmandas controlled by theBrahmas and other demigods come and go in this material world through thebreathing of Maha-Visnu.   Foolish persons think that when Krsna appears as the son of Vasudeva, He islimited like an ordinary child. But Vasudeva was aware that although the Lordhad appeared as his son, the Lord had not entered Devaki's womb and then comeout. Rather, the Lord was always there. The Supreme Lord is all-pervading,present within and without. pravista iva bhavyase: He only seemed to haveentered the womb of Devaki and to have now appeared as Vasudeva's child. Theexpression of this knowledge by Vasudeva indicates that Vasudeva knew how theseevents took place. Vasudeva was certainly a devotee of the Lord in fullknowledge, and we must learn from devotees like him. Bhagavad-gita (4.34)therefore recommends:                        tad viddhi pranipatena                         pariprasnena sevaya
                        upadeksyanti te jnanam                       jnaninas tattva-darsinah   "Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire fromhim submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impartknowledge unto you because he has seen the truth." Vasudeva begot the SupremePersonality of Godhead, yet he was in full knowledge of how the Supreme Lordappears and disappears. He was therefore tattva-darsi, a seer of the truth,because he personally saw how the Supreme Absolute Truth appeared as his son.Vasudeva was not in ignorance, thinking that because the Supreme Godhead hadappeared as his son, the Lord had become limited. The Lord is unlimitedlyexisting and all-pervading, inside and outside. Thus there is no question of Hisappearance or disappearance.                             TEXTS 15-17                                 TEXT                        yatheme 'vikrta bhavas                        tatha te vikrtaih saha                       nana-viryah prthag-bhuta                         virajam janayanti hi                        sannipatya samutpadya                         drsyante 'nugata iva                        prag eva vidyamanatvan                        na tesam iha sambhavah                 evam bhavan buddhy-anumeya-laksanair               grahyair gunaih sann api tad-gunagrahah                   anavrtatvad bahir antaram na te                  sarvasya sarvatmana atma-vastunah                               SYNONYMS   yatha--as; ime--these material creations, made of material energy; avikrtah--actually not disintegrated; bhavah--with such a conception; tatha--similarly;te--they; vikrtaih saha--association with these different elements coming fromthe total material energy; nana-viryah--every element is full of differentenergies; prthak--separated; bhutah--becoming; virajam--the whole cosmicmanifestation; janayanti--create; hi--indeed; sannipatya--because of associationwith the spiritual energy; samutpadya--after being created; drsyante--theyappear; anugatah--entered within it; iva--as if; prak--from the very beginning,before the creation of this cosmic manifestation; eva--indeed; vidyamanatvat--due to the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na--not; tesam--ofthese material elements; iha--in this matter of creation; sambhavah--enteringwould have been possible; evam--in this way; bhavan--O my Lord; buddhi-anumeya-laksanaih--by real intelligence and by such symptoms; grahyaih--with the objectsof the senses; gunaih--with the modes of material nature; san api--although intouch; tat-guna-agrahah--are not touched by the material qualities; anavrtatvat--because of being situated everywhere; bahih antaram--within the external andinternal; na te--there is no such thing for You; sarvasya--of everything; sarva-atmanah--You are the root of everything; atma-vastunah--everything belongs toYou, but You are outside and inside of everything.                             TRANSLATION
   The mahat-tattva, the total material energy, is undivided, but because of thematerial modes of nature, it appears to separate into earth, water, fire, airand ether. Because of the living energy [jiva-bhuta], these separated energiescombine to make the cosmic manifestation visible, but in fact, before thecreation of the cosmos, the total energy is already present. Therefore, thetotal material energy never actually enters the creation. Similarly, althoughYou are perceived by our senses because of Your presence, You cannot beperceived by the senses, nor experienced by the mind or words [avan-manasa-gocara]. With our senses we can perceive some things, but not everything; forexample, we can use our eyes to see, but not to taste. Consequently, You arebeyond perception by the senses. Although in touch with the modes of materialnature, You are unaffected by them. You are the prime factor in everything, theall-pervading, undivided Supersoul. For You, therefore, there is no external orinternal. You never entered the womb of Devaki; rather, You existed therealready.                               PURPORT   This same understanding is explained by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita(9.4):                        maya tatam idam sarvam                        jagad-avyakta-murtina                       mat-sthani sarva-bhutani                       na caham tesv avasthitah   "By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beingsare in Me, but I am not in them."   The Supreme Personality of Godhead is not perceivable through the grossmaterial senses. It is said that Lord Sri Krsna's name, fame, pastimes, etc.,cannot be understood by material senses. Only to one who is engaged in puredevotional service under proper guidance is He revealed. As stated in Brahma-samhita (5.38):                premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena                 santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti   One can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, always, withinoneself and outside oneself, if one has developed the transcendental lovingattitude toward Him. Thus for people in general, He is not visible. In theabove-mentioned verse from Bhagavad-gita, therefore, it is said that although Heis all-pervading, everywhere present, He is not conceivable by the materialsenses. But actually, although we cannot see Him, everything is resting in Him.As discussed in the Seventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, the entire material cosmicmanifestation is only a combination of His two different energies, the superior,spiritual energy and the inferior, material energy. Just as the sunshine isspread all over the universe, the energy of the Lord is spread all over thecreation, and everything is resting in that energy.   Yet one should not conclude that because He is spread all over He has lostHis personal existence. To refute such arguments, the Lord says, "I ameverywhere, and everything is in Me, but still I am aloof." For example, a kingheads a government which is but the manifestation of the king's energy; thedifferent governmental departments are nothing but the energies of the king, andeach department is resting on the king's power. But still one cannot expect theking to be present in every department personally. That is a crude example.Similarly, all the manifestations that we see, and everything that exists, bothin this material world and in the spiritual world, are resting on the energy ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. The creation takes place by the diffusion of
His different energies, and, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita, He is everywherepresent by His personal representation, the diffusion of His different energies.   One may argue that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who creates the wholecosmic manifestation simply by His glance, cannot come within the womb ofDevaki, the wife of Vasudeva. To eradicate this argument, Vasudeva said, "Mydear Lord, it is not very wonderful that You appeared within the womb of Devaki,for the creation was also made in that way. You were lying in the Causal Oceanas Maha-Visnu, and by Your breathing, innumerable universes came into existence.Then You entered into each of the universes as Garbhodakasayi Visnu. Then againYou expanded Yourself as Ksirodakasayi Visnu and entered into the heart of allliving entities and entered even within the atoms. Therefore Your entrance intothe womb of Devaki is understandable in the same way. You appear to haveentered, but You are simultaneously all-pervading. We can understand Yourentrance and nonentrance from material examples. The total material energyremains intact even after being divided into sixteen elements. The material bodyis nothing but a combination of the five gross elements--namely earth, water,fire, air and ether. Whenever there is a material body, it appears that suchelements are newly created, but actually the elements are always existingoutside of the body. Similarly, although You appear as a child in the womb ofDevaki, You are also existing outside. You are always in Your abode, but stillYou can simultaneously expand Yourself into millions of forms.   "One has to understand Your appearance with great intelligence because thematerial energy is also emanating from You. You are the original source of thematerial energy, just as the sun is the source of the sunshine. The sunshinecannot cover the sun globe, nor can the material energy--being an emanation fromYou--cover You. You appear to be in the three modes of material energy, butactually the three modes of material energy cannot cover You. This is understoodby the highly intellectual philosophers. In other words, although You appear tobe within the material energy, You are never covered by it."   We hear from the Vedic version that the Supreme Brahman exhibits Hiseffulgence and therefore everything is illuminated. We can understand fromBrahma-samhita that the brahmajyoti, or the Brahman effulgence, emanates fromthe body of the Supreme Lord. And from the Brahman effulgence, all creationtakes place. It is further stated in the Bhagavad-gita that the Lord is thesupport of the Brahman effulgence. Originally He is the root cause ofeverything. But persons who are less intelligent think that when the SupremePersonality of Godhead comes within this material world, He accepts materialqualities. Such conclusions are not mature, but are, made by the lessintelligent.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                   ya atmano drsya-gunesu sann iti                  vyavasyate sva-vyatirekato 'budhah                   vinanuvadam na ca tan manisitam                 samyag yatas tyaktam upadadat puman                               SYNONYMS   yah--anyone who; atmanah--of his own real identity, the soul; drsya-gunesu--among the visible objects, beginning with the body; san--being situated in thatposition; iti--thus; vyavasyate--continues to act; sva-vyatirekatah--as if thebody were independent of the soul; abudhah--a rascal; vina anuvadam--withoutproper analytical study; na--not; ca--also; tat--the body and other visibleobjects; manisitam--such considerations having been discussed; samyak--fully;
yatah--because he is a fool; tyaktam--are rejected; upadadat--accepts this bodyas reality; puman--a person.                             TRANSLATION   One who considers his visible body, which is a product of the three modes ofnature, to be independent of the soul is unaware of the basis of existence, andtherefore he is a rascal. Those who are learned have rejected his conclusionbecause one can understand through full discussion that with no basis in soul,the visible body and senses would be insubstantial. Nonetheless, although hisconclusion has been rejected, a foolish person considers it a reality.                               PURPORT   Without the basic principle of soul, the body cannot be produced. So-calledscientists have tried in many ways to produce a living body in their chemicallaboratories, but no one has been able to do it because unless the spirit soulis present, a body cannot be prepared from material elements. Since scientistsare now enamored of theories about the chemical composition of the body, we havechallenged many scientists to make even a small egg. The chemicals in eggs canbe found very easily. There is a white substance and a yellow substance, coveredby a shell, and modern scientists should very easily be able to duplicate allthis. But even if they were to prepare such an egg and put it in an incubator,this man-made chemical egg would not produce a chicken. The soul must be addedbecause there is no question of a chemical combination for life. Those who thinkthat life can exist without the soul have therefore been described here asabudhah, foolish rascals.   Again, there are those who reject the body, regarding it as insubstantial.They are of the same category of fools. One can neither reject the body noraccept it as substantial. The substance is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,and both the body and the soul are energies of the Supreme Godhead, as describedby the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (7.4-5):                        bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh                       kham mano buddhir eva ca                          ahankara itiyam me                       bhinna prakrtir astadha                        apareyam itas tv anyam                       prakrtim viddhi me param                        jiva-bhutam maha-baho                        yayedam dharyate jagat   "Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego--alltogether these eight comprise My separated material energies. But besides thisinferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of Mine,which consists of all living entities who are struggling with material natureand are sustaining the universe."   The body, therefore, has a relationship with the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, just as the soul does. Since both of them are energies of the Lord,neither of them is false, because they come from the reality. One who does notknow this secret of life is described as abudhah. According to the Vedicinjunctions, aitadatmyam idam sarvam, sarvam khalv idam brahma: everything isthe Supreme Brahman. Therefore, both the body and the soul are Brahman, sincematter and spirit emanate from Brahman.   Not knowing the conclusions of the Vedas, some people accept the materialnature as substance, and others accept the spirit soul as substance, butactually Brahman is the substance. Brahman is the cause of all causes. The
ingredients and the immediate cause of this manifested material world areBrahman, and we cannot make the ingredients of this world independent ofBrahman. Furthermore, since the ingredients and the immediate cause of thismaterial manifestation are Brahman, both of them are truth, satya; there is novalidity to the expression brahma satyam jagan mithya. The world is not false.   Jnanis reject this world, and foolish persons accept this world as reality,and in this way they are both misguided. Although the body is not as importantas the soul, we cannot say that it is false. Yet the body is temporary, and onlyfoolish, materialistic persons, who do not have full knowledge of the soul,regard the temporary body as reality and engage in decorating this body. Both ofthese pitfalls--rejection of the body as false and acceptance of the body as allin all--can be avoided when one is fully situated in Krsna consciousness. If weregard this world as false, we fall into the category of asuras, who say thatthis world is unreal, with no foundation and no God in control (asatyamapratistham te jagad ahur anisvaram). As described in the Sixteenth Chapter ofBhagavad-gita, this is the conclusion of demons.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT               tvatto 'sya janma-sthiti-samyaman vibho                   vadanty anihad agunad avikriyat                  tvayisvare brahmani no virudhyate                  tvad-asrayatvad upacaryate gunaih                               SYNONYMS   tvattah--are from Your Lordship; asya--of the entire cosmic manifestation;janma--the creation; sthiti--maintenance; samyaman--and annihilation; vibho--Omy Lord; vadanti--the learned Vedic scholars conclude; anihat--who are free fromendeavor; agunat--who are unaffected by the modes of material nature; avikriyat--who are unchanging in Your spiritual situation; tvayi--in You; isvare--theSupreme Personality of Godhead; brahmani--who are Parabrahman, the SupremeBrahman; no--not; virudhyate--there is a contradiction; tvat-asrayatvat--becauseof being controlled by You; upacaryate--things are going on automatically;gunaih--by the operation of the material modes.                             TRANSLATION   O my Lord, learned Vedic scholars conclude that the creation, maintenance andannihilation of the entire cosmic manifestation are performed by You, who arefree from endeavor, unaffected by the modes of material nature, and changelessin Your spiritual situation. There are no contradictions in You, who are theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Parabrahman. Because the three modes of materialnature--sattva, rajas and tamas--are under Your control, everything takes placeautomatically.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Vedas:                  na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate                 na tat-samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyate                  parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate                    svabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca
   "The Supreme Lord has nothing to do, and no one is found to be equal to orgreater than Him, for everything is done naturally and systematically by Hismultifarious energies." (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8) Creation, maintenance andannihilation are all conducted personally by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,and this is confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram). Yet ultimately the Lord does not need to do anything, and thereforeHe is nirvikara, changeless. Because everything is done under His direction, Heis called srsti-karta, the master of creation. Similarly, He is the master ofannihilation. When a master sits in one place while his servants work indifferent duties, whatever the servants are doing is ultimately an activity ofthe master, although he is doing nothing (na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate).The Lord's potencies are so numerous that everything is nicely done. Therefore,He is naturally still and is not directly the doer of anything in this materialworld.                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                 sa tvam tri-loka-sthitaye sva-mayaya                 bibharsi suklam khalu varnam atmanah                   sargaya raktam rajasopabrmhitam                  krsnam ca varnam tamasa janatyaye                               SYNONYMS   sah tvam--Your Lordship, who are the same person, the Transcendence; tri-loka-sthitaye--to maintain the three worlds, the upper, middle and lowerplanetary systems; sva-mayaya--by Your personal energy (atma-mayaya); bibharsi--assume; suklam--the white form of Visnu in goodness; khalu--as well as; varnam--color; atmanah--of the same category as You (visnu-tattva); sargaya--for thecreation of the entire world; raktam--the reddish color of rajo-guna; rajasa--with the quality of passion; upabrmhitam--being charged; krsnam ca--and thequality of darkness; varnam--the color; tamasa--which is surrounded byignorance; jana-atyaye--for the ultimate destruction of the entire creation.                             TRANSLATION   My Lord, Your form is transcendental to the three material modes, yet for themaintenance of the three worlds, You assume the white color of Visnu ingoodness; for creation, which is surrounded by the quality of passion, Youappear reddish; and at the end, when there is a need for annihilation, which issurrounded by ignorance, You appear blackish.                               PURPORT   Vasudeva prayed to the Lord, "You are called suklam. Suklam, or 'whiteness,'is the symbolic representation of the Absolute Truth because it is unaffected bythe material qualities. Lord Brahma is called rakta, or red, because Brahmarepresents the qualities of passion for creation. Darkness is entrusted to LordSiva because he annihilates the cosmos. The creation, annihilation andmaintenance of this cosmic manifestation are conducted by Your potencies, yetYou are always unaffected by those qualities." As confirmed in the Vedas, harirhi nirgunah saksat: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always free from allmaterial qualities. It is also said that the qualities of passion and ignoranceare nonexistent in the person of the Supreme Lord.   In this verse, the three colors mentioned--sukla, rakta and krsna--are not tobe understood literally, in terms of what we experience with our senses, but
rather as representatives of sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna. After all,sometimes we see that a duck is white, although it is in tamo-guna, the mode ofignorance. Illustrating the logic called bakandha-nyaya, the duck is such a foolthat it runs after the testicles of a bull, thinking them to be a hanging fishthat can be taken when it drops. Thus the duck is always in darkness. Vyasadeva,however, the compiler of the Vedic literature, is blackish, but this does notmean that he is in tamo-guna; rather, he is in the highest position of sattva-guna, beyond the material modes of nature. Sometimes these colors (sukla-raktastatha pitah) are used to designate the brahmanas, ksatriyas, vaisyas and sudras.Lord Ksirodakasayi Visnu is celebrated as possessing a blackish color, Lord Sivais whitish, and Lord Brahma is reddish, but according to Srila Sanatana Gosvamiin the Vaisnava-tosani-tika, this exhibition of colors is not what is referredto here.   The real understanding of sukla, rakta and krsna is as follows. The Lord isalways transcendental, but for the sake of creation He assumes the color raktaas Lord Brahma. Again, sometimes the Lord becomes angry. As He says in Bhagavad-gita (16.19):                       tan aham dvisatah kruran                         samsaresu naradhaman                       ksipamy ajasram asubhan                          asurisv eva yonisu   "Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, arecast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac speciesof life." To destroy the demons, the Lord becomes angry, and therefore Heassumes the form of Lord Siva. In summary, the Supreme personality of Godhead isalways beyond the material qualities, and we should not be misled into thinkingotherwise simply because of sense perception. One must understand the positionof the Lord through the authorities, or mahajanas. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.3.28), ete camsa-kalah pumsah krsnas tu bhagavan svayam.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                  tvam asya lokasya vibho riraksisur                   grhe 'vatirno 'si mamakhilesvara                  rajanya-samjnasura-koti-yuthapair                   nirvyuhyamana nihanisyase camuh                               SYNONYMS   tvam--Your Lordship; asya--of this world; lokasya--especially of this martya-loka, the planet earth; vibho--O Supreme; riraksisuh--desiring protection (fromthe disturbance of the asuras); grhe--in this house; avatirnah asi--have nowappeared; mama--my; akhila-isvara--although You are the proprietor of the entirecreation; rajanya-samjna-asura-koti-yutha-paih--with millions of demons andtheir followers in the roles of politicians and kings; nirvyuhyamanah--which aremoving here and there all over the world; nihanisyase--will kill; camuh--thearmies, paraphernalia, soldiers and retinues.                             TRANSLATION   O my Lord, proprietor of all creation, You have now appeared in my house,desiring to protect this world. I am sure that You will kill all the armies thatare moving all over the world under the leadership of politicians who are
dressed as ksatriya rulers but who are factually demons. They must be killed byYou for the protection of the innocent public.                               PURPORT   Krsna appears in this world for two purposes, paritranaya sadhunam vinasayaca duskrtam: to protect the innocent, religious devotees of the Lord and toannihilate all the uneducated, uncultured asuras, who unnecessarily bark likedogs and fight among themselves for political power. It is said, kali-kale nama-rupe krsna avatara. The Hare Krsna movement is also an incarnation of Krsna inthe form of the holy name (nama-rupe). Every one of us who is actually afraid ofthe asuric rulers and politicians must welcome this incarnation of Krsna: HareKrsna, Hare Krsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare. Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, HareHare. Then we will surely be protected from the harassment of asuric rulers. Atthe present moment these rulers are so powerful that by hook or by crook theycapture the highest posts in government and harass countless numbers of peopleon the plea of national security or some emergency. Then again, one asuradefeats another asura, but the public continues to suffer. Therefore the entireworld is in a precarious condition, and the only hope is this Hare Krsnamovement. Lord Nrsimhadeva appeared when Prahlada was excessively harassed byhis asuric father. Because of such asuric fathers--that is, the rulingpoliticians--it is very difficult to press forward the Hare Krsna movement, butbecause Krsna has now appeared in His holy name through this movement, we canhope that these asuric fathers will be annihilated and the kingdom of Godestablished all over the world. The entire world is now full of many asuras inthe guise of politicians, gurus, sadhus, yogis and incarnations, and they aremisleading the general public away from Krsna consciousness, which can offertrue benefit to human society.                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT                 ayam tv asabhyas tava janma nau grhe                 srutvagrajams te nyavadhit suresvara                  sa te 'vataram purusaih samarpitam                  srutvadhunaivabhisaraty udayudhah                               SYNONYMS   ayam--this (rascal); tu--but; asabhyah--who is not civilized at all (asurameans "uncivilized," and sura means "civilized"); tava--of Your Lordship; janma--the birth; nau--our; grhe--into the home; srutva--after hearing; agrajan te--all the brothers born before You; nyavadhit--killed; sura-isvara--O Lord of thesuras, the civilized persons; sah--he (that uncivilized Kamsa); te--Your;avataram--appearance; purusaih--by his lieutenants; samarpitam--being informedof; srutva--after hearing; adhuna--now; eva--indeed; abhisarati--will comeimmediately; udayudhah--with raised weapons.                             TRANSLATION   O my Lord, Lord of the demigods, after hearing the prophecy that You wouldtake birth in our home and kill him, this uncivilized Kamsa killed so many ofYour elder brothers. As soon as he hears from his lieutenants that You haveappeared, he will immediately come with weapons to kill You.                               PURPORT
   Kamsa has here been described as asabhya, meaning "uncivilized" or "mostheinous," because he killed the many children of his sister. When he heard theprophecy that he would be killed by her eighth son, this uncivilized man, Kamsa,was immediately ready to kill his innocent sister on the occasion of hermarriage. An uncivilized man can do anything for the satisfaction of his senses.He can kill children, he can kill cows, he can kill brahmanas, he can kill oldmen; he has no mercy for anyone. According to the Vedic civilization, cows,women, children, old men and brahmanas should be excused if they are at fault.But asuras, uncivilized men, do not care about that. At the present moment, thekilling of cows and the killing of children is going on unrestrictedly, andtherefore this civilization is not at all human, and those who are conductingthis condemned civilization are uncivilized asuras.   Such uncivilized men are not in favor of the Krsna consciousness movement. Aspublic officers, they declare without hesitation that the chanting of the HareKrsna movement is a nuisance, although Bhagavad-gita clearly says, satatamkirtayanto mam yatantas ca drdha-vratah. According to this verse, it is the dutyof the mahatmas to chant the Hare Krsna mantra and try to spread it all over theworld to the best of their ability. Unfortunately, society is in such anuncivilized state that there are so-called mahatmas who are prepared to killcows and children and stop the Hare Krsna movement. Such uncivilized activitieswere actually demonstrated in opposition to the Hare Krsna movement's Bombaycenter, Hare Krsna Land. As Kamsa was not expected to kill the beautiful childof Devaki and Vasudeva, the uncivilized society, although unhappy about theadvancement of the Krsna consciousness movement, cannot be expected to stop it.Yet we must face many difficulties in many different ways. Although Krsna cannotbe killed, Vasudeva, as the father of Krsna, was trembling because in affectionhe thought that Kamsa would immediately come and kill his son. Similarly,although the Krsna consciousness movement and Krsna are not different and noasuras can check it, we are afraid that at any moment the asuras can stop thismovement in any part of the world.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                       athainam atmajam viksya                         maha-purusa-laksanam                         devaki tam upadhavat                        kamsad bhita suvismita                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; atha--after this offering ofprayers by Vasudeva; enam--this Krsna; atmajam--their son; viksya--observing;maha-purusa-laksanam--with all the symptoms of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Visnu; devaki--Krsna's mother; tam--unto Him (Krsna); upadhavat--offered prayers; kamsat--of Kamsa; bhita--being afraid; su-vismita--and alsobeing astonished by seeing such a wonderful child.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thereafter, having seen that her child had allthe symptoms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Devaki, who was very muchafraid of Kamsa and unusually astonished, began to offer prayers to the Lord.                               PURPORT
   The word suvismita, meaning "astonished," is significant in this verse.Devaki and her husband, Vasudeva, were assured that their child was the SupremePersonality of Godhead and could not be killed by Kamsa, but because ofaffection, as they thought of Kamsa's previous atrocities, they weresimultaneously afraid that Krsna would be killed. This is why the word suvismitahas been used. Similarly, we are also astounded upon thinking of whether thismovement will be killed by the asuras or will continue to advance without fear.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                           sri-devaky uvaca                 rupam yat tat prahur avyaktam adyam                  brahma jyotir nirgunam nirvikaram                   satta-matram nirvisesam niriham                 sa tvam saksad visnur adhyatma-dipah                               SYNONYMS   sri-devaki uvaca--Sri Devaki said; rupam--form or substance; yat tat--becauseYou are the same substance; prahuh--You are sometimes called; avyaktam--notperceivable by the material senses (atah sri-krsna-namadi na bhaved grahyamindriyaih); adyam--You are the original cause; brahma--You are known as Brahman;jyotih--light; nirgunam--without material qualities; nirvikaram--without change,the same form of Visnu perpetually; satta-matram--the original substance, thecause of everything; nirvisesam--You are present everywhere as the Supersoul(within the heart of a human being and within the heart of an animal, the samesubstance is present); niriham--without material desires; sah--that SupremePerson; tvam--Your Lordship; saksat--directly; visnuh--Lord Visnu; adhyatma-dipah--the light for all transcendental knowledge (knowing You, one knowseverything: yasmin vijnate sarvam evam vijnatam bhavati).                             TRANSLATION   Sri Devaki said: My dear Lord, there are different Vedas, some of whichdescribe You as unperceivable through words and the mind. Yet You are the originof the entire cosmic manifestation. You are Brahman, the greatest of everything,full of effulgence like the sun. You have no material cause, You are free fromchange and deviation, and You have no material desires. Thus the Vedas say thatYou are the substance. Therefore, my Lord, You are directly the origin of allVedic statements, and by understanding You, one gradually understandseverything. You are different from the light of Brahman and Paramatma, yet Youare not different from them. Everything emanates from You. Indeed, You are thecause of all causes, Lord Visnu, the light of all transcendental knowledge.                               PURPORT   Visnu is the origin of everything, and there is no difference between LordVisnu and Lord Krsna because both of Them are visnu-tattva. From the Rg Veda weunderstand, om tad visnoh paramam padam: the original substance is the all-pervading Lord Visnu, who is also Paramatma and the effulgent Brahman. Theliving entities are also part and parcel of Visnu, who has various energies(parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate svabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca). Visnu, orKrsna, is therefore everything. Lord Krsna says in the Bhagavad-gita (10.8),aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate: "I am the source of allspiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me." Krsna, therefore,is the original cause of everything (sarva-karana-karanam). When Visnu expands
in His all-pervading aspect, we should understand Him to be the nirakara-nirvisesa-brahmajyoti.   Although everything emanates from Krsna, He is ultimately a person. Aham adirhi devanam: He is the origin of Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara, and from them manyother demigods are manifested. Krsna therefore says in Bhagavad-gita (14.27),brahmano hi pratisthaham; "Brahman rests upon Me." The Lord also says:                      ye 'py anya-devata-bhakta                       yajante sraddhayanvitah                       te 'pi mam eva kaunteya                       yajanty avidhi-purvakam   "Whatever a man may sacrifice to other gods, O son of Kunti, is really meantfor Me alone, but it is offered without true understanding." (Bg. 9.23) Thereare many persons who worship different demigods, considering all of them to beseparate gods, which in fact they are not. The fact is that every demigod, andevery living entity, is part and parcel of Krsna (mamaivamso jiva-loke jiva-bhutah). The demigods are also in the category of living entities; they are notseparate gods. But men whose knowledge is immature and contaminated by the modesof material nature worship various demigods, according to their intelligence.Therefore they are rebuked in Bhagavad-gita (kamais tais tair hrta-jnanahprapadyante 'nya-devatah). Because they are unintelligent and not very advancedand have not properly considered the truth, they take to the worship of variousdemigods or speculate according to various philosophies, such as the Mayavadaphilosophy.   Krsna, Visnu, is the actual origin of everything. As stated in the Vedas,yasya bhasa sarvam idam vibhati. The Absolute Truth is described later in theSrimad-Bhagavatam (10.28.15) as satyam jnanam anantam yad brahma-jyotihsanatanam. The brahmajyoti is sanatana, eternal, yet it is dependent on Krsna(brahmano hi pratisthaham). The Brahma-samhita states that the Lord is all-pervading. Andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham: He is within this universe,and He is within the atom as Paramatma. Yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti-kotisv asesa-vasudhadi-vibhu-ti-bhinnam: Brahman is also not independent of Him.Therefore whatever a philosopher may describe is ultimately Krsna, or Lord Visnu(sarvam khalv idam brahma, param brahma param dhama pavitram paramam bhavan).According to different phases of understanding, Lord Visnu is differentlydescribed, but in fact He is the origin of everything.   Because Devaki was an unalloyed devotee, she could understand that the sameLord Visnu had appeared as her son. Therefore, after the prayers of Vasudeva,Devaki offered her prayers. She was very frightened because of her brother'satrocities. Devaki said, "My dear Lord, Your eternal forms, like Narayana, LordRama, Sesa, Varaha, Nrsimha, Vamana, Baladeva, and millions of similarincarnations emanating from Visnu, are described in the Vedic literature asoriginal. You are original because all Your forms as incarnations are outside ofthis material creation. Your form was existing before this cosmic manifestationwas created. Your forms are eternal and all-pervading. They are self-effulgent,changeless and uncontaminated by the material qualities. Such eternal forms areever-cognizant and full of bliss; they are situated in transcendental goodnessand are always engaged in different pastimes. You are not limited to aparticular form only; all such transcendental, eternal forms are self-sufficient. I can understand that You are the Supreme Lord Visnu." We mayconclude, therefore, that Lord Visnu is everything, although He is alsodifferent from everything. This is the acintya-bhedabheda-tattva philosophy.                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT
                    naste loke dvi-parardhavasane                    maha-bhutesv adi-bhutam gatesu                   vyakte 'vyaktam kala-vegena yate                  bhavan ekah sisyate 'sesa-samjnah                               SYNONYMS   naste--after the annihilation; loke--of the cosmic manifestation; dvi-parardha-avasane--after millions and millions of years (the life of Brahma);maha-bhutesu--when the five primary elements (earth, water, fire, air andether); adi-bhutam gatesu--enter within the subtle elements of sense perception;vyakte--when everything manifested; avyaktam--into the unmanifested; kala-vegena--by the force of time; yate--enters; bhavan--Your Lordship; ekah--onlyone; sisyate--remains; asesa-samjnah--the same one with different names.                             TRANSLATION   After millions of years, at the time of cosmic annihilation, when everything,manifested and unmanifested, is annihilated by the force of time, the five grosselements enter into the subtle conception, and the manifested categories enterinto the unmanifested substance. At that time, You alone remain, and You areknown as Ananta Sesa-naga.                               PURPORT   At the time of annihilation, the five gross elements--earth, water, fire, airand ether--enter into the mind, intelligence and false ego (ahankara), and theentire cosmic manifestation enters into the spiritual energy of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, who alone remains as the origin of everything. The Lordis therefore known as Sesa-naga, as Adi-purusa and by many other names.   Devaki therefore prayed, "After many millions of years, when Lord Brahmacomes to the end of his life, the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation takesplace. At that time the five elements--namely earth, water, fire, air and ether--enter into the mahat-tattva. The mahat-tattva again enters, by the force oftime, into the nonmanifested total material energy; the total material energyenters into the energetic pradhana, and the pradhana enters into You. Thereforeafter the annihilation of the whole cosmic manifestation, You alone remain withYour transcendental name, form, quality and paraphernalia.   "My Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You because You are thedirector of the unmanifested total energy, and the ultimate reservoir of thematerial nature. My Lord, the whole cosmic manifestation is under the influenceof time, beginning from the moment up to the duration of the year. All act underYour direction. You are the original director of everything and the reservoir ofall potent energies."                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                yo 'yam kalas tasya te 'vyakta-bandho                   cestam ahus cestate yena visvam                    nimesadir vatsaranto mahiyams                  tam tvesanam ksema-dhama prapadye                               SYNONYMS   yah--that which; ayam--this; kalah--time (minutes, hours, seconds); tasya--ofHim; te--of You; avyakta-bandho--O my Lord, You are the inaugurator of the
unmanifested (the original mahat-tattva or prakrti); cestam--attempt orpastimes; ahuh--it is said; cestate--works; yena--by which; visvam--the entirecreation; nimesa-adih--beginning with minute parts of time; vatsara-antah--up tothe limit of a year; mahiyan--powerful; tam--unto Your Lordship; tva isanam--unto You, the supreme controller; ksema-dhama--the reservoir of allauspiciousness; prapadye--I offer full surrender.                             TRANSLATION   O inaugurator of the material energy, this wonderful creation works under thecontrol of powerful time, which is divided into seconds, minutes, hours andyears. This element of time, which extends for many millions of years, is butanother form of Lord Visnu. For Your pastimes, You act as the controller oftime, but You are the reservoir of all good fortune. Let me offer my fullsurrender unto Your Lordship.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.52):                yac-caksur esa savita sakala-grahanam                 raja samasta-sura-murtir asesa-tejah               yasyajnaya bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakro                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   "The sun is the king of all planetary systems and has unlimited potency inheat and light. I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, under whose control even the sun, which is considered to be the eye ofthe Lord, rotates within the fixed orbit of eternal time." Although we see thecosmic manifestation as gigantic and wonderful, it is within the limitations ofkala, the time factor. This time factor is also controlled by the SupremePersonality of Godhead, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (mayadhyaksena prakrtihsuyate sa-caracaram). Prakrti, the cosmic manifestation, is under the control oftime. Indeed, everything is under the control of time, and time is controlled bythe Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore the Supreme Lord has no fear ofthe onslaughts of time. Time is estimated according to the movements of the sun(savita). Every minute, every second, every day, every night, every month andevery year of time can be calculated according to the sun's movements. But thesun is not independent, for it is under time's control. Bhramati sambhrta-kala-cakrah: the sun moves within the kala-cakra, the orbit of time. The sun is underthe control of time, and time is controlled by the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Therefore the Lord has no fear of time.   The Lord is addressed here as avyakta-bandhu, or the inaugurator of themovements of the entire cosmic manifestation. Sometimes the cosmic manifestationis compared to a potter's wheel. When a potter's wheel is spinning, who has setit in motion? It is the potter, of course, although sometimes we can see onlythe motion of the wheel and cannot see the potter himself. Therefore the Lord,who is behind the motion of the cosmos, is called avyakta-bandhu. Everything iswithin the limits of time, but time moves under the direction of the Lord, whois therefore not within time's limit.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                  martyo mrtyu-vyala-bhitah palayan                 lokan sarvan nirbhayam nadhyagacchat                  tvat padabjam prapya yadrcchayadya
                   susthah sete mrtyur asmad apaiti                               SYNONYMS   martyah--the living entities who are sure to die; mrtyu-vyala-bhitah--afraidof the serpent of death; palayan--running (as soon as a serpent is seen,everyone runs away, fearing immediate death); lokan--to the different planets;sarvan--all; nirbhayam--fearlessness; na adhyagacchat--do not obtain; tvat-pada-abjam--of Your lotus feet; prapya--obtaining the shelter; yadrcchaya--by chance,by the mercy of Your Lordship and Your representative, the spiritual master(guru-krpa, krsna-krpa); adya--presently; su-sthah--being undisturbed andmentally composed; sete--are sleeping; mrtyuh--death; asmat--from those persons;apaiti--flees.                             TRANSLATION   No one in this material world has become free from the four principles birth,death, old age and disease, even by fleeing to various planets. But now that Youhave appeared, My Lord, death is fleeing in fear of You, and the livingentities, having obtained shelter at Your lotus feet by Your mercy, are sleepingin full mental peace.                               PURPORT   There are different categories of living entities, but everyone is afraid ofdeath. The highest aim of the karmis is to be promoted to the higher, heavenlyplanets, where the duration of life is very long. As stated in Bhagavad-gita(8.17), sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmano viduh: one day of Brahma equals1,000 yugas, and each yuga consists of 4,300,000 years. Similarly, Brahma has anight of 1,000 times 4,300,000 years. In this way, we may calculate Brahma'smonth and year, but even Brahma, who lives for millions and millions of years(dvi-parardha-kala), also must die. According to Vedic sastra, the inhabitantsof the higher planetary systems live for 10,000 years, and just as Brahma's dayis calculated to equal 4,300,000,000 of our years, one day in the higherplanetary systems equals six of our months. Karmis, therefore, try for promotionto the higher planetary systems, but this cannot free them from death. In thismaterial world, everyone from Brahma to the insignificant ant must die.Therefore this world is called martya-loka. As Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita(8.16), abrahma-bhuvanal lokah punar avartino'rjuna: as long as one is withinthis material world, either on Brahmaloka or on any other loka within thisuniverse, one must undergo the kala-cakra of one life after another (bhutvabhutva praliyate). But if one returns to the Supreme Personality of Godhead (yadgatva na nivartante), one need not reenter the limits of time. Therefore,devotees who have taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord can sleepvery peacefully with this assurance from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Asconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9), tyaktva deham punar janma naiti: after givingup the present body, a devotee who has understood Krsna as He is need not returnto this material world.   The constitutional position for the living entity is eternity (na hanyatehanyamane sarire, nityah sasvato 'yam). Every living entity is eternal. Butbecause of having fallen into this material world, one wanders within theuniverse, continually changing from one body to another. Caitanya Mahaprabhusays:                brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva               guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija   (Cc. Madhya 19.151)
   Everyone is wandering up and down within this universe, but one who issufficiently fortunate comes in contact with Krsna consciousness, by the mercyof the spiritual master, and takes to the path of devotional service. Then oneis assured of eternal life, with no fear of death. When Krsna appears, everyoneis freed from fear of death, yet Devaki felt, "We are still afraid of Kamsa,although You have appeared as our son." She was more or less bewildered as towhy this should be so, and she appealed to the Lord to free her and Vasudevafrom this fear.   In this connection, it may be noted that the moon is one of the heavenlyplanets. From the Vedic literature we understand that one who goes to the moonreceives a life with a duration of ten thousand years in which to enjoy thefruits of pious activities. If our so-called scientists are going to the moon,why should they come back here? We must conclude without a doubt that they havenever gone to the moon. To go to the moon, one must have the qualification ofpious activities. Then one may go there and live. If one has gone to the moon,why should he return to this planet, where life is of a very short duration?                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                  sa tvam ghorad ugrasenatmajan nas                  trahi trastan bhrtya-vitrasa-hasi                 rupam cedam paurusam dhyana-dhisnyam                 ma pratyaksam mamsa-drsam krsisthah                               SYNONYMS   sah--Your Lordship; tvam--You; ghorat--terribly fierce; ugrasena-atmajat--from the son of Ugrasena; nah--us; trahi--kindly protect; trastan--who are verymuch afraid (of him); bhrtya-vitrasa-ha asi--You are naturally the destroyer ofthe fear of Your servants; rupam--in Your Visnu form; ca--also; idam--this;paurusam--as the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhyana-dhisnyam--who isappreciated by meditation; ma--not; pratyaksam--directly visible; mamsa-drsam--to those who see with their material eyes; krsisthah--please be.                             TRANSLATION   My Lord, because You dispel all the fear of Your devotees, I request You tosave us and give us protection from the terrible fear of Kamsa. Your form asVisnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is appreciated by yogis inmeditation. Please make this form invisible to those who see with material eyes.                               PURPORT   The word dhyana-dhisnyam is significant in this verse because the form ofLord Visnu is meditated upon by yogis (dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa pasyantiyam yoginah). Devaki requested the Lord, who had appeared as Visnu, to concealthat form, for she wanted to see the Lord as an ordinary child, like a childappreciated by persons who have material eyes. Devaki wanted to see whether theSupreme Personality of Godhead had factually appeared or she was dreaming theVisnu form. If Kamsa were to come, she thought, upon seeing the Visnu form hewould immediately kill the child, but if he saw a human child, he mightreconsider. Devaki was afraid of Ugrasena-atmaja; that is, she was afraid not ofUgrasena and his men, but of the son of Ugrasena. Thus she requested the Lord todissipate that fear, since He is always ready to give protection (abhayam) toHis devotees. "My Lord," she prayed, "I request You to save me from the cruel
hands of the son of Ugrasena, Kamsa. I am praying to Your Lordship to pleaserescue me from this fearful condition because You are always ready to giveprotection to Your servitors." The Lord has confirmed this statement in theBhagavad-gita by assuring Arjuna, "You may declare to the world, My devoteeshall never be vanquished."   While thus praying to the Lord for rescue, mother Devaki expressed hermotherly affection: "I understand that this transcendental form is generallyperceived in meditation by the great sages, but I am still afraid because assoon as Kamsa understands that You have appeared, he might harm You. So Irequest that for the time being You become invisible to our material eyes." Inother words, she requested the Lord to assume the form of an ordinary child. "Myonly cause of fear from my brother Kamsa is due to Your appearance. My LordMadhusudana, Kamsa may know that You are already born. Therefore I request Youto conceal this four-armed form of Your Lordship, which holds the four symbolsof Visnu--namely the conchshell, the disc, the club and the lotus flower. Mydear Lord, at the end of the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation, You putthe whole universe within Your abdomen; still, by Your unalloyed mercy, You haveappeared in my womb. I am surprised that You imitate the activities of ordinaryhuman beings just to please Your devotee."   Devaki was so afraid of Kamsa that she could not believe that Kamsa would beunable to kill Lord Visnu, who was personally present. Out of motherlyaffection, therefore, she requested the Supreme Personality of Godhead todisappear. Although because of the Lord's disappearance Kamsa would harass hermore and more, thinking that the child born of her was hidden somewhere, she didnot want the transcendental child to be harassed and killed. Therefore sherequested Lord Visnu to disappear. Later, when harassed, she would think of Himwithin her mind.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                       janma te mayy asau papo                        ma vidyan madhusudana                       samudvije bhavad-dhetoh                       kamsad aham adhira-dhih                               SYNONYMS   janma--the birth; te--of Your Lordship; mayi--in my (womb); asau--that Kamsa;papah--extremely sinful; ma vidyat--may be unable to understand; madhusudana--OMadhusudana; samudvije--I am full of anxiety; bhavat-hetoh--because of Yourappearance; kamsat--because of Kamsa, with whom I have had such bad experience;aham--I; adhira-dhih--have become more and more anxious.                             TRANSLATION   O Madhusudana, because of Your appearance, I am becoming more and moreanxious in fear of Kamsa. Therefore, please arrange for that sinful Kamsa to beunable to understand that You have taken birth from my womb.                               PURPORT   Devaki addressed the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Madhusudana. She wasaware that the Lord had killed many demons like Madhu who were hundreds andthousands of times more powerful than Kamsa, yet because of affection for thetranscendental child, she believed that Kamsa could kill Him. Instead of
thinking of the unlimited power of the Lord, she thought of the Lord withaffection, and therefore she requested the transcendental child to disappear.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                        upasamhara visvatmann                         ado rupam alaukikam                       sankha-cakra-gada-padma-                      sriya justam catur-bhujam                               SYNONYMS   upasamhara--withdraw; visvatman--O all-pervading Supreme Personality ofGodhead; adah--that; rupam--form; alaukikam--which is unnatural in this world;sankha-cakra-gada-padma--of the conchshell, disc, club and lotus; sriya--withthese opulences; justam--decorated; catuh-bhujam--four hands.                             TRANSLATION   O my Lord, You are the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Yourtranscendental four-armed form, holding conchshell, disc, club and lotus, isunnatural for this world. Please withdraw this form [and become just like anatural human child so that I may try to hide You somewhere].                               PURPORT   Devaki was thinking of hiding the Supreme Personality of Godhead and nothanding Him over to Kamsa as she had all her previous children. AlthoughVasudeva had promised to hand over every child to Kamsa, this time he wanted tobreak his promise and hide the child somewhere. But because of the Lord'sappearance in this surprising four-armed form, He would be impossible to hide.                               TEXT 31                                 TEXT                  visvam yad etat sva-tanau nisante                   yathavakasam purusah paro bhavan                 bibharti so 'yam mama garbhago 'bhud                   aho nr-lokasya vidambanam hi tat                               SYNONYMS   visvam--the entire cosmic manifestation; yat etat--containing all moving andnonmoving creations; sva-tanau--within Your body; nisa-ante--at the time ofdevastation; yatha-avakasam--shelter in Your body without difficulty; purusah--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parah--transcendental; bhavan--YourLordship; bibharti--keep; sah--that (Supreme Personality of Godhead); ayam--thisform; mama--my; garbha-gah--came within my womb; abhut--it so happened; aho--alas; nr-lokasya--within this material world of living entities; vidambanam--itis impossible to think of; hi--indeed; tat--that (kind of conception).                             TRANSLATION   At the time of devastation, the entire cosmos, containing all created movingand nonmoving entities, enters Your transcendental body and is held there
without difficulty. But now this transcendental form has taken birth from mywomb. People will not be able to believe this, and I shall become an object ofridicule.                               PURPORT   As explained in Caitanya-caritamrta, loving service to the Personality ofGodhead is of two different kinds: aisvarya-purna, full of opulence, andaisvarya-sithila, without opulence. Real love of Godhead begins with aisvarya-sithila, simply on the basis of pure love.                premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena                 santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti               yam syamasundaram acintya-guna-svarupam                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   (Brahma-samhita 5.38)   Pure devotees, whose eyes are anointed with the ointment of prema, love, wantto see the Supreme Personality of Godhead as Syamasundara, Muralidhara, with aflute swaying in His two hands. This is the form available to the inhabitants ofVrndavana, who are all in love with the Supreme Personality of Godhead asSyamasundara, not as Lord Visnu, Narayana, who is worshiped in Vaikuntha, wherethe devotees admire His opulence. Although Devaki is not on the Vrndavanaplatform, she is near the Vrndavana platform. On the Vrndavana platform themother of Krsna is mother Yasoda, and on the Mathura and Dvaraka platform themother of Krsna is Devaki. In Mathura and Dvaraka the love for the Lord is mixedwith appreciation of His opulence, but in Vrndavana the opulence of the SupremePersonality of Godhead is not exhibited.   There are five stages of loving service to the Supreme Personality ofGodhead--santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya and madhurya. Devaki is on the platformof vatsalya. She wanted to deal with her eternal son, Krsna, in that stage oflove, and therefore she wanted the Supreme Personality of Godhead to withdrawHis opulent form of Visnu. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura illuminates thisfact very clearly in his explanation of this verse.   Bhakti, bhagavan and bhakta do not belong to the material world. This isconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita (14.26):                       mam ca yo 'vyabhicarena                         bhakti-yogena sevate                        sa gunan samatityaitan                        brahma-bhuyaya kalpate   "One who engages in the spiritual activities of unalloyed devotional serviceimmediately transcends the modes of material nature and is elevated to thespiritual platform." From the very beginning of one's transactions in bhakti,one is situated on the transcendental platform. Vasudeva and Devaki, therefore,being situated in a completely pure devotional state, are beyond this materialworld and are not subject to material fear. In the transcendental world,however, because of pure devotion, there is a similar conception of fear, whichis due to intense love.   As stated in Bhagavad-gita (bhaktya mam abhijanati yavan yas casmi tattvatah)and as confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah), without bhaktione cannot understand the spiritual situation of the Lord. Bhakti may beconsidered in three stages, called guni-bhuta, pradhani-bhuta and kevala, andaccording to these stages there are three divisions, which are called jnana,jnanamayi and rati, or prema--that is, simple knowledge, love mixed withknowledge, and pure love. By simple knowledge, one can perceive transcendental
bliss without variety. This perception is called mana-bhuti. When one comes tothe stage of jnanamayi, one realizes the transcendental opulences of thePersonality of Godhead. But when one reaches pure love, one realizes thetranscendental form of the Lord as Lord Krsna or Lord Rama. This is what iswanted. Especially in the madhurya-rasa, one becomes attached to the Personalityof Godhead (sri-vigraha-nistha-rupadi). Then loving transactions between theLord and the devotee begin.   The special significance of Krsna's bearing a flute in His hands inVrajabhumi, Vrndavana, is described as madhuri. .. virajate. The form of theLord with a flute in His hands is most attractive, and the one who is mostsublimely attracted is Srimati Radharani, Radhika. She enjoys supremely blissfulassociation with Krsna. Sometimes people cannot understand why Radhika's name isnot mentioned in Srimad-Bhagavatam. Actually, however, Radhika can be understoodfrom the word aradhana, which indicates that She enjoys the highest lovingaffairs with Krsna.   Not wanting to be ridiculed for having given birth to Visnu, Devaki wantedKrsna, with two hands, and therefore she requested the Lord to change His form.                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                          sri-bhagavan uvaca                      tvam eva purva-sarge 'bhuh                       prsnih svayambhuve sati                         tadayam sutapa nama                         prajapatir akalmasah                               SYNONYMS   sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said to Devaki; tvam--you; eva--indeed; purva-sarge--in a previous millennium; abhuh--became; prsnih--by the name Prsni; svayambhuve--the millennium of Svayambhuva Manu; sati--Osupremely chaste; tada--at that time; ayam--Vasudeva; sutapa--Sutapa; nama--bythe name; prajapatih--a Prajapati; akalmasah--a spotlessly pious person.                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied: My dear mother, best of thechaste, in your previous birth, in the Svayambhuva millennium, you were known asPrsni, and Vasudeva, who was the most pious Prajapati, was named Sutapa.                               PURPORT   The Supreme Personality of Godhead made it clear that Devaki had not becomeHis mother only now; rather, she had been His mother previously also. Krsna iseternal, and His selection of a father and mother from among His devotees takesplace eternally. Previously also, Devaki had been the Lord's mother and Vasudevathe Lord's father, and they were named Prsni and Sutapa. When the SupremePersonality of Godhead appears, He accepts His eternal father and mother, andthey accept Krsna as their son. This pastime takes place eternally and istherefore called nitya-lila. Thus there was no cause for surprise or ridicule.As confirmed by the Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (4.9):                       janma karma ca me divyam                       evam yo vetti tattvatah                      tyaktva deham punar janma                       naiti mam eti so 'rjuna
   "One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activities doesnot, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, butattains My eternal abode, O Arjuna." One should try to understand the appearanceand disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from Vedic authorities,not from imagination. One who follows his imaginations about the SupremePersonality of Godhead is condemned.                         avajananti mam mudha                        manusim tanum asritam                        param bhavam ajananto                        mama bhuta-mahesvaram   (Bg. 9.11)   The Lord appears as the son of His devotee by His param bhavam. The wordbhava refers to the stage of pure love, which has nothing to do with materialtransactions.                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                       yuvam vai brahmanadistau                        praja-sarge yada tatah                       sanniyamyendriya-gramam                        tepathe paramam tapah                               SYNONYMS   yuvam--both of you (Prsni and Sutapa); vai--indeed; brahmana adistau--orderedby Lord Brahma (who is known as Pitamaha, the father of the Prajapatis); praja-sarge--in the creation of progeny; yada--when; tatah--thereafter; sanniyamya--keeping under full control; indriya-gramam--the senses; tepathe--underwent;paramam--very great; tapah--austerity.                             TRANSLATION   When both of you were ordered by Lord Brahma to create progeny, you firstunderwent severe austerities by controlling your senses.                               PURPORT   Here is an instruction about how to use one's senses to create progeny.According to Vedic principles, before creating progeny one must fully controlthe senses. This control takes place through the garbhadhana-samskara. In Indiathere is great agitation for birth control in various mechanical ways, but birthcannot be mechanically controlled. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (13.9), janma-mrtyu jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosanudarsanam: birth, death, old age and disease arecertainly the primary distresses of the material world. People are trying tocontrol birth, but they are not able to control death; and if one cannot controldeath, one cannot control birth either. In other words, artificially controllingbirth is not any more feasible than artificially controlling death.   According to Vedic civilization, procreation should not be contrary toreligious principles, and then the birthrate will be controlled. As stated inBhagavad-gita (7.11), dharmaviruddho bhutesu kamo'smi: sex not contrary toreligious principles is a representation of the Supreme Lord. People should beeducated in how to give birth to good children through samskaras, beginning with
the garbhadhana-samskara; birth should not be controlled by artificial means,for this will lead to a civilization of animals. If one follows religiousprinciples, he automatically practices birth control because if one isspiritually educated he knows that the after-effects of sex are various types ofmisery (bahu-duhkha-bhaja). One who is spiritually advanced does not indulge inuncontrolled sex. Therefore, instead of being forced to refrain from sex orrefrain from giving birth to many children, people should be spirituallyeducated, and then birth control will automatically follow.   If one is determined to make spiritual advancement, he will not beget a childunless able to make that child a devotee. As stated in Srimad-Bhagavatam(5.5.18), pita na sa syat: one should not become a father unless one is able toprotect his child from mrtyu, the path of birth and death. But where is thereeducation about this? A responsible father never begets children like cats anddogs. Instead of being encouraged to adopt artificial means of birth control,people should be educated in Krsna consciousness because only then will theyunderstand their responsibility to their children. If one can beget children whowill be devotees and be taught to turn aside from the path of birth and death(mrtyu-samsara-vartmani), there is no need of birth control. Rather, one shouldbe encouraged to beget children. Artificial means of birth control have novalue. Whether one begets children or does not, a population of men who are likecats and dogs will never make human society happy. It is therefore necessary forpeople to be educated spiritually so that instead of begetting children likecats and dogs, they will undergo austerities to produce devotees. This will maketheir lives successful.                             TEXTS 34-35                                 TEXT                         varsa-vatatapa-hima-                        gharma-kala-gunan anu                        sahamanau svasa-rodha-                        vinirdhuta-mano-malau                         sirna-parnanilaharav                          upasantena cetasa                       mattah kaman abhipsantau                         mad-aradhanam ihatuh                               SYNONYMS   varsa--the rain; vata--strong wind; atapa--strong sunshine; hima--severecold; gharma--heat; kala-gunan anu--according to seasonal changes; sahamanau--byenduring; svasa-rodha--by practicing yoga, controlling the breath; vinirdhuta--the dirty things accumulated in the mind were completely washed away; manah-malau--the mind became clean, free from material contamination; sirna--rejected,dry; parna--leaves from the trees; anila--and air; aharau--eating; upasantena--peaceful; cetasa--with a fully controlled mind; mattah--from Me; kamanabhipsantau--desiring to beg some benediction; mat--My; aradhanam--worship;ihatuh--you both executed.                             TRANSLATION   My dear father and mother, you endured rain, wind, strong sun, scorching heatand severe cold, suffering all sorts of inconvenience according to differentseasons. By practicing pranayama to control the air within the body throughyoga, and by eating only air and dry leaves fallen from the trees, you cleansed
from your minds all dirty things. In this way, desiring a benediction from Me,you worshiped Me with peaceful minds.                               PURPORT   Vasudeva and Devaki did not obtain the Supreme Personality of Godhead astheir son very easily, nor does the Supreme Godhead accept merely anyone as Hisfather and mother. Here we can see how Vasudeva and Devaki obtained Krsna astheir eternal son. In our own lives, we are meant to follow the principlesindicated herewith for getting good children. Of course, it is not possible foreveryone to get Krsna as his son, but at least one can get very good sons anddaughters for the benefit of human society. In Bhagavad-gita it is said that ifhuman beings do not follow the spiritual way of life, there will be an increaseof varna-sankara population, population begotten like cats and dogs, and theentire world will become like hell. Not practicing Krsna consciousness butsimply encouraging artificial means to check the population will be futile; thepopulation will increase, and it will consist of varna-sankara, unwantedprogeny. It is better to teach people how to beget children not like hogs anddogs, but in controlled life.   Human life is meant not for becoming a hog or dog, but for tapo divyam,transcendental austerity. Everyone should be taught to undergo austerity,tapasya. Although it may not be possible to undergo tapasya like that of Prsniand Sutapa, the sastra has given an opportunity for a method of tapasya veryeasy to perform--the sankirtana movement. One cannot expect to undergo tapasyato get Krsna as one's child, yet simply by chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra(kirtanad eva krsnasya), one can become so pure that one becomes free from allthe contamination of this material world (mukta-sangah) and goes back home, backto Godhead (param vrajet). The Krsna consciousness movement, therefore, isteaching people not to adopt artificial means of happiness, but to take the realpath of happiness as prescribed in the sastra--the chanting of the Hare Krsnamantra--and become perfect in every aspect of material existence.                               TEXT 36                                 TEXT                       evam vam tapyatos tivram                        tapah parama-duskaram                        divya-varsa-sahasrani                        dvadaseyur mad-atmanoh                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this way; vam--for both of you; tapyatoh--executing austerities;tivram--very severe; tapah--austerity; parama-duskaram--extremely difficult toexecute; divya-varsa--celestial years, or years counted according to the higherplanetary system; sahasrani--thousand; dvadasa--twelve; iyuh--passed; mat-atmanoh--simply engaged in consciousness of Me.                             TRANSLATION   Thus you spent twelve thousand celestial years performing difficultactivities of tapasya in consciousness of Me [Krsna consciousness].                             TEXTS 37-38                                 TEXT
                       tada vam paritusto 'ham                          amuna vapusanaghe                       tapasa sraddhaya nityam                       bhaktya ca hrdi bhavitah                        pradurasam varada-rad                         yuvayoh kama-ditsaya                        vriyatam vara ity ukte                        madrso vam vrtah sutah                               SYNONYMS   tada--then (after the expiry of twelve thousand celestial years); vam--withboth of you; paritustah aham--I was very much satisfied; amuna--by this; vapusa--in this form as Krsna; anaghe--O My dear sinless mother; tapasa--by austerity;sraddhaya--by faith; nityam--constantly (engaged); bhaktya--by devotionalservice; ca--as well as; hrdi--within the core of the heart; bhavitah--fixed (indetermination); pradurasam--appeared before you (in the same way); vara-da-rat--the best of all who can bestow benedictions; yuvayoh--of both of you; kama-ditsaya--wishing to fulfill the desire; vriyatam--asked you to open your minds;varah--for a benediction; iti ukte--when you were requested in this way;madrsah--exactly like Me; vam--of both of you; vrtah--was asked; sutah--as Yourson (you wanted a son exactly like Me).                             TRANSLATION   O sinless mother Devaki, after the expiry of twelve thousand celestial years,in which you constantly contemplated Me within the core of your heart with greatfaith, devotion and austerity, I was very much satisfied with you. Since I amthe best of all bestowers of benediction, I appeared in this same form as Krsnato ask you to take from Me the benediction you desired. You then expressed yourdesire to have a son exactly like Me.                               PURPORT   Twelve thousand years on the celestial planets is not a very long time forthose who live in the upper planetary system, although it may be very long forthose who live on this planet. Sutapa was the son of Brahma, and as we havealready understood from Bhagavad-gita (8.17), one day of Brahma equals manymillions of years according to our calculation (sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yadbrahmano viduh). We should be careful to understand that to get Krsna as one'sson, one must undergo such great austerities. If we want to get the SupremePersonality of Godhead to become one of us in this material world, this requiresgreat penance, but if we want to go back to Krsna (tyaktva deham punar janmanaiti mam eti so 'rjuna), we need only understand Him and love Him. Through loveonly, we can very easily go back home, back to Godhead. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhutherefore declared, prema pum-artho mahan: love of Godhead is the highestachievement for anyone.   As we have explained, in worship of the Lord there are three stages--jnana,jnanamayi and rati, or love. Sutapa and his wife, Prsni, inaugurated theirdevotional activities on the basis of full knowledge. Gradually they developedlove for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and when this love was mature, theLord appeared as Visnu, although Devaki then requested Him to assume the form ofKrsna. To love the Supreme Personality of Godhead more, we want a form of theLord like Krsna or Rama. We can engage in loving transactions with Krsnaespecially.
   In this age, we are all fallen, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead hasappeared as Caitanya Mahaprabhu to bestow upon us love of Godhead directly. Thiswas appreciated by the associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Rupa Gosvami said:                         namo maha-vadanyaya                        krsna-prema-pradaya te                       krsnaya krsna-caitanya-                       namne gaura-tvise namah   In this verse, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is described as maha-vadanya, the mostmunificent of charitable persons, because He gives Krsna so easily that one canattain Krsna simply by chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. We should thereforetake advantage of the benediction given by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and when bychanting the Hare Krsna mantra we are cleansed of all dirty things (ceto-darpana-marjanam), we shall be able to understand very easily that Krsna is theonly object of love (kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah param vrajet).   Therefore, one need not undergo severe penances for many thousands of years;one need only learn how to love Krsna and be always engaged in His service(sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah). Then one can very easily goback home, back to Godhead. Instead of bringing the Lord here for some materialpurpose, to have a son or whatever else, if we go back home, back to Godhead,our real relationship with the Lord is revealed, and we eternally engage in oureternal relationship. By chanting the Hare Krsna mantra, we gradually developour eternal relationship with the Supreme Person and thus attain the perfectioncalled svarupa-siddhi. We should take advantage of this benediction and go backhome, back to Godhead. Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has therefore sung, patita-pavana-hetu tava avatara: Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared as an incarnation todeliver all fallen souls like us and directly bestow upon us love of Godhead. Wemust take advantage of this great benediction of the great personality ofGodhead.                               TEXT 39                                 TEXT                        ajusta-gramya-visayav                        anapatyau ca dam-pati                       na vavrathe 'pavargam me                         mohitau deva-mayaya                               SYNONYMS   ajusta-gramya-visayau--for sex life and to beget a child like Me; anapatyau--because of possessing no son; ca--also; dam-pati--both husband and wife; na--never; vavrathe--asked for (any other benediction); apavargam--liberation fromthis world; me--from Me; mohitau--being so much attracted; deva-mayaya--bytranscendental love for Me (desiring Me as your beloved son).                             TRANSLATION   Being husband and wife but always sonless, you were attracted by sexualdesires, for by the influence of devamaya, transcendental love, you wanted tohave Me as your son. Therefore you never desired to be liberated from thismaterial world.                               PURPORT
   Vasudeva and Devaki had been dam-pati, husband and wife, since the time ofSutapa and Prsni, and they wanted to remain husband and wife in order to havethe Supreme Personality of Godhead as their son. This attachment came about bythe influence of devamaya. Loving Krsna as one's son is a Vedic principle.Vasudeva and Devaki never desired anything but to have the Lord as their son,yet for this purpose they apparently wanted to live like ordinary grhasthas forsexual indulgence. Although this was a transaction of spiritual potency, theirdesire appears like attachment for sex in conjugal life. If one wants to returnhome, back to Godhead, one must give up such desires. This is possible only whenone develops intense love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu has said:               niskincanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya                param param jigamisor bhava-sagarasya   (Cc. Madhya 11.8)   If one wants to go back home, back to Godhead, one must be niskincana, freefrom all material desires. Therefore, instead of desiring to have the Lord comehere and become one's son, one should desire to become free from all materialdesires (anyabhilasita-sunyam) and go back home, back to Godhead. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu teaches us in His Siksastaka:                    na dhanam na janam na sundarim                     kavitam va jagad-isa kamaye                      mama janmani janmanisvare                   bhavatad bhaktir ahaituki tvayi   "O almighty Lord, I have no desire to accumulate wealth, nor do I desirebeautiful women, nor do I want any number of followers. I only want Yourcauseless devotional service, birth after birth." One should not ask the Lord tofulfill any materially tainted desires.                               TEXT 40                                 TEXT                       gate mayi yuvam labdhva                       varam mat-sadrsam sutam                      gramyan bhogan abhunjatham                       yuvam prapta-manorathau                               SYNONYMS   gate mayi--after My departure; yuvam--both of you (husband and wife);labdhva--after receiving; varam--the benediction of (having a son); mat-sadrsam--exactly like Me; sutam--a son; gramyan bhogan--engagement in sex; abhunjatham--enjoyed; yuvam--both of you; prapta--having been achieved; manorathau--thedesired result of your aspirations.                             TRANSLATION   After you received that benediction and I disappeared, you engaged yourselvesin sex to have a son like Me, and I fulfilled your desire.                               PURPORT
   According to the Sanskrit dictionary Amara-kosa, sex life is also calledgramya-dharma, material desire, but in spiritual life this gramya-dharma, thematerial desire for sex, is not very much appreciated. If one has a tinge ofattachment for the material enjoyments of eating, sleeping, mating anddefending, one is not niskincana. But one really should be niskincana.Therefore, one should be free from the desire to beget a child like Krsna bysexual enjoyment. This is indirectly hinted at in this verse.                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT                         adrstvanyatamam loke                       silaudarya-gunaih samam                        aham suto vam abhavam                        prsnigarbha iti srutah                               SYNONYMS   adrstva--not finding; anyatamam--anyone else; loke--in this world; sila-audarya-gunaih--with the transcendental qualities of good character andmagnanimity; samam--equal to you; aham--I; sutah--the son; vam--of both of you;abhavam--became; prsni-garbhah--celebrated as born of Prsni; iti--thus; srutah--I am known.                             TRANSLATION   Since I found no one else as highly elevated as you in simplicity and otherqualities of good character, I appeared in this world as Prsnigarbha, or one whois celebrated as having taken birth from Prsni.                               PURPORT   In the Treta-yuga the Lord appeared as Prsnigarbha. Srila VisvanathaCakravarti Thakura says, prsnigarbha iti so 'yam treta-yugavataro laksyate.                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                        tayor vam punar evaham                         adityam asa kasyapat                         upendra iti vikhyato                        vamanatvac ca vamanah                               SYNONYMS   tayoh--of you two, husband and wife; vam--in both of you; punah eva--evenagain; aham--I Myself; adityam--in the womb of Aditi; asa--appeared; kasyapat--by the semen of Kasyapa Muni; upendrah--by the name Upendra; iti--thus;vikhyatah--celebrated; vamanatvat ca--and because of being a dwarf; vamanah--Iwas known as Vamana.                             TRANSLATION   In the next millennium, I again appeared from the two of you, who appeared asMy mother, Aditi, and My father, Kasyapa. I was known as Upendra, and because ofbeing a dwarf, I was also known as Vamana.
                               TEXT 43                                 TEXT                     trtiye 'smin bhave 'ham vai                        tenaiva vapusatha vam                        jato bhuyas tayor eva                       satyam me vyahrtam sati                               SYNONYMS   trtiye--for the third time; asmin bhave--in this appearance (as Krsna); aham--I Myself; vai--indeed; tena--with the same personality; eva--in this way;vapusa--by the form; atha--as; vam--of both of you; jatah--born; bhuyah--again;tayoh--of both of you; eva--indeed; satyam--take as truth; me--My; vyahrtam--words; sati--O supremely chaste.                             TRANSLATION   O supremely chaste mother, I, the same personality, have now appeared of youboth as your son for the third time. Take My words as the truth.                               PURPORT   The Supreme Personality of Godhead chooses a mother and father from whom totake birth again and again. The Lord took birth originally from Sutapa andPrsni, then from Kasyapa and Aditi, and again from the same father and mother,Vasudeva and Devaki. "In other appearances also," the Lord said, "I took theform of an ordinary child just to become your son so that we could reciprocateeternal love." Jiva Gosvami has explained this verse in his Krsna-sandarbha,Ninety-sixth Chapter, where he notes that in text 37 the Lord says, amunavapusa, meaning "by this same form." In other words, the Lord told Devaki, "Thistime I have appeared in My original form as Sri Krsna." Srila Jiva Gosvami saysthat the other forms were partial expansions of the Lord's original form, butbecause of the intense love developed by Prsni and Sutapa, the Lord appearedfrom Devaki and Vasudeva in His full opulence as Sri Krsna. In this verse theLord confirms, "I am the same Supreme Personality of Godhead, but I appear infull opulence as Sri Krsna." This is the purport of the words tenaiva vapusa.When the Lord mentioned the birth of Prsnigarbha, He did not say tenaiva vapusa,but He assured Devaki that in the third birth the Supreme Personality of GodheadKrsna had appeared, not His partial expansion. Prsnigarbha and Vamana werepartial expansions of Krsna, but in this third birth Krsna Himself appeared.This is the explanation given in Sri Krsna-sandarbha by Srila Jiva Gosvami.                               TEXT 44                                 TEXT                       etad vam darsitam rupam                       prag-janma-smaranaya me                      nanyatha mad-bhavam jnanam                        martya-lingena jayate                               SYNONYMS   etat--this form of Visnu; vam--unto both of you; darsitam--has been shown;rupam--My form as the Supreme Personality of Godhead with four hands; prak-
janma--of My previous appearances; smaranaya--just to remind you; me--My; na--not; anyatha--otherwise; mat-bhavam--Visnu's appearance; jnanam--thistranscendental knowledge; martya-lingena--by taking birth like a human child;jayate--does arise.                             TRANSLATION   I have shown you this form of Visnu just to remind you of My previous births.Otherwise, if I appeared like an ordinary human child, you would not believethat the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Visnu, has indeed appeared.                               PURPORT   Devaki did not need to be reminded that the Supreme personality of Godhead,Lord Visnu, had appeared as her son; she already accepted this. Nonetheless, shewas anxious, thinking that if her neighbors heard that Visnu had appeared as herson, none of them would believe it. Therefore she wanted Lord Visnu to transformHimself into a human child. On the other hand, the Supreme Lord was alsoanxious, thinking that if He appeared as an ordinary child, she would notbelieve that Lord Visnu had appeared. Such are the dealings between devotees andthe Lord. The Lord deals with His devotees exactly like a human being, but thisdoes not mean that the Lord is one of the human beings, for this is theconclusion of nondevotees (avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam). Devoteesknow the Supreme Personality of Godhead under any circumstances. This is thedifference between a devotee and a nondevotee. The Lord says, man-mana bhavamad-bhakto mad-yaji mam namaskuru: "Engage your mind always in thinking of Me,become My devotee, offer obeisances and worship Me." A nondevotee cannot believethat simply by thinking of one person, one can achieve liberation from thismaterial world and go back home, back to Godhead. But this is a fact. The Lordcomes as a human being, and if one becomes attached to the Lord on the platformof loving service, one's promotion to the transcendental world is assured.                               TEXT 45                                 TEXT                       yuvam mam putra-bhavena                        brahma-bhavena casakrt                       cintayantau krta-snehau                       yasyethe mad-gatim param                               SYNONYMS   yuvam--both of you (husband and wife); mam--unto Me; putra-bhavena--as yourson; brahma-bhavena--knowing that I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca--and; asakrt--constantly; cintayantau--thinking like that; krta-snehau--dealingwith love and affection; yasyethe--shall both obtain; mat-gatim--My supremeabode; param--which is transcendental, beyond this material world.                             TRANSLATION   Both of you, husband and wife, constantly think of Me as your son, but alwaysknow that I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By thus thinking of Meconstantly with love and affection, you will achieve the highest perfection:returning home, back to Godhead.                               PURPORT
   This instruction by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to His father andmother, who are eternally connected with Him, is especially intended for personseager to return home, back to Godhead. One should never think of the SupremePersonality of Godhead as an ordinary human being, as nondevotees do. Krsna, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, personally appeared and left His instructionsfor the benefit of all human society, but fools and rascals unfortunately thinkof Him as an ordinary human being and twist the instructions of Bhagavad-gitafor the satisfaction of their senses. Practically everyone commenting onBhagavad-gita interprets it for sense gratification. It has become especiallyfashionable for modern scholars and politicians to interpret Bhagavad-gita as ifit were something fictitious, and by their wrong interpretations they arespoiling their own careers and the careers of others. The Krsna consciousnessmovement, however, is fighting against this principle of regarding Krsna as afictitious person and of accepting that there was no Battle of Kuruksetra, thateverything is symbolic, and that nothing in Bhagavad-gita is true. In any case,if one truly wants to be successful, one can do so by reading the text ofBhagavad-gita as it is. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu especially stressed theinstructions of Bhagavad-gita: yare dekha, tare kaha 'krsna'-upadesa. If onewants to achieve the highest success in life, one must accept Bhagavad-gita asspoken by the Supreme Lord. By accepting Bhagavad-gita in this way, all of humansociety can become perfect and happy.   It is to be noted that because Vasudeva and Devaki would be separated fromKrsna when He was carried to Gokula, the residence of Nanda Maharaja, the Lordpersonally instructed them that they should always think of Him as their son andas the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That would keep them in touch with Him.After eleven years, the Lord would return to Mathura to be their son, andtherefore there was no question of separation.                               TEXT 46                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                      ity uktvasid dharis tusnim                         bhagavan atma-mayaya                       pitroh sampasyatoh sadyo                        babhuva prakrtah sisuh                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti uktva--after instructing inthis way; asit--remained; harih--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tusnim--silent; bhagavan--Lord Visnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atma-mayaya--by acting in His own spiritual energy; pitroh sampasyatoh--while His father andmother were factually seeing Him; sadyah--immediately; babhuva--He became;prakrtah--like an ordinary human being; sisuh--a child.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: After thus instructing His father and mother, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, remained silent. In their presence, byHis internal energy, He then transformed Himself into a small human child. [Inother words, He transformed Himself into His original form: krsnas tu bhagavansvayam.]                               PURPORT
   As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.6), sambhavamy atma-mayaya: whatever is done bythe Supreme Personality of Godhead is done by His spiritual energy; nothing isforced upon Him by the material energy. This is the difference between the Lordand an ordinary living being. The Vedas say:                  parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate                    svabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca   (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8)   It is natural for the Lord to be untinged by material qualities, and becauseeverything is perfectly present in His spiritual energy, as soon as He desiressomething, it is immediately done. The Lord is not a prakrta-sisu, a child ofthis world, but by His personal energy He appeared like one. Ordinary people mayhave difficulty accepting the supreme controller, God, as a human being becausethey forget that He can do everything by spiritual energy (atma-mayaya).Nonbelievers say, "How can the supreme controller descend as an ordinary being?"This sort of thinking is materialistic. Srila Jiva Gosvami says that unless weaccept the energy of the Supreme personality of Godhead as inconceivable, beyondthe conception of our words and mind, we cannot understand the Supreme Lord.Those who doubt that the Supreme personality of Godhead can come as a humanbeing and turn Himself into a human child are fools who think that Krsna's bodyis material, that He is born and that He therefore also dies.   In Srimad-Bhagavatam, Third Canto, Fourth Chapter, verses 28 and 29, there isa description of Krsna's leaving His body. Maharaja Pariksit inquired fromSukadeva Gosvami, "When all the members of the Yadu dynasty met their end, Krsnaalso put an end to Himself, and the only member of the family who remained alivewas Uddhava. How was this possible?" Sukadeva Gosvami answered that Krsna, byHis own energy, destroyed the entire family and then thought of making His ownbody disappear. In this connection, Sukadeva Gosvami described how the Lord gaveup His body. But this was not the destruction of Krsna's body; rather, it wasthe disappearance of the Supreme Lord by His personal energy.   Actually, the Lord does not give up His body, which is eternal, but as He canchange His body from the form of Visnu to that of an ordinary human child, Hecan change His body to any form He likes. This does not mean that He gives upHis body. By spiritual energy, the Lord can appear in a body made of wood orstone. He can change His body into anything because everything is His energy(parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate). As clearly said in Bhagavad-gita (7.4),bhinna prakrtir astadha: the material elements are separated energies of theSupreme Lord. If He transforms Himself into the arca-murti, the worshipableDeity, which we see as stone or wood, He is still Krsna. Therefore the sastrawarns, arcye visnau sila-dhir gurusu nara-matih. One who thinks that theworshipable Deity in the temple is made of wood or stone, one who sees aVaisnava guru as an ordinary human being, or one who materially conceives of aVaisnava as belonging to a particular caste is naraki, a resident of hell. TheSupreme Personality of Godhead can appear before us in many forms, as he likes,but we must know the true facts: janma karma ca me divyam evam yo vettitattvatah (Bg. 4.9). By following the instructions of sadhu, guru and sastra--the saintly persons, the spiritual master and the authoritative scriptures--onecan understand Krsna, and then one makes his life successful by returning home,back to Godhead.                               TEXT 47                                 TEXT                 tatas ca saurir bhagavat-pracoditah                    sutam samadaya sa sutika-grhat
                  yada bahir gantum iyesa tarhy aja                     ya yogamayajani nanda-jayaya                               SYNONYMS   tatah--thereafter; ca--indeed; saurih--Vasudeva; bhagavat-pracoditah--beinginstructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sutam--his son; samadaya--carrying very carefully; sah--he; sutika-grhat--from the maternity room; yada--when; bahih gantum--to go outside; iyesa--desired; tarhi--exactly at that time;aja--the transcendental energy, who also never takes birth; ya--who; yogamaya--is known as Yogamaya; ajani--took birth; nanda-jayaya--from the wife of NandaMaharaja.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, exactly when Vasudeva, being inspired by the Supreme Personalityof Godhead, was about to take the newborn child from the delivery room,Yogamaya, the Lord's spiritual energy, took birth as the daughter of the wife ofMaharaja Nanda.                               PURPORT   Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura discusses that Krsna appearedsimultaneously as the son of Devaki and as the son of Yasoda, along with thespiritual energy Yogamaya. As the son of Devaki, He first appeared as Visnu, andbecause Vasudeva was not in the position of pure affection for Krsna, Vasudevaworshiped his son as Lord Visnu. Yasoda, however, pleased her son Krsna withoutunderstanding His Godhood. This is the difference between Krsna as the son ofYasoda and as the son of Devaki. This is explained by Visvanatha Cakravarti onthe authority of Hari-vamsa.                             TEXTS 48-49                                 TEXT                   taya hrta-pratyaya-sarva-vrttisu                dvah-sthesu pauresv api sayitesv atha                  dvaras ca sarvah pihita duratyaya                   brhat-kapatayasa-kila-srnkhalaih                    tah krsna-vahe vasudeva agate                 svayam vyavaryanta yatha tamo raveh                   vavarsa parjanya upamsu-garjitah                 seso 'nvagad vari nivarayan phanaih                               SYNONYMS   taya--by the influence of Yogamaya; hrta-pratyaya--deprived of all sensation;sarva-vrttisu--having all their senses; dvah-sthesu--all the doormen; pauresuapi--as well as other members of the house; sayitesu--sleeping very deeply;atha--when Vasudeva tried to take his transcendental son out of the confinement;dvarah ca--as well as the doors; sarvah--all; pihitah--constructed; duratyaya--very hard and firm; brhat-kapata--and on great doors; ayasa-kila-srnkhalaih--strongly constructed with iron pins and closed with iron chains; tah--all ofthem; krsna-vahe--bearing Krsna; vasudeve--when Vasudeva; agate--appeared;svayam--automatically; vyavaryanta--opened wide; yatha--as; tamah--darkness;raveh--on the appearance of the sun; vavarsa--showered rain; parjanyah--theclouds in the sky; upamsu-garjitah--very mildly resounding and raining very
slightly; sesah--Ananta-naga; anvagat--followed; vari--showers of rain;nivarayan--stopping; phanaih--by spreading His hoods.                             TRANSLATION   By the influence of Yogamaya, all the doorkeepers fell fast asleep, theirsenses unable to work, and the other inhabitants of the house also fell deeplyasleep. When the sun rises, the darkness automatically disappears; similarly,when Vasudeva appeared, the closed doors, which were strongly pinned with ironand locked with iron chains, opened automatically. Since the clouds in the skywere mildly thundering and showering, Ananta-naga, an expansion of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, followed Vasudeva, beginning from the door, with hoodsexpanded to protect Vasudeva and the transcendental child.                               PURPORT   Sesa-naga is an expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead whosebusiness is to serve the Lord with all necessary paraphernalia. When Vasudevawas carrying the child, Sesa-naga came to serve the Lord and protect Him fromthe mild showers of rain.                               TEXT 50                                 TEXT                   maghoni varsaty asakrd yamanuja                  gambhira-toyaugha-javormi-phenila                     bhayanakavarta-satakula nadi                margam dadau sindhur iva sriyah pateh                               SYNONYMS   maghoni varsati--because of Lord Indra's showering rain; asakrt--constantly;yama-anuja--the River Yamuna, who is considered the younger sister of Yamaraja;gambhira-toya-ogha--of the very deep water; java--by the force; urmi--by thewaves; phenila--full of foam; bhayanaka--fierce; avarta-sata--by the whirlingwaves; akula--agitated; nadi--the river; margam--way; dadau--gave; sindhuh iva--like the ocean; sriyah pateh--unto Lord Ramacandra, the husband of the goddessSita.                             TRANSLATION   Because of constant rain sent by the demigod Indra, the River Yamuna wasfilled with deep water, foaming about with fiercely whirling waves. But as thegreat Indian Ocean had formerly given way to Lord Ramacandra by allowing Him toconstruct a bridge, the River Yamuna gave way to Vasudeva and allowed him tocross.                               TEXT 51                                 TEXT                 nanda-vrajam saurir upetya tatra tan                  gopan prasuptan upalabhya nidraya                   sutam yasoda-sayane nidhaya tat-                    sutam upadaya punar grhan agat                               SYNONYMS
   nanda-vrajam--the village or the house of Nanda Maharaja; saurih--Vasudeva;upetya--reaching; tatra--there; tan--all the members; gopan--the cowherd men;prasuptan--were fast asleep; upalabhya--understanding that; nidraya--in deepsleep; sutam--the son (Vasudeva's son); yasoda-sayane--on the bed where motherYasoda was sleeping; nidhaya--placing; tat-sutam--her daughter; upadaya--pickingup; punah--again; grhan--to his own house; agat--returned.                             TRANSLATION   When Vasudeva reached the house of Nanda Maharaja, he saw that all thecowherd men were fast asleep. Thus he placed his own son on the bed of Yasoda,picked up her daughter, an expansion of Yogamaya, and then returned to hisresidence, the prison house of Kamsa.                               PURPORT   Vasudeva knew very well that as soon as the daughter was in the prison houseof Kamsa, Kamsa would immediately kill her; but to protect his own child, he hadto kill the child of his friend. Nanda Maharaja was his friend, but out of deepaffection and attachment for his own son, he knowingly did this. SrilaVisvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says that one cannot be blamed for protectingone's own child at the sacrifice of another's. Furthermore, Vasudeva cannot beaccused of callousness, since his actions were impelled by the force ofYogamaya.                               TEXT 52                                 TEXT                        devakyah sayane nyasya                        vasudevo 'tha darikam                        pratimucya pador loham                         aste purvavad avrtah                               SYNONYMS   devakyah--of Devaki; sayane--on the bed; nyasya--placing; vasudevah--Vasudeva; atha--thus; darikam--the female child; pratimucya--binding himselfagain; padoh loham--iron shackles on the two legs; aste--remained; purva-vat--like before; avrtah--bound.                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva placed the female child on the bed of Devaki, bound his legs withthe iron shackles, and thus remained there as before.                               TEXT 53                                 TEXT                        yasoda nanda-patni ca                        jatam param abudhyata                       na tal-lingam parisranta                         nidrayapagata-smrtih                               SYNONYMS
   yasoda--Yasoda, Krsna's mother in Gokula; nanda-patni--the wife of NandaMaharaja; ca--also; jatam--a child was born; param--the Supreme Person;abudhyata--could understand; na--not; tat-lingam--whether the child was male orfemale; parisranta--because of too much labor; nidraya--when overwhelmed withsleep; apagata-smrtih--having lost consciousness.                             TRANSLATION   Exhausted by the labor of childbirth, Yasoda was overwhelmed with sleep andunable to understand what kind of child had been born to her.                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva were intimate friends, and so were their wives,Yasoda and Devaki. Although their names were different, they were practicallynondifferent personalities. The only difference is that Devaki was able tounderstand that the Supreme Personality of Godhead had been born to her and hadnow changed into Krsna, whereas Yasoda was not able to understand what kind ofchild had been born to her. Yasoda was such an advanced devotee that she neverregarded Krsna as the Supreme personality of Godhead, but simply loved Him asher own child. Devaki, however, knew from the very beginning that although Krsnawas her son, He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In Vrndavana, no oneregarded Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. When something verywonderful happened because of Krsna's activities, the inhabitants of Vrndavana--the cowherd men, the cowherd boys, Nanda Maharaja, Yasoda and the others--weresurprised, but they never considered their son Krsna the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. Sometimes they suggested that some great demigod had appeared there asKrsna. In such an exalted status of devotional service, a devotee forgets theposition of Krsna and intensely loves the Supreme Personality of Godhead withoutunderstanding His position. This is called kevala-bhakti and is distinct fromthe stages of jnana and jnanamayi bhakti.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Third Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "The Birth of Lord Krsna."                             Chapter Four                     The Atrocities of King Kamsa   This chapter describes how Kamsa, following the advice of his demoniacfriends, considered the persecution of small children to be very diplomatic.   After Vasudeva bound himself with iron shackles as before, all the doors ofthe prison house closed by the influence of Yogamaya, who then began crying as anewborn child, This crying awakened the doorkeepers, who immediately informedKamsa that a child had been born to Devaki. Upon hearing this news, Kamsaappeared with great force in the maternity room, and in spite of Devaki's pleasthat the child be saved, the demon forcibly snatched the child from Devaki'shands and dashed the child against a rock. Unfortunately for Kamsa, however, thenewborn child slipped away from his hands, rose above his head and appeared asthe eight-armed form of Durga. Durga then told Kamsa, "The enemy you contemplatehas taken birth somewhere else. Therefore your plan to persecute all thechildren will prove futile."   According to the prophecy, the eighth child of Devaki would kill Kamsa, andtherefore when Kamsa saw that the eighth child was a female and heard that hisso-called enemy had taken birth elsewhere, he was struck with wonder. He decidedto release Devaki and Vasudeva, and he admitted before them the wrongness of hisatrocities. Falling at the feet of Devaki and Vasudeva, he begged their pardonand tried to convince them that because the events that had taken place weredestined to happen, they should not be unhappy for his having killed so many oftheir children. Devaki and Vasudeva, being naturally very pious, immediately
excused Kamsa for his atrocities, and Kamsa, after seeing that his sister andbrother-in-law were happy, returned to his home.   After the night passed, however, Kamsa called for his ministers and informedthem of all that had happened. The ministers, who were all demons, advised Kamsathat because his enemy had already taken birth somewhere else, all the childrenborn within the past ten days in the villages within Kamsa's kingdom should bekilled. Although the demigods always feared Kamsa, they should not be treatedleniently; since they were enemies, Kamsa should try his best to uproot theirexistence. The demoniac ministers further advised that Kamsa and the demonscontinue their enmity toward Visnu because Visnu is the original person amongall the demigods. The brahmanas, the cows, the Vedas, austerity, truthfulness,control of the senses and mind, faithfulness and mercy are among the differentparts of the body of Visnu, who is the origin of all the demigods, includingLord Brahma and Lord Siva. Therefore, the ministers advised, the demigods, thesaintly persons, the cows and the brahmanas should be systematically persecuted.Strongly advised in this way by his friends, the demoniac ministers, Kamsaapproved of their instructions and considered it beneficial to be envious of thebrahmanas. Following Kamsa's orders, therefore, the demons began committingtheir atrocities all over Vrajabhumi.                                TEXT 1                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                       bahir-antah-pura-dvarah                        sarvah purvavad avrtah                       tato bala-dhvanim srutva                        grha-palah samutthitah                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; bahih-antah-pura-dvarah--thedoors inside and outside the house; sarvah--all; purva-vat--like before; avrtah--closed; tatah--thereafter; bala-dhvanim--the crying of the newborn child;srutva--hearing; grha-palah--all the inhabitants of the house, especially thedoormen; samutthitah--awakened.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King Pariksit, the doors inside andoutside the house closed as before. Thereafter, the inhabitants of the house,especially the watchmen, heard the crying of the newborn child and thus awakenedfrom their beds.                               PURPORT   The activities of Yogamaya are distinctly visible in this chapter, in whichDevaki and Vasudeva excuse Kamsa for his many devious, atrocious activities andKamsa becomes repentant and falls at their feet. Before the awakening of thewatchmen and the others in the prison house, many other things happened. Krsnawas born and transferred to the home of Yasoda in Gokula, the strong doorsopened and again closed, and Vasudeva resumed his former condition of beingshackled. The watchmen, however, could not understand all this. They awakenedonly when they heard the crying of the newborn child, Yogamaya.   Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura has remarked that the watchmen were justlike dogs. At night the dogs in the street act like watchmen. If one dog barks,many other dogs immediately follow it by barking. Although the street dogs are
not appointed by anyone to act as watchmen, they think they are responsible forprotecting the neighborhood, and as soon as someone unknown enters it, they allbegin to bark. Both Yogamaya and Mahamaya act in all material activities(prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmani sarvasah), but although the energy of theSupreme Personality of Godhead acts under the Supreme Lord's direction(mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram), doglike watchmen such aspoliticians and diplomats think that they are protecting their neighborhoodsfrom the dangers of the outside world. These are the actions of maya. But onewho surrenders to Krsna is relieved of the protection afforded by the dogs anddoglike guardians of this material world.                                TEXT 2                                 TEXT                        te tu turnam upavrajya                       devakya garbha-janma tat                        acakhyur bhoja-rajaya                       yad udvignah pratiksate                               SYNONYMS   te--all the watchmen; tu--indeed; turnam--very quickly; upavrajya--goingbefore (the King); devakyah--of Devaki; garbha-janma--the deliverance from thewomb; tat--that (child); acakhyuh--submitted; bhoja-rajaya--unto the King of theBhojas, Kamsa; yat--of whom; udvignah--with great anxiety; pratiksate--waswaiting (for the child's birth).                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, all the watchmen very quickly approached King Kamsa, the ruler ofthe Bhoja dynasty, and submitted the news of the birth of Devaki's child. Kamsa,who had awaited this news very anxiously, immediately took action.                               PURPORT   Kamsa was very anxiously waiting because of the prophecy that the eighthchild of Devaki would kill him. This time, naturally, he was awake and waiting,and when the watchmen approached him, he immediately took action to kill thechild.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT                       sa talpat turnam utthaya                        kalo 'yam iti vihvalah                        suti-grham agat turnam                      praskhalan mukta-murdhajah                               SYNONYMS   sah--he (King Kamsa); talpat--from the bed; turnam--very quickly; utthaya--getting up; kalah ayam--here is my death, the supreme time; iti--in this way;vihvalah--overwhelmed; suti-grham--to the maternity home; agat--went; turnam--without delay; praskhalan--scattering; mukta--had become opened; murdha-jah--thehair on the head.
                             TRANSLATION   Kamsa immediately got up from bed, thinking, "Here is Kala, the supreme timefactor, which has taken birth to kill me!" Thus overwhelmed, Kamsa, his hairscattered on his head, at once approached the place where the child had beenborn.                               PURPORT   The word kalah is significant. Although the child was born to kill Kamsa,Kamsa thought that this was the proper time to kill the child so that he himselfwould be saved. Kala is actually another name of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead when He appears only for the purpose of killing. When Arjuna inquiredfrom Krsna in His universal form, "Who are You?" the Lord presented Himself askala, death personified to kill. By nature's law, when there is an unwantedincrease in population, kala appears, and by some arrangement of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, people are killed wholesale in different ways, by war,pestilence, famine and so on. At that time, even atheistic political leaders goto a church, mosque or temple for protection by God or gods and submissivelysay, "God willing." Before that, they pay no attention to God, not caring toknow God or His will, but when kala appears, they say, "God willing." Death isbut another feature of the supreme kala, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Atthe time of death, the atheist must submit to this supreme kala, and then theSupreme Personality of Godhead takes away all his possessions (mrtyuh sarva-haras caham) and forces him to accept another body (tatha dehantara-praptih).This the atheists do not know, and if they do know, they neglect it so that theymay go on with their normal life. The Krsna consciousness movement is trying toteach them that although for a few years one may act as a great protector orgreat watchman, with the appearance of kala, death, one must take another bodyby the laws of nature. Not knowing this, they unnecessarily waste their time intheir occupation as watchdogs and do not try to get the mercy of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. As it is clearly said, aprapya mam nivartante mrtyu-samsara-vartmani: without Krsna consciousness, one is condemned to continuewandering in birth and death, not knowing what will happen in one's next birth.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                        tam aha bhrataram devi                         krpana karunam sati                        snuseyam tava kalyana                       striyam ma hantum arhasi                               SYNONYMS   tam--unto Kamsa; aha--said; bhrataram--her brother; devi--mother Devaki;krpana--helplessly; karunam--piteously; sati--the chaste lady; snusa iyam tava--this child will be your daughter-in-law, the wife of your future son; kalyana--Oall-auspicious one; striyam--a woman; ma--not; hantum--to kill; arhasi--youdeserve.                             TRANSLATION   Devaki helplessly, piteously appealed to Kamsa: My dear brother, all goodfortune unto you. Don't kill this girl. She will be your daughter-in-law.Indeed, it is unworthy of you to kill a woman.
                               PURPORT   Kamsa had previously excused Devaki because he thought that a woman shouldnot be killed, especially when pregnant. But now, by the influence of maya, hewas prepared to kill a woman--not only a woman, but a small, helpless newbornchild. Devaki wanted to save her brother from this terrible, sinful act.Therefore she told him, "Don't be so atrocious as to kill a female child. Letthere be all good fortune for you." Demons can do anything for their personalbenefit, not considering what is pious or vicious. But Devaki, on the contrary,although safe because she had already given birth to her own son, Krsna, wasanxious to save the daughter of someone else. This was natural for her.                                TEXT 5                                 TEXT                        bahavo himsita bhratah                         sisavah pavakopamah                        tvaya daiva-nisrstena                        putrikaika pradiyatam                               SYNONYMS   bahavah--many; himsitah--killed out of envy; bhratah--my dear brother;sisavah--small children; pavaka-upamah--all of them equal to fire in brightnessand beauty; tvaya--by you; daiva-nisrstena--as spoken by destiny; putrika--daughter; eka--one; pradiyatam--give me as your gift.                             TRANSLATION   My dear brother, by the influence of destiny you have already killed manybabies, each of them as bright and beautiful as fire. But kindly spare thisdaughter. Give her to me as your gift.                               PURPORT   Here we see that Devaki first focused Kamsa's attention on his atrociousactivities, his killing of her many sons. Then she wanted to compromise with himby saying that whatever he had done was not his fault, but was ordained bydestiny. Then she appealed to him to give her the daughter as a gift. Devaki wasthe daughter of a ksatriya and knew how to play the political game. In politicsthere are different methods of achieving success: first repression (dama), thencompromise (sama), and then asking for a gift (dana). Devaki first adopted thepolicy of repression by directly attacking Kamsa for having cruelly, atrociouslykilled her babies. Then she compromised by saying that this was not his fault,and then she begged for a gift. As we learn from the history of the Mahabharata,or "Greater India," the wives and daughters of the ruling class, the ksatriyas,knew the political game, but we never find that a woman was given the post ofchief executive. This is in accordance with the injunctions of Manu-samhita, butunfortunately Manu-samhita is now being insulted, and the Aryans, the members ofVedic society, cannot do anything. Such is the nature of Kali-yuga.   Nothing happens unless ordained by destiny.                   tasyaiva hetoh prayateta kovido                na labhyate yad bhramatam upary adhah                tal labhyate duhkhavad anyatah sukham                   kalena sarvatra gabhira-ramhasa
   (Bhag. 1.5.18)   Devaki knew very well that because the killing of her many children had beenordained by destiny, Kamsa was not to be blamed. There was no need to give goodinstructions to Kamsa. Upadeso hi murkhanam prakopaya na santaye (CanakyaPandita). If a foolish person is given good instructions, he becomes more andmore angry. Moreover, a cruel person is more dangerous than a snake. A snake anda cruel person are both cruel, but a cruel person is more dangerous becausealthough a snake can be charmed by mantras or subdued by herbs, a cruel personcannot be subdued by any means. Such was the nature of Kamsa.                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                       nanv aham te hy avaraja                        dina hata-suta prabho                         datum arhasi mandaya                        angemam caramam prajam                               SYNONYMS   nanu--however; aham--I am; te--your; hi--indeed; avaraja--younger sister;dina--very poor; hata-suta--deprived of all children; prabho--O my lord; datumarhasi--you deserve to give (some gift); mandayah--to me, who am so poor; anga--my dear brother; imam--this; caramam--last; prajam--child.                             TRANSLATION   My lord, my brother, I am very poor, being bereft of all my children, butstill I am your younger sister, and therefore it would be worthy of you to giveme this last child as a gift.                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                         upaguhyatmajam evam                         rudatya dina-dinavat                      yacitas tam vinirbhartsya                       hastad acicchide khalah                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; upaguhya--embracing; atmajam--herdaughter; evam--in this way; rudatya--by Devaki, who was crying; dina-dina-vat--very piteously, like a poor woman; yacitah--being begged; tam--her (Devaki);vinirbhartsya--chastising; hastat--from her hands; acicchide--separated thechild by force; khalah--Kamsa, the most cruel.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: piteously embracing her daughter and crying,Devaki begged Kamsa for the child, but he was so cruel that he chastised her andforcibly snatched the child from her hands.                               PURPORT
   Although Devaki was crying like a very poor woman, actually she was not poor,and therefore the word used here is dinavat. She had already given birth toKrsna. Therefore, who could have been richer than she? Even the demigods hadcome to offer prayers to Devaki, but she played the part of a poor, piteouslyafflicted woman because she wanted to save the daughter of Yasoda.                                TEXT 8                                 TEXT                        tam grhitva caranayor                       jata-matram svasuh sutam                        apothayac chila-prsthe                       svarthonmulita-sauhrdah                               SYNONYMS   tam--the child; grhitva--taking by force; caranayoh--by the two legs; jata-matram--the newborn child; svasuh--of his sister; sutam--the daughter;apothayat--smashed; sila-prsthe--on the surface of a stone; sva-artha-unmulita--uprooted because of intense selfishness; sauhrdah--all friendship or familyrelationships.                             TRANSLATION   Having uprooted all relationships with his sister because of intenseselfishness, Kamsa, who was sitting on his knees, grasped the newborn child bythe legs and tried to dash her against the surface of a stone.                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT                      sa tad-dhastat samutpatya                       sadyo devy ambaram gata                         adrsyatanuja visnoh                         sayudhasta-mahabhuja                               SYNONYMS   sa--that female child; tat-hastat--from the hand of Kamsa; sam-utpatya--slipped upward; sadyah--immediately; devi--the form of a demigoddess; ambaram--into the sky; gata--went; adrsyata--was seen; anuja--the younger sister; visnoh--of the Supreme personality of Godhead; sa-ayudha--with weapons; asta--eight;maha-bhuja--with mighty arms.                             TRANSLATION   The child, Yogamaya-devi, the younger sister of Lord Visnu, slipped upwardfrom Kamsa's hands and appeared in the sky as Devi, the goddess Durga, witheight arms, completely equipped with weapons.                               PURPORT   Kamsa tried to dash the child downward against a piece of stone, but sinceshe was Yogamaya, the younger sister of Lord Visnu, she slipped upward andassumed the form of the goddess Durga. The word anuja, meaning "the younger
sister," is significant. When Visnu, or Krsna, took birth from Devaki, He musthave simultaneously taken birth from Yasoda also. Otherwise how could Yogamayahave been anuja, the Lord's younger sister?                             TEXTS 10-11                                 TEXT                        divya-srag-ambaralepa-                         ratnabharana-bhusita                        dhanuh-sulesu-carmasi-                       sankha-cakra-gada-dhara                      siddha-carana-gandharvair                        apsarah-kinnaroragaih                          upahrtoru-balibhih                         stuyamanedam abravit                               SYNONYMS   divya-srak-ambara-alepa--she then assumed the form of a demigoddess,completely decorated with sandalwood pulp, flower garlands and a nice dress;ratna-abharana-bhusita--decorated with ornaments of valuable jewels; dhanuh-sula-isu-carma-asi--with bow, trident, arrows, shield and sword; sankha-cakra-gada-dhara--and holding the weapons of Visnu (conchshell, disc and club);siddha-carana-gandharvaih--by the Siddhas, Caranas and Gandharvas; apsarah-kinnara-uragaih--and by the Apsaras, Kinnaras and Uragas; upahrta-uru-balibhih--who brought all kinds of presentations to her; stuyamana--being praised; idam--these words; abravit--she said.                             TRANSLATION   The goddess Durga was decorated with flower garlands, smeared with sandalwoodpulp and dressed with excellent garments and ornaments made of valuable jewels.Holding in her hands a bow, a trident, arrows, a shield, a sword, a conchshell,a disc and a club, and being praised by celestial beings like Apsaras, Kinnaras,Uragas, Siddhas, Caranas and Gandharvas, who worshiped her with all kinds ofpresentations, she spoke as follows.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                        kim maya hataya manda                       jatah khalu tavanta-krt                      yatra kva va purva-satrur                       ma himsih krpanan vrtha                               SYNONYMS   kim--what is the use; maya--me; hataya--in killing; manda--O you fool; jatah--has already been born; khalu--indeed; tava anta-krt--who will kill you; yatrakva va--somewhere else; purva-satruh--your former enemy; ma--do not; himsih--kill; krpanan--other poor children; vrtha--unnecessarily.                             TRANSLATION
   O Kamsa, you fool, what will be the use of killing me? The SupremePersonality of Godhead, who has been your enemy from the very beginning and whowill certainly kill you, has already taken His birth somewhere else. Therefore,do not unnecessarily kill other children.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT                        iti prabhasya tam devi                         maya bhagavati bhuvi                          bahu-nama-niketesu                         bahu-nama babhuva ha                               SYNONYMS   iti--in this way; prabhasya--addressing; tam--Kamsa; devi--the goddess Durga;maya--Yogamaya; bhagavati--possessing immense power, like that of the Supremepersonality of Godhead; bhuvi--on the surface of the earth; bahu-nama--ofdifferent names; niketesu--in different places; bahu-nama--different names;babhuva--became; ha--indeed.                             TRANSLATION   After speaking to Kamsa in this way, the goddess Durga, Yogamaya, appeared indifferent places, such as Varanasi, and became celebrated by different names,such as Annapurna, Durga, Kali and Bhadra.                               PURPORT   The goddess Durga is celebrated in Calcutta as Kali, in Bombay as Mumbadevi,in Varanasi as Annapurna, in Cuttack as Bhadrakali and in Ahmedabad as Bhadra.Thus in different places she is known by different names. Her devotees are knownas saktas, or worshipers of the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,whereas worshipers of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself are calledVaisnavas. Vaisnavas are destined to return home, back to Godhead, in thespiritual world, whereas the saktas are destined to live within this materialworld to enjoy different types of material happiness. In the material world, theliving entity must accept different types of bodies. Bhramayan sarva-bhutaniyantrarudhani mayaya (Bg. 18.61). According to the living entity's desire,Yogamaya, or Maya, the goddess Durga, gives him a particular type of body, whichis mentioned as yantra, a machine. But the living entities who are promoted tothe spiritual world do not return to the prison house of a material body(tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti so'rjuna). The words janma na etiindicate that these living entities remain in their original, spiritual bodiesto enjoy the company of the Supreme personality of Godhead in the transcendentalabodes Vaikuntha and Vrndavana.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                         tayabhihitam akarnya                        kamsah parama-vismitah                         devakim vasudevam ca                       vimucya prasrito 'bravit                               SYNONYMS
   taya--by the goddess Durga; abhihitam--the words spoken; akarnya--by hearing;kamsah--Kamsa; parama-vismitah--was struck with wonder; devakim--unto Devaki;vasudevam ca--and Vasudeva; vimucya--releasing immediately; prasritah--withgreat humility; abravit--spoke as follows.                             TRANSLATION   After hearing the words of the goddess Durga, Kamsa was struck with wonder.Thus he approached his sister Devaki and brother-in-law Vasudeva, released themimmediately from their shackles, and very humbly spoke as follows.                               PURPORT   Kamsa was astonished because the goddess Durga had become the daughter ofDevaki. Since Devaki was a human being, how could the goddess Durga become herdaughter? This was one cause of his astonishment. Also, how is it that theeighth child of Devaki was a female? This also astonished him. Asuras aregenerally devotees of mother Durga, Sakti, or of demigods, especially Lord Siva.The appearance of Durga in her original eight-armed feature, holding variousweapons, immediately changed Kamsa's mind about Devaki's being an ordinaryhuman. Devaki must have had some transcendental qualities; otherwise why wouldthe goddess Durga have taken birth from her womb? Under the circumstances,Kamsa, struck with wonder, wanted to compensate for his atrocities against hissister Devaki.                               TEXT 15                                 TEXT                        aho bhaginy aho bhama                        maya vam bata papmana                          purusada ivapatyam                        bahavo himsitah sutah                               SYNONYMS   aho--alas; bhagini--my dear sister; aho--alas; bhama--my dear brother-in-law;maya--by me; vam--of you; bata--indeed; papmana--because of sinful activities;purusa-adah--a Raksasa, man-eater; iva--like; apatyam--child; bahavah--many;himsitah--have been killed; sutah--sons.                             TRANSLATION   Alas, my sister! Alas, my brother-in-law! I am indeed so sinful that exactlylike a man-eater [Raksasa] who eats his own child, I have killed so many sonsborn of you.                               PURPORT   Raksasas are understood to be accustomed to eating their own sons, as snakesand many other animals sometimes do. At the present moment in Kali-yuga, Raksasafathers and mothers are killing their own children in the womb, and some areeven eating the fetus with great relish. Thus the so-called civilization isgradually advancing by producing Raksasas.                               TEXT 16
                                 TEXT                      sa tv aham tyakta-karunyas                      tyakta-jnati-suhrt khalah                       kan lokan vai gamisyami                       brahma-heva mrtah svasan                               SYNONYMS   sah--that person (Kamsa); tu--indeed; aham--I; tyakta-karunyah--devoid of allmercy; tyakta-jnati-suhrt--my relatives and friends have been rejected by me;khalah--cruel; kan lokan--which planets; vai--indeed; gamisyami--shall go;brahma-ha iva--like the killer of a brahmana; mrtah svasan--either after deathor while breathing.                             TRANSLATION   Being merciless and cruel, I have forsaken all my relatives and friends.Therefore, like a person who has killed a brahmana, I do not know to whichplanet I shall go, either after death or while breathing.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                       daivam apy anrtam vakti                        na martya eva kevalam                      yad-visrambhad aham papah                       svasur nihatavan chisun                               SYNONYMS   daivam--providence; api--also; anrtam--lies; vakti--say; na--not; martyah--human beings; eva--certainly; kevalam--only; yat-visrambhat--because ofbelieving that prophecy; aham--I; papah--the most sinful; svasuh--of my sister;nihatavan--killed; sisun--so many children.                             TRANSLATION   Alas, not only human beings but sometimes even providence lies. And I am sosinful that I believed the omen of providence and killed so many of my sister'schildren.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                        ma socatam maha-bhagav                       atmajan sva-krtam bhujah                        jantavo na sadaikatra                         daivadhinas tadasate                               SYNONYMS   ma socatam--kindly do not be aggrieved (for what happened in the past); maha-bhagau--O you who are learned and fortunate in spiritual knowledge; atmajan--foryour sons; sva-krtam--only because of their own acts; bhujah--who are suffering;jantavah--all living entities; na--not; sada--always; ekatra--in one place;
daiva-adhinah--who are under the control of providence; tada--hence; asate--live.                             TRANSLATION   O great souls, your children have suffered their own misfortune. Therefore,please do not lament for them. All living entities are under the control of theSupreme, and they cannot always live together.                               PURPORT   Kamsa addressed his sister and brother-in-law as maha-bhagau because althoughhe killed their ordinary children, the goddess Durga took birth from them.Because Devaki bore Durgadevi in her womb, Kamsa praised both Devaki and herhusband. Asuras are very devoted to the goddess Durga, Kali and so forth. Kamsa,therefore, truly astonished, appreciated the exalted position of his sister andbrother-in-law. Durga is certainly not under the laws of nature, because sheherself is the controller of the laws of nature. Ordinary living beings,however, are controlled by these laws (prakrteh kriyamanani gunaih karmanisarvasah). Consequently, none of us are allowed to live together for any longperiod. By speaking in this way, Kamsa tried to pacify his sister and brother-in-law.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                        bhuvi bhaumani bhutani                       yatha yanty apayanti ca                        nayam atma tathaitesu                       viparyeti yathaiva bhuh                               SYNONYMS   bhuvi--on the surface of the world; bhaumani--all material products fromearth, such as pots; bhutani--which are produced; yatha--as; yanti--appear (inform); apayanti--disappear (broken or mixed with the earth); ca--and; na--not;ayam atma--the soul or spiritual identity; tatha--similarly; etesu--among allthese (products of material elements); viparyeti--is changed or broken; yatha--as; eva--certainly; bhuh--the earth.                             TRANSLATION   In this world, we can see that pots, dolls and other products of the earthappear, break and then disappear, mixing with the earth. Similarly, the bodiesof all conditioned living entities are annihilated, but the living entities,like the earth itself, are unchanging and never annihilated [na hanyatehanyamane sarire].                               PURPORT   Although Kamsa is described as a demon, he had good knowledge of the affairsof atma-tattva, the truth of the self. Five thousand years ago, there were kingslike Kamsa, who is described as an asura, but he was better than modernpoliticians and diplomats, who have no knowledge about atma-tattva. As stated inthe Vedas, asango hy ayam purusah: the spirit soul has no connection with thechanges of the material body. The body undergoes six changes--birth, growth,sustenance, by-products, dwindling and then annihilation--but the soul undergoes
no such changes. Even after the annihilation of a particular bodily form, theoriginal source of the bodily elements does not change. The living entity enjoysthe material body, which appears and disappears, but the five elements earth,water, fire, air and ether remain the same. The example given here is that potsand dolls are produced from the earth, and when broken or destroyed they minglewith their original ingredients. In any case, the source of supply remains thesame.   As already discussed, the body is made according to the desires of the soul.The soul desires, and thus the body is formed. Krsna therefore says in Bhagavad-gita (18.61):                        isvarah sarva-bhutanam                       hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati                       bhramayan sarva-bhutani                         yantrarudhani mayaya   "The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is directingthe wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made ofthe material energy." Neither the Supersoul, Paramatma, nor the individual soulchanges its original, spiritual identity. The atma does not undergo birth, deathor changes like the body. Therefore a Vedic aphorism says, asango hy ayampurusah: although the soul is conditioned within this material world, he has noconnections with the changes of the material body.                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                        yathanevam-vido bhedo                         yata atma-viparyayah                         deha-yoga-viyogau ca                        samsrtir na nivartate                               SYNONYMS   yatha--as; an-evam-vidah--of a person who has no knowledge (about atma-tattvaand the steadiness of the atma in his own identity, despite the changes of thebody); bhedah--the idea of difference between body and self; yatah--because ofwhich; atma-viparyayah--the foolish understanding that one is the body; deha-yoga-viyogau ca--and this causes connections and separations among differentbodies; samsrtih--the continuation of conditioned life; na--not; nivartate--doesstop.                             TRANSLATION   One who does not understand the constitutional position of the body and thesoul [atma] becomes too attached to the bodily concept of life. Consequently,because of attachment to the body and its by-products, he feels affected byunion with and separation from his family, society and nation. As long as thiscontinues, one continues his material life. [Otherwise, one is liberated.]                               PURPORT   As confirmed in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.6):                      sa vai pumsam paro dharmo                        yato bhaktir adhoksaje                         ahaituky apratihata
                         yayatma suprasidati   The word dharma means "engagement." One who is engaged in the service of theLord (yato bhaktir adhoksaje), without impediment and without cessation, isunderstood to be situated in his original, spiritual status. When one ispromoted to this status, one is always happy in transcendental bliss. Otherwise,as long as one is in the bodily concept of life, one must suffer materialconditions. Janma-mrtyu jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosanudarsanam. The body is subjectto its own principles of birth, death, old age and disease, but one who issituated in spiritual life (yato bhaktir adhoksaje) has no birth, no death, noold age and no disease. One may argue that we may see a person who isspiritually engaged twenty-four hours a day but is still suffering from disease.In fact, however, he is neither suffering nor diseased; otherwise he could notbe engaged twenty-four hours a day in spiritual activities. The example may begiven in this connection that sometimes dirty foam or garbage is seen floatingon the water of the Ganges. This is called nira-dharma, a function of the water.But one who goes to the Ganges does not mind the foam and dirty things floatingin the water. With his hand, he pushes away such nasty things, bathes in theGanges and gains the beneficial results. Therefore, one who is situated in thespiritual status of life is unaffected by foam and garbage--or any superficialdirty things. This is confirmed by Srila Rupa Gosvami:                        iha yasya harer dasye                         karmana manasa gira                       nikhilasv apy avasthasu                        jivan-muktah sa ucyate   "A person acting in the service of Krsna with his body, mind and words is aliberated person, even within the material world." (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu1.2.187) Therefore, one is forbidden to regard the guru as an ordinary humanbeing (gurusu nara-matir. .. naraki sah). The spiritual master, or acarya, isalways situated in the spiritual status of life. Birth, death, old age anddisease do not affect him. According to the Hari-bhakti-vilasa, therefore, afterthe disappearance of an acarya, his body is never burnt to ashes, for it is aspiritual body. The spiritual body is always unaffected by material conditions.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                      tasmad bhadre sva-tanayan                         maya vyapaditan api                        manusoca yatah sarvah                       sva-krtam vindate 'vasah                               SYNONYMS   tasmat--therefore; bhadre--my dear sister (all auspiciousness unto you); sva-tanayan--for your own sons; maya--by me; vyapaditan--unfortunately killed; api--although; ma anusoca--do not be aggrieved; yatah--because; sarvah--everyone;sva-krtam--the fruitive results of one's own deeds; vindate--suffers or enjoys;avasah--under the control of providence.                             TRANSLATION   My dear sister Devaki, all good fortune unto you. Everyone suffers and enjoysthe results of his own work under the control of providence. Therefore, althoughyour sons have unfortunately been killed by me, please do not lament for them.
                               PURPORT   As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.54):            yas tv indra-gopam athavendram aho sva-karma-                 bandhanurupa-phala-bhajanam atanoti               karmani nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhajam                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   Everyone, beginning from the small insect known as indra-gopa up to Indra,the King of the heavenly planets, is obliged to undergo the results of hisfruitive activities. We may superficially see that one is suffering or enjoyingbecause of some external causes, but the real cause is one's own fruitiveactivities. Even when someone kills someone else, it is to be understood thatthe person who was killed met the fruitive results of his own work and that theman who killed him acted as the agent of material nature. Thus Kamsa beggedDevaki's pardon by analyzing the matter deeply. He was not the cause of thedeath of Devaki's sons. Rather, this was their own destiny. Under thecircumstances, Devaki should excuse Kamsa and forget his past deeds withoutlamentation. Kamsa admitted his own fault, but whatever he had done was underthe control of providence. Kamsa might have been the immediate cause for thedeath of Devaki's sons, but the remote cause was their past deeds. This was anactual fact.                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT                      yavad dhato 'smi hantasmi-                     ty atmanam manyate 'sva-drk                       tavat tad-abhimany ajno                        badhya-badhakatam iyat                               SYNONYMS   yavat--as long as; hatah asmi--I am now being killed (by others); hanta asmi--I am the killer (of others); iti--thus; atmanam--own self; manyate--heconsiders; a-sva-drk--one who has not seen himself (because of the darkness ofthe bodily conception of life); tavat--for that long; tat-abhimani--regardinghimself as the killed or the killer; ajnah--a foolish person; badhya-badhakatam--the worldly transaction of being obliged to execute some responsibility; iyat--continues.                             TRANSLATION   In the bodily conception of life, one remains in darkness, without self-realization, thinking, "I am being killed" or "I have killed my enemies." Aslong as a foolish person thus considers the self to be the killer or the killed,he continues to be responsible for material obligations, and consequently hesuffers the reactions of happiness and distress.                               PURPORT   By the grace of the Lord, Kamsa felt sincere regret for having unnecessarilypersecuted such Vaisnavas as Devaki and Vasudeva, and thus he came to thetranscendental stage of knowledge. "Because I am situated on the platform ofknowledge," Kamsa said, "understanding that I am not at all the killer of your
sons, I have no responsibility for their death. As long as I thought that Iwould be killed by your son, I was in ignorance, but now I am free from thisignorance, which was due to a bodily conception of life." As stated in Bhagavad-gita (18.17):                        yasya nahankrto bhavo                       buddhir yasya na lipyate                        hatvapi sa imal lokan                        na hanti na nibadhyate   "One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled,though he kills men in this world, is not the slayer. Nor is he bound by hisactions." According to this axiomatic truth, Kamsa pleaded that he was notresponsible for having killed the sons of Devaki and Vasudeva. "Please try toexcuse me for such false, external activities," he said, "and be pacified withthis same knowledge."                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                      ksamadhvam mama dauratmyam                        sadhavo dina-vatsalah                      ity uktvasru-mukhah padau                      syalah svasror athagrahit                               SYNONYMS   ksamadhvam--kindly excuse; mama--my; dauratmyam--atrocious activities;sadhavah--both of you are great saintly persons; dina-vatsalah--and are verykind to poor, cripple-minded persons; iti uktva--saying this; asru-mukhah--hisface full of tears; padau--the feet; syalah--his brother-in-law Kamsa; svasrah--of his sister and brother-in-law; atha--thus; agrahit--captured.                             TRANSLATION   Kamsa begged, "My dear sister and brother-in-law, please be merciful to sucha poor-hearted person as me, since both of you are saintly persons. Pleaseexcuse my atrocities." Having said this, Kamsa fell at the feet of Vasudeva andDevaki, his eyes full of tears of regret.                               PURPORT   Although Kamsa had spoken very nicely on the subject of real knowledge, hispast deeds were abominable and atrocious, and therefore he further beggedforgiveness from his sister and brother-in-law by falling at their feet andadmitting that he was a most sinful person.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                         mocayam asa nigadad                       visrabdhah kanyaka-gira                         devakim vasudevam ca                       darsayann atma-sauhrdam                               SYNONYMS
   mocayam asa--Kamsa released them; nigadat--from their iron shackles;visrabdhah--with full confidence; kanyaka-gira--in the words of the goddessDurga; devakim--toward his sister Devaki; vasudevam ca--and his brother-in-lawVasudeva; darsayan--fully exhibiting; atma-sauhrdam--his family relationship.                             TRANSLATION   Fully believing in the words of the goddess Durga, Kamsa exhibited hisfamilial affection for Devaki and Vasudeva by immediately releasing them fromtheir iron shackles.                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT                        bhratuh samanutaptasya                        ksanta-rosa ca devaki                        vyasrjad vasudevas ca                        prahasya tam uvaca ha                               SYNONYMS   bhratuh--toward her brother Kamsa; samanutaptasya--because of his beingregretful; ksanta-rosa--was relieved of anger; ca--also; devaki--Krsna's mother,Devaki; vyasrjat--gave up; vasudevah ca--Vasudeva also; prahasya--smiling; tam--unto Kamsa; uvaca--said; ha--in the past.                             TRANSLATION   When Devaki saw her brother actually repentant while explaining ordainedevents, she was relieved of all anger. Similarly, Vasudeva was also free fromanger. Smiling, he spoke to Kamsa as follows.                               PURPORT   Devaki and Vasudeva, both highly elevated personalities, accepted the truthpresented by Kamsa that everything is ordained by providence. According to theprophecy, Kamsa would be killed by the eighth child of Devaki. Therefore,Vasudeva and Devaki saw that behind all these incidents was a great plan devisedby the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Because the Lord had already taken birth,just like a human child, and was in the safe custody of Yasoda, everything washappening according to plan, and there was no need to continue their ill feelingtoward Kamsa. Thus they accepted Kamsa's words.                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                         evam etan maha-bhaga                         yatha vadasi dehinam                       ajnana-prabhavaham-dhih                        sva-pareti bhida yatah                               SYNONYMS   evam--yes, this is right; etat--what you have said; maha-bhaga--O greatpersonality; yatha--as; vadasi--you are speaking; dehinam--about living entities
(accepting material bodies); ajnana-prabhava--by the influence of ignorance;aham-dhih--this is my interest (false ego); sva-para iti--this is another'sinterest; bhida--differentiation; yatah--because of such a conception of life.                             TRANSLATION   O great personality Kamsa, only by the influence of ignorance does one acceptthe material body and bodily ego. What you have said about this philosophy iscorrect. Persons in the bodily concept of life, lacking self-realization,differentiate in terms of "This is mine" and "This belongs to another."                               PURPORT   Everything is done automatically by the laws of nature, which work under thedirection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There is no question of doinganything independently, for one who has put himself in this material atmosphereis fully under the control of nature's laws. Our main business, therefore,should be to get out of this conditioned life and again become situated inspiritual existence. Only due to ignorance does a person think, "I am ademigod," "I am a human being," "I am a dog," "I am a cat," or, when theignorance is still further advanced, "I am God." Unless one is fully self-realized, one's life of ignorance will continue.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                       soka-harsa-bhaya-dvesa-                        lobha-moha-madanvitah                      mitho ghnantam na pasyanti                     bhavair bhavam prthag-drsah                               SYNONYMS   soka--lamentation; harsa--jubilation; bhaya--fear; dvesa--envy; lobha--greed;moha--illusion; mada--madness; anvitah--endowed with; mithah--one another;ghnantam--engaged in killing; na pasyanti--do not see; bhavaih--because of suchdifferentiation; bhavam--the situation in relation to the Supreme Lord; prthak-drsah--persons who see everything as separate from the control of the Lord.                             TRANSLATION   Persons with the vision of differentiation are imbued with the materialqualities lamentation, jubilation, fear, envy, greed, illusion and madness. Theyare influenced by the immediate cause, which they are busy counteracting,because they have no knowledge of the remote, supreme cause, the Personality ofGodhead.                               PURPORT   Krsna is the cause of all causes (sarva-karana-karanam), but one who has noconnection with Krsna is disturbed by immediate causes and cannot restrain hisvision of separation or differences. When an expert physician treats a patient,he tries to find the original cause of the disease and is not diverted by thesymptoms of that original cause. Similarly, a devotee is never disturbed byreverses in life. Tat te 'nukampam susamiksamanah (Bhag. 10.14.8). A devoteeunderstands that when he is in distress, this is due to his own past misdeeds,which are now accruing reactions, although by the grace of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead these are only very slight. Karmani nirdahati kintu cabhakti-bhajam (Brahma-samhita 5.54). When a devotee under the protection of theSupreme Personality of Godhead is to suffer because of faults in his past deeds,he passes through only a little misery by the grace of the Lord. Although thedisease of a devotee is due to mistakes committed sometime in the past, heagrees to suffer and tolerate such miseries, and he depends fully on the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Thus he is never affected by material conditions oflamentation, jubilation, fear and so on. A devotee never sees anything to beunconnected with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Srila Madhvacarya, quotingfrom the Bhavisya Purana, says:                       bhagavad-darsanad yasya                       virodhad darsanam prthak                       prthag-drstih sa vijneyo                       na tu sad-bheda-darsanah                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                       kamsa evam prasannabhyam                       visuddham pratibhasitah                         devaki-vasudevabhyam                        anujnato 'visad grham                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; kamsah--King Kamsa; evam--thus;prasannabhyam--who were very much appeased; visuddham--in purity; pratibhasitah--being answered; devaki-vasudevabhyam--by Devaki and Vasudeva; anujnatah--takingpermission; avisat--entered; grham--his own palace.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thus having been addressed in purity by Devakiand Vasudeva, who were very much appeased, Kamsa felt pleased, and with theirpermission he entered his home.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                      tasyam ratryam vyatitayam                        kamsa ahuya mantrinah                       tebhya acasta tat sarvam                        yad uktam yoga-nidraya                               SYNONYMS   tasyam--that; ratryam--night; vyatitayam--having passed; kamsah--King Kamsa;ahuya--calling for; mantrinah--all the ministers; tebhyah--them; acasta--informed; tat--that; sarvam--all; yat uktam--which was spoken (that Kamsa'smurderer was already somewhere else); yoga-nidraya--by Yogamaya, the goddessDurga.                             TRANSLATION
   After that night passed, Kamsa summoned his ministers and informed them ofall that had been spoken by Yogamaya [who had revealed that He who was to slayKamsa had already been born somewhere else].                               PURPORT   The Vedic scripture Candi describes maya, the energy of the Supreme Lord, asnidra: durga devi sarva-bhutesu nidra-rupena samasthitah. The energy of Yogamayaand Mahamaya keeps the living entities sleeping in this material world in thegreat darkness of ignorance. Yogamaya, the goddess Durga, kept Kamsa in darknessabout Krsna's birth and misled him to believe that his enemy Krsna had been bornelsewhere. Krsna was born the son of Devaki, but according to the Lord'soriginal plan, as prophesied to Brahma, He went to Vrndavana to give pleasure tomother Yasoda and Nanda Maharaja and other intimate friends and devotees foreleven years. Then He would return to kill Kamsa. Because Kamsa did not knowthis, he believed Yogamaya's statement that Krsna was born elsewhere, not ofDevaki.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                       akarnya bhartur gaditam                        tam ucur deva-satravah                        devan prati krtamarsa                         daiteya nati-kovidah                               SYNONYMS   akarnya--after hearing; bhartuh--of their master; gaditam--the words orstatement; tam ucuh--replied to him; deva-satravah--all the asuras, who wereenemies of the demigods; devan--the demigods; prati--toward; krta-amarsah--whowere envious; daiteyah--the asuras; na--not; ati-kovidah--who were very expertin executing transactions.                             TRANSLATION   After hearing their master's statement, the envious asuras, who were enemiesof the demigods and were not very expert in their dealings, advised Kamsa asfollows.                               PURPORT   There are two different types of men--the asuras and the suras.                     dvau bhuta-sargau loke 'smin                          daiva asura eva ca                      visnu-bhaktah smrto daiva                        asuras tad-viparyayah   (Padma Purana)   Those who are devotees of Lord Visnu, Krsna, are suras, or devas, whereasthose who are opposed to the devotees are called asuras. Devotees are expert inall transactions (yasyasti bhaktir bhagavaty akincana sarvair gunais tatrasamasate surah). Therefore they are called kovida, which means "expert." Asuras,however, although superficially showing expertise in passionate activities, areactually all fools. They are neither sober nor expert. Whatever they do is
imperfect. Moghasa mogha-karmanah. According to this description of the asurasgiven in Bhagavad-gita (9.12), whatever they do will ultimately be baffled. Itwas such persons who advised Kamsa because they were his chief friends andministers.                               TEXT 31                                 TEXT                       evam cet tarhi bhojendra                         pura-grama-vrajadisu                        anirdasan nirdasams ca                       hanisyamo 'dya vai sisun                               SYNONYMS   evam--thus; cet--if it is so; tarhi--then; bhoja-indra--O King of Bhoja;pura-grama-vraja-adisu--in all the towns, villages and pasturing grounds;anirdasan--those who are less than ten days old; nirdasan ca--and those who arejust over ten days old; hanisyamah--we shall kill; adya--beginning from today;vai--indeed; sisun--all such children.                             TRANSLATION   If this is so, O King of the Bhoja dynasty, beginning today we shall kill allthe children born in all the villages, towns and pasturing grounds within thepast ten days or slightly more.                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                       kim udyamaih karisyanti                        devah samara-bhiravah                        nityam udvigna-manaso                      jya-ghosair dhanusas tava                               SYNONYMS   kim--what; udyamaih--by their endeavors; karisyanti--will do; devah--all thedemigods; samara-bhiravah--who are afraid of fighting; nityam--always; udvigna-manasah--with agitated minds; jya-ghosaih--by the sound of the string; dhanusah--of the bow; tava--your.                             TRANSLATION   The demigods always fear the sound of your bowstring. They are constantly inanxiety, afraid of fighting. Therefore, what can they do by their endeavors toharm you?                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                       asyatas te sara-vratair                        hanyamanah samantatah                          jijivisava utsrjya                         palayana-para yayuh
                               SYNONYMS   asyatah--pierced by your discharged arrows; te--your; sara-vrataih--by themultitude of arrows; hanyamanah--being killed; samantatah--here and there;jijivisavah--aspiring to live; utsrjya--giving up the battlefield; palayana-parah--intent on escaping; yayuh--they fled (the fighting).                             TRANSLATION   While being pierced by your arrows, which you discharged on all sides, someof them, who were injured by the multitude of arrows but who desired to live,fled the battlefield, intent on escaping.                               TEXT 34                                 TEXT                        kecit pranjalayo dina                       nyasta-sastra divaukasah                      mukta-kaccha-sikhah kecid                        bhitah sma iti vadinah                               SYNONYMS   kecit--some of them; pranjalayah--folded their hands just to please you;dinah--very poor; nyasta-sastrah--being bereft of all weapons; divaukasah--thedemigods; mukta-kaccha-sikhah--their garments and hair loosened and scattered;kecit--some of them; bhitah--we are very much afraid; sma--so became; itivadinah--they spoke thus.                             TRANSLATION   Defeated and bereft of all weapons, some of the demigods gave up fighting andpraised you with folded hands, and some of them, appearing before you withloosened garments and hair, said, "O lord, we are very much afraid of you."                               TEXT 35                                 TEXT                     na tvam vismrta-sastrastran                       virathan bhaya-samvrtan                       hamsy anyasakta-vimukhan                       bhagna-capan ayudhyatah                               SYNONYMS   na--not; tvam--Your Majesty; vismrta-sastra-astran--those who have forgottenhow to use weapons; virathan--without chariots; bhaya-samvrtan--bewildered byfear; hamsi--does kill; anya-asakta-vimukhan--persons attached not to fightingbut to some other subject matter; bhagna-capan--their bows broken; ayudhyatah--and thus not fighting.                             TRANSLATION   When the demigods are bereft of their chariots, when they forget how to useweapons, when they are fearful or attached to something other than fighting, or
when their bows are broken and they have thus lost the ability to fight, YourMajesty does not kill them.                               PURPORT   There are principles that govern even fighting. If an enemy has no chariot,is unmindful of the fighting art because of fear, or is unwilling to fight, heis not to be killed. Kamsa's ministers reminded Kamsa that despite his power, hewas cognizant of the principles of fighting, and therefore he had excused thedemigods because of their incapability. "But the present emergency," theministers said, "is not intended for such mercy or military etiquette. Now youshould prepare to fight under any circumstances." Thus they advised Kamsa togive up the traditional etiquette in fighting and chastise the enemy at anycost.                               TEXT 36                                 TEXT                      kim ksema-surair vibudhair                        asamyuga-vikatthanaih                         raho-jusa kim harina                        sambhuna va vanaukasa                        kim indrenalpa-viryena                        brahmana va tapasyata                               SYNONYMS   kim--what is there to fear; ksema--in a place where there is a scarcity ofthe ability to fight; suraih--by the demigods; vibudhaih--by such powerfulpersons; asamyuga-vikatthanaih--by boasting and talking uselessly, away from thefighting; rahah-jusa--who is living in a solitary place within the core of theheart; kim harina--what is the fear from Lord Visnu; sambhuna--(and what is thefear) from Lord Siva; va--either; vana-okasa--who is living in the forest; kimindrena--what is the fear from Indra; alpa-viryena--he is not at all powerful(having no power to fight with you); brahmana--and what is the fear from Brahma;va--either; tapasyata--who is always engaged in meditation.                             TRANSLATION   The demigods boast uselessly while away from the battlefield. Only wherethere is no fighting can they show their prowess. Therefore, from such demigodswe have nothing to fear. As for Lord Visnu, He is in seclusion in the core ofthe hearts of the yogis. As for Lord Siva, he has gone to the forest. And as forLord Brahma, he is always engaged in austerities and meditation. The otherdemigods, headed by Indra, are devoid of prowess. Therefore you have nothing tofear.                               PURPORT   Kamsa's ministers told Kamsa that all the exalted demigods had fled in fearof him. One had gone to the forest, one to the core of the heart, and one toengage in tapasya. "Thus you can be free from all fear of the demigods," theysaid. "Just prepare to fight."                               TEXT 37                                 TEXT
                       tathapi devah sapatnyan                         nopeksya iti manmahe                        tatas tan-mula-khanane                       niyunksvasman anuvratan                               SYNONYMS   tatha api--still; devah--the demigods; sapatnyat--due to enmity; na upeksyah--should not be neglected; iti manmahe--this is our opinion; tatah--therefore;tat-mula-khanane--to uproot them completely; niyunksva--engage; asman--us;anuvratan--who are ready to follow you.                             TRANSLATION   Nonetheless, because of their enmity, our opinion is that the demigods shouldnot be neglected. Therefore, to uproot them completely, engage us in fightingwith them, for we are ready to follow you.                               PURPORT   According to moral instructions, one should not neglect to extinguish firecompletely, treat diseases completely, and clear debts completely. Otherwisethey will increase and later be difficult to stop. Therefore the ministersadvised Kamsa to uproot his enemies completely.                               TEXT 38                                 TEXT                  yathamayo 'nge samupeksito nrbhir                  na sakyate rudha-padas cikitsitum                  yathendriya-grama upeksitas tatha                  ripur mahan baddha-balo na calyate                               SYNONYMS   yatha--as; amayah--a disease; ange--in the body; samupeksitah--beingneglected; nrbhih--by men; na--not; sakyate--is able; rudha-padah--when it isacute; cikitsitum--to be treated; yatha--and as; indriya-gramah--the senses;upeksitah--not controlled in the beginning; tatha--similarly; ripuh mahan--agreat enemy; baddha-balah--if he becomes strong; na--not; calyate--can becontrolled.                             TRANSLATION   As a disease, if initially neglected, becomes acute and impossible to cure,or as the senses, if not controlled at first, are impossible to control later,an enemy, if neglected in the beginning, later becomes insurmountable.                               TEXT 39                                 TEXT                       mulam hi visnur devanam                       yatra dharmah sanatanah                      tasya ca brahma-go-vipras                       tapo yajnah sa-daksinah
                               SYNONYMS   mulam--the foundation; hi--indeed; visnuh--is Lord Visnu; devanam--of thedemigods; yatra--wherein; dharmah--religious principles; sanatanah--traditionalor eternal; tasya--of this (foundation); ca--also; brahma--brahminicalcivilization; go--cow protection; viprah--brahmanas; tapah--austerity; yajnah--performing sacrifices; sa-daksinah--with proper remuneration.                             TRANSLATION   The foundation of all the demigods is Lord Visnu, who lives and is worshipedwherever there are religious principles, traditional culture, the Vedas, cows,brahmanas, austerities, and sacrifices with proper remuneration.                               PURPORT   Here is a description of sanatana-dharma, eternal religious principles, whichmust include brahminical culture, brahmanas, sacrifices and religion. Theseprinciples establish the kingdom of Visnu. Without the kingdom of Visnu, thekingdom of God, no one can be happy. Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum: inthis demoniac civilization, people unfortunately do not understand that theself-interest of human society lies in Visnu. Durasaya ye bahir-artha-maninah:thus they are involved in a hopeless hope. People want to be happy without Godconsciousness, or Krsna consciousness, because they are led by blind leaders wholead human society to chaos. The asuric adherents of Kamsa wanted to disrupt thetraditional condition of human happiness and thus defeat the devatas, thedevotees and demigods. Unless the devotees and demigods predominate, the asuraswill increase, and human society will be in a chaotic condition.                               TEXT 40                                 TEXT                       tasmat sarvatmana rajan                       brahmanan brahma-vadinah                        tapasvino yajna-silan                      gas ca hanmo havir-dughah                               SYNONYMS   tasmat--therefore; sarva-atmana--in every respect; rajan--O King; brahmanan--the brahmanas; brahma-vadinah--who maintain the brahminical culture, centeredaround Visnu; tapasvinah--persons who are engaged in austerities; yajna-silan--persons engaged in offering sacrifices; gah ca--cows and persons engaged inprotecting cows; hanmah--we shall kill; havih-dughah--because they supply milk,from which clarified butter is obtained for the offering of sacrifice.                             TRANSLATION   O King, we, who are your adherents in all respects, shall therefore kill theVedic brahmanas, the persons engaged in offering sacrifices and austerities, andthe cows that supply milk, from which clarified butter is obtained for theingredients of sacrifice.                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT
                       vipra gavas ca vedas ca                       tapah satyam damah samah                       sraddha daya titiksa ca                       kratavas ca hares tanuh                               SYNONYMS   viprah--the brahmanas; gavah ca--and the cows; vedah ca--and the Vedicknowledge; tapah--austerity; satyam--truthfulness; damah--control of the senses;samah--control of the mind; sraddha--faith; daya--mercy; titiksa--tolerance; ca--also; kratavah ca--as well as sacrifices; hareh tanuh--are the different partsof the body of Lord Visnu.                             TRANSLATION   The brahmanas, the cows, Vedic knowledge, austerity, truthfulness, control ofthe mind and senses, faith, mercy, tolerance and sacrifice are the differentparts of the body of Lord Visnu, and they are the paraphernalia for a godlycivilization.                               PURPORT   When we offer our obeisances to the Personality of Godhead, we say:                        namo brahmanya-devaya                        go-brahmana-hitaya ca                        jagad-dhitaya krsnaya                         govindaya namo namah   When Krsna comes to establish real perfection in the social order, Hepersonally gives protection to the cows and the brahmanas (go-brahmana-hitayaca). This is His first interest because without protection of the brahmanas andthe cows, there can be no human civilization and no question of happy, peacefullife. Asuras, therefore, are always interested in killing the brahmanas andcows. Especially in this age, Kali-yuga, cows are being killed all over theworld, and as soon as there is a movement to establish brahminical civilization,people in general rebel. Thus they regard the Krsna consciousness movement as aform of "brainwashing." How can such envious persons be happy in their godlesscivilization? The Supreme Personality of Godhead punishes them by keeping themin darkness, birth after birth, and pushing them lower and lower into wretchedconditions of hellish life. The Krsna consciousness movement has started abrahminical civilization, but especially when it is introduced in the Westerncountries, the asuras try to impede it in many ways. Nonetheless, we must pushforward this movement tolerantly for the benefit of human society.                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                       sa hi sarva-suradhyakso                       hy asura-dvid guha-sayah                       tan-mula devatah sarvah                       sesvarah sa-catur-mukhah                        ayam vai tad-vadhopayo                        yad rsinam vihimsanam                               SYNONYMS
   sah--He (Lord Visnu); hi--indeed; sarva-sura-adhyaksah--the leader of all thedemigods; hi--indeed; asura-dvit--the enemy of the asuras; guha-sayah--He is theSupersoul within the core of everyone's heart; tat-mulah--taking shelter at Hislotus feet; devatah--the demigods exist; sarvah--all of them; sa-isvarah--including Lord Siva; sa-catuh-mukhah--as well as Lord Brahma, who has fourfaces; ayam--this is; vai--indeed; tat-vadha-upayah--the only means of killingHim (Visnu); yat--which; rsinam--of great sages, saintly persons, or Vaisnavas;vihimsanam--suppression with all kinds of persecution.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Visnu, the Supersoul within the core of everyone's heart, is theultimate enemy of the asuras and is therefore known as asura-dvit. He is theleader of all the demigods because all the demigods, including Lord Siva andLord Brahma, exist under His protection. The great saintly persons, sages andVaisnavas also depend upon Him. To persecute the Vaisnavas, therefore, is theonly way to kill Visnu.                               PURPORT   The demigods and the Vaisnavas especially are part and parcel of the SupremeLord, Visnu, because they are always obedient to His orders (om tad visnohparamam padam sada pasyanti surayah). The demoniac followers of Kamsa thoughtthat if the Vaisnavas, saintly persons and sages were persecuted, the originalbody of Visnu would naturally be destroyed. Thus they decided to suppressVaisnavism. The asuras perpetually struggle to persecute the Vaisnavas becausethey do not want Vaisnavism to spread. Vaisnavas preach only devotional service,not encouraging karmis, jnanis and yogis, because if one must liberate oneselffrom material, conditional life, one must ultimately become a Vaisnava. OurKrsna consciousness movement is directed with this understanding, and thereforethe asuras always try to suppress it.                               TEXT 43                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                      evam durmantribhih kamsah                       saha sammantrya durmatih                       brahma-himsam hitam mene                         kala-pasavrto 'surah                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam--in this way; durmantribhih--his bad ministers; kamsah--King Kamsa; saha--along with; sammantrya--afterconsidering very elaborately; durmatih--without good intelligence; brahma-himsam--persecution of the brahmanas; hitam--as the best way; mene--accepted;kala-pasa-avrtah--being bound by the rules and regulations of Yamaraja; asurah--because he was a demon.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thus, having considered the instructions of hisbad ministers, Kamsa, who was bound by the laws of Yamaraja and devoid of goodintelligence because he was a demon, decided to persecute the saintly persons,the brahmanas, as the only way to achieve his own good fortune.
                               PURPORT   Srila Locana dasa Thakura has sung, apana karama, bhunjaye samana, kahayelocana dasa. Instead of taking good instructions from the sages and the sastras,godless nondevotees act whimsically, according to their own plans. Actually,however, no one has his own plans because everyone is bound by the laws ofnature and must act according to his tendency in material, conditional life.Therefore one must change one's own decision and follow the decision of Krsnaand Krsna's devotees. Then one is rescued from punishment by Yamaraja. Kamsa wasnot uneducated. It appears from his talks with Vasudeva and Devaki that he knewall about the laws of nature. But because of his association with bad ministers,he could not make a clear decision about his welfare. Therefore the Caitanya-caritamrta (Madhya 22.54) says:          'sadhu-sanga,' 'sadhu-sanga'----sarva-sastre kaya               lava-matra sadhu-sasge sarva-siddhi haya   If one desires his real welfare, he must associate with devotees and saintlypersons and in this way rectify the material condition of his life.                               TEXT 44                                 TEXT                        sandisya sadhu-lokasya                         kadane kadana-priyan                        kama-rupa-dharan diksu                         danavan grham avisat                               SYNONYMS   sandisya--after giving permission; sadhu-lokasya--of the saintly persons;kadane--in persecution; kadana-priyan--to the demons, who were very expert atpersecuting others; kama-rupa-dharan--who could assume any form, according totheir own desire; diksu--in all directions; danavan--to the demons; grhamavisat--Kamsa entered his own palace.                             TRANSLATION   These demons, the followers of Kamsa, were expert at persecuting others,especially the Vaisnavas, and could assume any form they desired. After givingthese demons permission to go everywhere and persecute the saintly persons,Kamsa entered his palace.                               TEXT 45                                 TEXT                       te vai rajah-prakrtayas                         tamasa mudha-cetasah                        satam vidvesam acerur                         arad agata-mrtyavah                               SYNONYMS   te--all the asuric ministers; vai--indeed; rajah-prakrtayah--surcharged withthe mode of passion; tamasa--overwhelmed by the mode of ignorance; mudha-
cetasah--foolish persons; satam--of saintly persons; vidvesam--persecution;aceruh--executed; arat agata-mrtya-vah--impending death having already overtakenthem.                             TRANSLATION   Surcharged with passion and ignorance and not knowing what was good or badfor them, the asuras, for whom impending death was waiting, began thepersecution of the saintly persons.                               PURPORT   As stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.13):                       dehino 'smin yatha dehe                        kaumaram yauvanam jara                       tatha dehantara-praptir                       dhiras tatra na muhyati   "As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youthto old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." Irresponsible persons,surcharged with passion and ignorance, foolishly do things that are not to bedone (nunam pramattah kurute vikarma). But one should know the results ofirresponsible actions, as explained in the next verse.                               TEXT 46                                 TEXT                       ayuh sriyam yaso dharmam                          lokan asisa eva ca                        hanti sreyamsi sarvani                        pumso mahad-atikramah                               SYNONYMS   ayuh--the duration of life; sriyam--beauty; yasah--fame; dharmam--religion;lokan--elevation to higher planets; asisah--blessings; eva--indeed; ca--also;hanti--destroys; sreyamsi--benedictions; sarvani--all; pumsah--of a person;mahat-atikramah--trespassing against great personalities.                             TRANSLATION   My dear King, when a man persecutes great souls, all his benedictions oflongevity, beauty, fame, religion, blessings and promotion to higher planetswill be destroyed.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Fourth Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "The Atrocities of King Kamsa."                             Chapter Five              The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva   As described in this chapter, Nanda Maharaja very gorgeously performed thebirth ceremony for his newborn child. Then he went to Kamsa to pay taxes due andmet his intimate friend Vasudeva.   There was great jubilation all over Vrndavana due to Krsna's birth. Everyonewas overwhelmed with joy. Therefore the King of Vraja, Maharaja Nanda, wanted toperform the birth ceremony for his child, and this he did. During this great
festival, Nanda Maharaja gave in charity to all present whatever they desired.After the festival, Nanda Maharaja put the cowherd men in charge of protectingGokula, and then he went to Mathura to pay official taxes to Kamsa. In Mathura,Nanda Maharaja met Vasudeva. Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva were brothers, andVasudeva praised Nanda Maharaja's good fortune because he knew that Krsna hadaccepted Nanda Maharaja as His father. When Vasudeva inquired from NandaMaharaja about the welfare of the child, Nanda Maharaja informed him all aboutVrndavana, and Vasudeva was very much satisfied by this, although he expressedhis grief because Devaki's many children had been killed by Kamsa. NandaMaharaja consoled Vasudeva by saying that everything happens according todestiny and that one who knows this is not aggrieved. Expecting manydisturbances in Gokula, Vasudeva then advised Nanda Maharaja not to wait inMathura, but to return to Vrndavana as soon as possible. Thus Nanda Maharajatook leave of Vasudeva and returned to Vrndavana with the other cowherd men ontheir bullock carts.                              TEXTS 1-2                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                       nandas tv atmaja utpanne                         jatahlado maha-manah                        ahuya vipran veda-jnan                        snatah sucir alankrtah                        vacayitva svastyayanam                        jata-karmatmajasya vai                         karayam asa vidhivat                        pitr-devarcanam tatha                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; nandah--Maharaja Nanda; tu--indeed; atmaje--his son; utpanne--having been born; jata--overwhelmed; ahladah--in great jubilation; maha-manah--who was great minded; ahuya--invited; vipran--the brahmanas; veda-jnan--who were fully conversant in Vedic knowledge; snatah--taking a full bath; sucih--purifying himself; alankrtah--being dressed verynicely with ornaments and fresh garments; vacayitva--after causing to berecited; svasti-ayanam--Vedic mantras (by the brahmanas); jata-karma--thefestival for the birth of the child; atmajasya--of his own son; vai--indeed;karayam asa--caused to be performed; vidhi-vat--according to the Vedicregulations; pitr-deva-arcanam--the worship of the forefathers and the demigods;tatha--as well as.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: Nanda Maharaja was naturally very magnanimous, andwhen Lord Sri Krsna appeared as his son, he was overwhelmed by jubilation.Therefore, after bathing and purifying himself and dressing himself properly, heinvited brahmanas who knew how to recite Vedic mantras. After having thesequalified brahmanas recite auspicious Vedic hymns, he arranged to have the Vedicbirth ceremony celebrated for his newborn child according to the rules andregulations, and he also arranged for worship of the demigods and forefathers.                               PURPORT
   Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura has discussed the significance of thewords nandas tu. The word tu, he says, is not used to fulfill the sentence,because without tu the sentence is complete. Therefore the word tu is used for adifferent purpose. Although Krsna appeared as the son of Devaki, Devaki andVasudeva did not enjoy the jata-karma, the festival of the birth ceremony.Instead, this ceremony was enjoyed by Nanda Maharaja, as stated here (nandas tvatmaja utpanne jatahlado maha-manah). When Nanda Maharaja met Vasudeva, Vasudevacould not disclose, "Your son Krsna is actually my son. You are His father in adifferent way, spiritually." Because of fear of Kamsa, Vasudeva could notobserve the festival for Krsna's birth, Nanda Maharaja, however, took fulladvantage of this opportunity.   The jata-karma ceremony can take place when the umbilical cord, connectingthe child and the placenta, is cut. However, since Krsna was brought by Vasudevato the house of Nanda Maharaja, where was the chance for this to happen? In thisregard, Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura desires to prove with evidence from manysastras that Krsna actually took birth as the son of Yasoda before the birth ofYogamaya, who is therefore described as the Lord's younger sister. Even thoughthere may be doubts about the cutting of the umbilical cord, and even though itis possible that this was not done, when the Supreme Personality of Godheadappears, such events are regarded as factual. Krsna appeared as Varahadeva fromthe nostril of Brahma, and therefore Brahma is described as the father ofVarahadeva. Also significant are the words karayam asa vidhivat. Beingoverwhelmed with jubilation over the birth of his son, Nanda Maharaja did notsee whether the cord was cut or not. Thus he performed the ceremony verygorgeously. According to the opinion of some authorities, Krsna was actuallyborn as the son of Yasoda. In any case, without regard for materialunderstandings, we can accept that Nanda Maharaja's celebration for the ceremonyof Krsna's birth was proper. This ceremony is therefore well known everywhere asNandotsava.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT                        dhenunam niyute pradad                        viprebhyah samalankrte                      tiladrin sapta ratnaugha-                        satakaumbhambaravrtan                               SYNONYMS   dhenunam--of milk-giving cows; niyute--two million; pradat--gave in charity;viprebhyah--unto the brahmanas; samalankrte--completely decorated; tila-adrin--hills of grain; sapta--seven; ratna-ogha-sata-kaumbha-ambara-avrtan--coveredwith jewels and cloth embroidered with gold.                             TRANSLATION   Nanda Maharaja gave two million cows, completely decorated with cloth andjewels, in charity to the brahmanas. He also gave them seven hills of grain,covered with jewels and with cloth decorated with golden embroidery.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                       kalena snana-saucabhyam                        samskarais tapasejyaya
                      sudhyanti danaih santustya                       dravyany atmatma-vidyaya                               SYNONYMS   kalena--by due course of time (the land and other material things becomepurified); snana-saucabhyam--by bathing (the body becomes purified) and bycleansing (unclean things become purified); samskaraih--by purificatoryprocesses (birth becomes purified); tapasa--by austerity (the senses becomepurified); ijyaya--by worship (the brahmanas become purified); sudhyanti--becomepurified; danaih--by charity (wealth becomes purified); santustya--bysatisfaction (the mind becomes purified); dravyani--all material possessions,such as cows, land and gold; atma--the soul (becomes purified); atma-vidyaya--byself-realization.                             TRANSLATION   O King, by the passing of time, land and other material possessions arepurified; by bathing, the body is purified; and by being cleansed, uncleanthings are purified. By purificatory ceremonies, birth is purified; byausterity, the senses are purified; and by worship and charity offered to thebrahmanas, material possessions are purified. By satisfaction, the mind ispurified; and by self-realization, or Krsna consciousness, the soul is purified.                               PURPORT   These are sastric injunctions concerning how one can purify everythingaccording to Vedic civilization. Unless purified, anything we use will infect uswith contamination. In India five thousand years ago, even in the villages suchas that of Nanda Maharaja, people knew know to purify things, and thus theyenjoyed even material life without contamination.                                TEXT 5                                 TEXT                       saumangalya-giro viprah                        suta-magadha-vandinah                        gayakas ca jagur nedur                       bheryo dundubhayo muhuh                               SYNONYMS   saumangalya-girah--whose chanting of mantras and hymns purified theenvironment by their vibration; viprah--the brahmanas; suta--experts in recitingall the histories; magadha--experts in reciting the histories of special royalfamilies; vandinah--general professional reciters; gayakah--singers; ca--as wellas; jaguh--chanted; neduh--vibrated; bheryah--a kind of musical instrument;dundubhayah--a kind of musical instrument; muhuh--constantly.                             TRANSLATION   The brahmanas recited auspicious Vedic hymns, which purified the environmentby their vibration. The experts in reciting old histories like the Puranas, theexperts in reciting the histories of royal families, and general reciters allchanted, while singers sang and many kinds of musical instruments, like bherisand dundubhis, played in accompaniment.
                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                      vrajah sammrsta-samsikta-                         dvarajira-grhantarah                      citra-dhvaja-pataka-srak-                        caila-pallava-toranaih                               SYNONYMS   vrajah--the land occupied by Nanda Maharaja; sammrsta--very nicely cleaned;samsikta--very nicely washed; dvara--all the doors or entrances; ajira--courtyards; grha-antarah--everything within the house; citra--variegated;dhvaja--of festoons; pataka--of flags; srak--of flower garlands; caila--ofpieces of cloth; pallava--of the leaves of mango trees; toranaih--(decorated) bygates in different places.                             TRANSLATION   Vrajapura, the residence of Nanda Maharaja, was fully decorated withvarieties of festoons and flags, and in different places, gates were made withvarieties of flower garlands, pieces of cloth, and mango leaves. The courtyards,the gates near the roads, and everything within the rooms of the houses wereperfectly swept and washed with water.                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT                         gavo vrsa vatsatara                        haridra-taila-rusitah                       vicitra-dhatu-barhasrag-                        vastra-kancana-malinah                               SYNONYMS   gavah--the cows; vrsah--the bulls; vatsatarah--the calves; haridra--with amixture of turmeric; taila--and oil; rusitah--their entire bodies smeared;vicitra--decorated varieties of; dhatu--colored minerals; barha-srak--peacock-feather garlands; vastra--cloths; kancana--golden ornaments; malinah--beingdecorated with garlands.                             TRANSLATION   The cows, the bulls and the calves were thoroughly smeared with a mixture ofturmeric and oil, mixed with varieties of minerals. Their heads were bedeckedwith peacock feathers, and they were garlanded and covered with cloth and goldenornaments.                               PURPORT   The Supreme Personality of Godhead has instructed in Bhagavad-gita (18.44),krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam vaisya-karma-svabhavajam: "Farming, cow protection andtrade are the qualities of work for the vaisyas." Nanda Maharaja belonged to thevaisya community, the agriculturalist community. How to protect the cows and howrich this community was are explained in these verses. We can hardly imaginethat cows, bulls and calves could be cared for so nicely and decorated so well
with cloths and valuable golden ornaments. How happy they were. As describedelsewhere in the Bhagavatam, during Maharaja Yudhisthira's time the cows were sohappy that they used to muddy the pasturing ground with milk. This is Indiancivilization. Yet in the same place, India, Bharata-varsa, how much people aresuffering by giving up the Vedic way of life and not understanding the teachingsof Bhagavad-gita.                                TEXT 8                                 TEXT                        maharha-vastrabharana-                        kancukosnisa-bhusitah                         gopah samayayu rajan                          nanopayana-panayah                               SYNONYMS   maha-arha--extremely valuable; vastra-abharana--with garments and ornaments;kancuka--by a particular type of garment used in Vrndavana; usnisa--withturbans; bhusitah--being nicely dressed; gopah--all the cowherd men; samayayuh--came there; rajan--O King (Maharaja Pariksit); nana--various; upayana--presentations; panayah--holding in their hands.                             TRANSLATION   O King Pariksit, the cowherd men dressed very opulently with valuableornaments and garments such as coats and turbans. Decorated in this way andcarrying various presentations in their hands, they approached the house ofNanda Maharaja.                               PURPORT   When we consider the past condition of the agriculturalist in the village, wecan see how opulent he was, simply because of agricultural produce andprotection of cows. At the present, however, agriculture having been neglectedand cow protection given up, the agriculturalist is suffering pitiably and isdressed in a niggardly torn cloth. This is the distinction between the India ofhistory and the India of the present day. By the atrocious activities of ugra-karma, how we are killing the opportunity of human civilization!                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT                        gopyas cakarnya mudita                        yasodayah sutodbhavam                       atmanam bhusayam cakrur                        vastrakalpanjanadibhih                               SYNONYMS   gopyah--the feminine community, the wives of the cowherd men; ca--also;akarnya--after hearing; muditah--became very glad; yasodayah--of mother Yasoda;suta-udbhavam--the birth of a male child; atmanam--personally; bhusayam cakruh--dressed very nicely to attend the festival; vastra-akalpa-anjana-adibhih--withproper dress, ornaments, black ointment, and so on.
                             TRANSLATION   The gopi wives of the cowherd men were very pleased to hear that motherYasoda had given birth to a son, and they began to decorate themselves verynicely with proper dresses, ornaments, black ointment for the eyes, and so on.                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT                        nava-kunkuma-kinjalka-                        mukha-pankaja-bhutayah                       balibhis tvaritam jagmuh                      prthu-sronyas calat-kucah                               SYNONYMS   nava-kunkuma-kinjalka--with saffron and newly grown kunkuma flower; mukha-pankaja-bhutayah--exhibiting an extraordinary beauty in their lotuslike faces;balibhih--with presentations in their hands; tvaritam--very quickly; jagmuh--went (to the house of mother Yasoda); prthu-sronyah--bearing full hips,fulfilling womanly beauty; calat-kucah--their developed breasts were moving.                             TRANSLATION   Their lotuslike faces extraordinarily beautiful, being decorated with saffronand newly grown kunkuma, the wives of the cowherd men hurried to the house ofmother Yasoda with presentations in their hands. Because of natural beauty, thewives had full hips and full breasts, which moved as they hurried along.                               PURPORT   The cowherd men and women in the villages lived a very natural life, and thewomen developed a natural feminine beauty, with full hips and breasts. Becausewomen in modern civilization do not live naturally, their hips and breasts donot develop this natural fullness. Because of artificial living, women have losttheir natural beauty, although they claim to be independent and advanced inmaterial civilization. This description of the village women gives a clearexample of the contrast between natural life and the artificial life of acondemned society, such as that of the Western countries, where topless,bottomless beauty may be easily purchased in clubs and shops and for publicadvertisements. The word balibhih indicates that the women were carrying goldcoins, jeweled necklaces, nice cloths, newly grown grass, sandalwood pulp,flower garlands and similar offerings on plates made of gold. Such offerings arecalled bali. The words tvaritam jagmuh indicate how happy the village women wereto understand that mother Yasoda had given birth to a wonderful child known asKrsna.                               TEXT 11                                 TEXT              gopyah sumrsta-mani-kundala-niska-kanthyas              citrambarah pathi sikha-cyuta-malya-varsah                nandalayam sa-valaya vrajatir virejur                vyalola-kundala-payodhara-hara-sobhah                               SYNONYMS
   gopyah--the gopis; su-mrsta--very dazzling; mani--made of jewels; kundala--wearing earrings; niska-kanthyah--and having little keys and lockets hangingfrom their necks; citra-ambarah--dressed with varieties of colored embroidery;pathi--on their way to Yasodamayi's house; sikha-cyuta--fell from their hair;malya-varsah--a shower of flower garlands; nanda-alayam--to the house ofMaharaja Nanda; sa-valayah--with bangles on their hands; vrajatih--while going(in that costume); virejuh--they looked very, very beautiful; vyalola--moving;kundala--with earrings; payodhara--with breasts; hara--with flower garlands;sobhah--who appeared so beautiful.                             TRANSLATION   In the ears of the gopis were brilliantly polished jeweled earrings, and fromtheir necks hung metal lockets. Their hands were decorated with bangles, theirdresses were of varied colors, and from their hair, flowers fell onto the streetlike showers. Thus while going to the house of Maharaja Nanda, the gopis, theirearrings, breasts and garlands moving, were brilliantly beautiful.                               PURPORT   The description of the gopis, who were going to the house of Maharaja Nandato welcome Krsna, is especially significant. The gopis were not ordinary women,but expansions of Krsna's pleasure potency, as described in the Brahma-samhita(5.37,29):                 ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis                 tabhir ya eva nija-rupataya kalabhih                 goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhuto                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   (5.37)                cintamani-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vrksa-                 laksavrtesu surabhir abhipalayantam               laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   (5.29)   Krsna is always worshiped by the gopis wherever He goes. Therefore Krsna isso vividly described in Srimad-Bhagavatam. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has alsodescribed Krsna in this way: ramya kacid upasana vrajavadhu-vargena ya kalpita.All these gopis were going to offer Krsna their presentations because the gopisare eternal associates of the Lord. Now the gopis were more jubilant because ofthe news of Krsna's appearance in Vrndavana.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                        ta asisah prayunjanas                         ciram pahiti balake                       haridra-curna-tailadbhih                       sincantyo 'janam ujjaguh                               SYNONYMS
   tah--all the women, the wives and daughters of the cowherd men; asisah--blessings; prayunjanah--offering; ciram--for a long time; pahi--may You becomethe King of Vraja and maintain all its inhabitants; iti--thus; balake--unto thenewborn child; haridra-curna--powder of turmeric; taila-adbhih--mixed with oil;sincantyah--sprinkling; ajanam--the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who isunborn; ujjaguh--offered prayers.                             TRANSLATION   Offering blessings to the newborn child, Krsna, the wives and daughters ofthe cowherd men said, "May You become the King of Vraja and long maintain allits inhabitants." They sprinkled a mixture of turmeric powder, oil and waterupon the birthless Supreme Lord and offered their prayers.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT                         avadyanta vicitrani                         vaditrani mahotsave                       krsne visvesvare 'nante                        nandasya vrajam agate                               SYNONYMS   avadyanta--vibrated in celebration of Vasudeva's son; vicitrani--various;vaditrani--musical instruments; maha-utsave--in the great festival; krsne--whenLord Krsna; visva-isvare--the master of the entire cosmic manifestation; anante--unlimitedly; nandasya--of Maharaja Nanda; vrajam--at the pasturing place;agate--had so arrived.                             TRANSLATION   Now that the all-pervading, unlimited Lord Krsna, the master of the cosmicmanifestation, had arrived within the estate of Maharaja Nanda, various types ofmusical instruments resounded to celebrate the great festival.                               PURPORT   The Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.7):                        yada yada hi dharmasya                        glanir bhavati bharata                       abhyutthanam adharmasya                        tadatmanam srjamy aham   "Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O descendantof Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion--at that time I descendMyself." Whenever Krsna comes, once in a day of Brahma, He comes to the house ofNanda Maharaja in Vrndavana. Krsna is the master of all creation (sarva-loka-mahesvaram). Therefore, not only in the neighborhood of Nanda Maharaja's estate,but all over the universe--and in all the other universes--musical soundscelebrated the auspicious arrival of the Lord.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT
                        gopah parasparam hrsta                       dadhi-ksira-ghrtambubhih                         asincanto vilimpanto                        navanitais ca ciksipuh                               SYNONYMS   gopah--the cowherd men; parasparam--on one another; hrstah--being so pleased;dadhi--with curd; ksira--with condensed milk; ghrta-ambubhih--with water mixedwith butter; asincantah--sprinkling; vilimpantah--smearing; navanitaih ca--andwith butter; ciksipuh--they threw on one another.                             TRANSLATION   In gladness, the cowherd men enjoyed the great festival by splashing oneanother's bodies with a mixture of curd, condensed milk, butter and water. Theythrew butter on one another and smeared it on one another's bodies.                               PURPORT   From this statement we can understand that five thousand years ago not onlywas there enough milk, butter and curd to eat, drink and cook with, but whenthere was a festival it would be thrown about without restriction. There was nolimit to how extensively milk, butter, curd and other such products were used inhuman society. Everyone had an ample stock of milk, and by using it in manyvaried milk preparations, people would keep good health in natural ways and thusenjoy life in Krsna consciousness.                             TEXTS 15-16                                 TEXT                       nando maha-manas tebhyo                       vaso 'lankara-go-dhanam                        suta-magadha-vandibhyo                        ye 'nye vidyopajivinah                      tais taih kamair adinatma                         yathocitam apujayat                        visnor aradhanarthaya                        sva-putrasyodayaya ca                               SYNONYMS   nandah--Maharaja Nanda; maha-manah--who among the cowherd men was thegreatest of all upright persons; tebhyah--unto the cowherd men; vasah--clothing;alankara--ornaments; go-dhanam--and cows; suta-magadha-vandibhyah--unto thesutas (the professional reciters of the old histories), the magadhas (theprofessional reciters of the histories of royal dynasties) and the vandis(general singers of prayers); ye anye--as well as others; vidya-upajivinah--whowere continuing their livelihood on the basis of educational qualifications;taih taih--with whatever; kamaih--improvements of desire; adina-atma--MaharajaNanda, who was so magnanimous; yatha-ucitam--as was suitable; apujayat--worshiped them or satisfied them; visnoh aradhana-arthaya--for the purpose ofsatisfying Lord Visnu; sva-putrasya--of his own child; udayaya--for theimprovement in all respects; ca--and.                             TRANSLATION
   The great-minded Maharaja Nanda gave clothing, ornaments and cows in charityto the cowherd men in order to please Lord Visnu, and thus he improved thecondition of his own son in all respects. He distributed charity to the sutas,the magadhas, the vandis, and men of all other professions, according to theireducational qualifications, and satisfied everyone's desires.                               PURPORT   Although it has become fashionable to speak of daridra-narayana, the wordsvisnor aradhanarthaya do not mean that all the people satisfied by NandaMaharaja in this great ceremony were Visnus. They were not daridra, nor werethey Narayana. Rather, they were devotees of Narayana, and by their educationalqualifications they would satisfy Narayana. Therefore, satisfying them was anindirect way of satisfying Lord Visnu. Mad-bhakta-pujabhyadhika (Bhag.11.19.21). The Lord says, "Worshiping My devotees is better than worshiping Medirectly." The varnasrama system is entirely meant for visnu-aradhana, worshipof Lord Visnu. Varnasramacaravata purusena parah puman. visnur aradhyate (VisnuPurana 3.8.9). The ultimate goal of life is to please Lord Visnu, the SupremeLord. The uncivilized man or materialistic person, however, does not know thisaim of life. Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum (Bhag. 7.5.31). One's realself-interest lies in satisfying Lord Visnu. Not satisfying Lord Visnu butinstead attempting to become happy through material adjustments (bahir-artha-maninah) is the wrong way for happiness. Because Visnu is the root ofeverything, if Visnu is pleased, everyone is pleased; in particular, one'schildren and family members become happy in all respects. Nanda Maharaja wantedto see his newborn child happy. That was his purpose. Therefore he wanted tosatisfy Lord Visnu, and to satisfy Lord Visnu it was necessary to satisfy Hisdevotees, such as the learned brahmanas, magadhas and sutas. Thus, in aroundabout way, ultimately it was Lord Visnu who was to be satisfied.“Srimad-Bhagavatam – Canto Ten” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada.Summary: Srimad-Bhagavatam is compared to the ripened fruit of Vedic knowledge.Also known as the Bhagavata Purana, this multi-volume work elaborates on thepastimes of Lord Krishna and His devotees, and includes detailed descriptionsof, among other phenomena, the process of creation and annihilation of theuniverse. His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada considered thetranslation of the Bhagavatam his life’s work.COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of thisbook, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines established byinternational copyright laws. You may use this electronic file to evaluate theprinted version of this book, for your own private use, or for short excerptsused in academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the like.You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more than tenpercent (10%) of this book in any media without the express written permissionfrom the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Srimad-Bhagavatam” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book TrustInternational, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluatedozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,www.Krishna.com.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                         rohini ca maha-bhaga                         nanda-gopabhinandita                      vyacarad divya-vasa-srak-                        kanthabharana-bhusita                               SYNONYMS   rohini--Rohini, the mother of Baladeva; ca--also; maha-bhaga--the mostfortunate mother of Baladeva (greatly fortunate because of having theopportunity to raise Krsna and Balarama together); nanda-gopa-abhinandita--beinghonored by Maharaja Nanda and mother Yasoda; vyacarat--was busy wandering hereand there; divya--beautiful; vasa--with a dress; srak--with a garland; kantha-abharana--and with an ornament covering the neck; bhusita--decorated.                             TRANSLATION   The most fortunate Rohini, the mother of Baladeva, was honored by NandaMaharaja and Yasoda, and thus she also dressed gorgeously and decorated herselfwith a necklace, a garland and other ornaments. She was busy wandering here andthere to receive the women who were guests at the festival.                               PURPORT   Rohini, another wife of Vasudeva's, was also kept under the care of NandaMaharaja with her son Baladeva. Because her husband was imprisoned by Kamsa, shewas not very happy, but on the occasion of Krsna-janmastami, Nandotsava, whenNanda Maharaja gave dresses and ornaments to others, he also gave gorgeousgarments and ornaments to Rohini so that she could take part in the festival.Thus she also was busy receiving the women who were guests. Because of her goodfortune in being able to raise Krsna and Balarama together, she is described asmaha-bhaga, greatly fortunate.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                        tata arabhya nandasya                       vrajah sarva-samrddhiman                        harer nivasatma-gunai                        ramakridam abhun nrpa                               SYNONYMS   tatah arabhya--beginning from that time; nandasya--of Maharaja Nanda; vrajah--Vrajabhumi, the land for protecting and breeding cows; sarva-samrddhiman--became opulent with all kinds of riches; hareh nivasa--of the residence of theSupreme Personality of Godhead; atma-gunaih--by the transcendental qualities;
rama-akridam--the place of pastimes for the goddess of fortune; abhut--became;nrpa--O King (Maharaja Pariksit).                             TRANSLATION   O Maharaja Pariksit, the home of Nanda Maharaja is eternally the abode of theSupreme Personality of Godhead and His transcendental qualities and is thereforealways naturally endowed with the opulence of all wealth. Yet beginning fromLord Krsna's appearance there, it became the place for the pastimes of thegoddess of fortune.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.29), laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami. The abode of Krsna is alwaysserved by hundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune. Wherever Krsna goes,the goddess of fortune naturally resides with Him. The chief of the goddesses offortune is Srimati Radharani. Therefore, Krsna's appearance in the land of Vrajaindicated that the chief goddess of fortune, Radharani, would also appear therevery soon. Nanda Maharaja's abode was already opulent, and since Krsna hadappeared, it would be opulent in all respects.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                        gopan gokula-raksayam                        nirupya mathuram gatah                      nandah kamsasya varsikyam                        karam datum kurudvaha                               SYNONYMS   gopan--the cowherd men; gokula-raksayam--in giving protection to the state ofGokula; nirupya--after appointing; mathuram--to Mathura; gatah--went; nandah--Nanda Maharaja; kamsasya--of Kamsa; varsikyam--yearly taxes; karam--the share ofprofit; datum--to pay; kuru-udvaha--O Maharaja Pariksit, best protector of theKuru dynasty.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Thereafter, my dear King Pariksit, O bestprotector of the Kuru dynasty, Nanda Maharaja appointed the local cowherd men toprotect Gokula and then went to Mathura to pay the yearly taxes to King Kamsa.                               PURPORT   Because the killing of babies was going on and had already become known,Nanda Maharaja was very much afraid for his newborn child. Thus he appointed thelocal cowherd men to protect his home and child. He wanted to go immediately toMathura to pay the taxes due and also to offer some presentation for the sake ofhis newborn son. For the protection of the child, he had worshiped variousdemigods and forefathers and given charity to everyone's satisfaction.Similarly, Nanda Maharaja wanted not only to pay Kamsa the yearly taxes but alsoto offer some presentation so that Kamsa too would be satisfied. His onlyconcern was how to protect his transcendental child, Krsna.                               TEXT 20
                                 TEXT                          vasudeva upasrutya                       bhrataram nandam agatam                       jnatva datta-karam rajne                         yayau tad-avamocanam                               SYNONYMS   vasudevah--Vasudeva; upasrutya--when he heard; bhrataram--that his dearfriend and brother; nandam--Nanda Maharaja; agatam--had come to Mathura; jnatva--when he learned; datta-karam--and had already paid the taxes; rajne--unto theKing; yayau--he went; tat-avamocanam--to the residential quarters of NandaMaharaja.                             TRANSLATION   When Vasudeva heard that Nanda Maharaja, his very dear friend and brother,had come to Mathura and already paid the taxes to Kamsa, he went to NandaMaharaja's residence.                               PURPORT   Vasudeva and Nanda Maharaja were so intimately connected that they lived likebrothers. Furthermore, it is learned from the notes of Sripada Madhvacarya thatVasudeva and Nanda Maharaja were stepbrothers. Vasudeva's father, Surasena,married a vaisya girl, and from her Nanda Maharaja was born. Later, NandaMaharaja himself married a vaisya girl, Yasoda. Therefore his family iscelebrated as a vaisya family, and Krsna, identifying Himself as their son, tookcharge of vaisya activities (krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam). Balarama representsplowing the land for agriculture and therefore always carries in His hand aplow, whereas Krsna tends cows and therefore carries a flute in His hand. Thusthe two brothers represent krsi-raksya and go-raksya.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                       tam drstva sahasotthaya                        dehah pranam ivagatam                      pritah priyatamam dorbhyam                        sasvaje prema-vihvalah                               SYNONYMS   tam--him (Vasudeva); drstva--seeing; sahasa--suddenly; utthaya--getting up;dehah--the same body; pranam--life; iva--as if; agatam--had returned; pritah--sopleased; priya-tamam--his dear friend and brother; dorbhyam--by his two arms;sasvaje--embraced; prema-vihvalah--overwhelmed with love and affection.                             TRANSLATION   When Nanda Maharaja heard that Vasudeva had come, he was overwhelmed withlove and affection, being as pleased as if his body had regained its life.Seeing Vasudeva suddenly present, he got up and embraced him with both arms.                               PURPORT
   Nanda Maharaja was older than Vasudeva. Therefore Nanda Maharaja embracedhim, and Vasudeva offered him namaskara.                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT                        pujitah sukham asinah                         prstvanamayam adrtah                      prasakta-dhih svatmajayor                          idam aha visampate                               SYNONYMS   pujitah--Vasudeva having been so dearly welcomed; sukham asinah--having beengiven a place to sit comfortably; prstva--asking; anamayam--all-auspiciousinquiries; adrtah--being honored and respectfully received; prasakta-dhih--because of his being very much attached; sva-atmajayoh--to his own two sons,Krsna and Balarama; idam--the following; aha--inquired; visam-pate--O MaharajaPariksit.                             TRANSLATION   O Maharaja Pariksit, having thus been received and welcomed by Nanda Maharajawith honor, Vasudeva sat down very peacefully and inquired about his own twosons because of intense love for them.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                       distya bhratah pravayasa                         idanim aprajasya te                         prajasaya nivrttasya                        praja yat samapadyata                               SYNONYMS   distya--it is by great fortune; bhratah--O my dear brother; pravayasah--ofyou whose age is now quite advanced; idanim--at the present moment; aprajasya--of one who did not have a son before; te--of you; praja-asayah nivrttasya--ofone who was almost hopeless of getting a son at this age; praja--a son; yat--whatever; samapadyata--has been gotten by chance.                             TRANSLATION   My dear brother Nanda Maharaja, at an advanced age you had no son at all andwere hopeless of having one. Therefore, that you now have a son is a sign ofgreat fortune.                               PURPORT   At an advanced age one generally cannot beget a male child. If by chance onedoes beget a child at this age, the child is generally female. Thus Vasudevaindirectly asked Nanda Maharaja whether he had actually begotten a male child ora female child. Vasudeva knew that Yasoda had given birth to a female child,whom he had stolen and replaced with a male child. This was a great mystery, and
Vasudeva wanted to determine whether this mystery was already known to NandaMaharaja. On inquiring, however, he was confident that the mystery of Krsna'sbirth and His being placed in the care of Yasoda was still hidden. There was nodanger, since Kamsa at least could not learn what had already happened.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                      distya samsara-cakre 'smin                       vartamanah punar-bhavah                        upalabdho bhavan adya                       durlabham priya-darsanam                               SYNONYMS   distya--it is also by great fortune; samsara-cakre asmin--in this world ofbirth and death; vartamanah--although I was existing; punah-bhavah--my meetingwith you is just like another birth; upalabdhah--being obtained by me; bhavan--you; adya--today; durlabham--although it was never to happen; priya-darsanam--tosee you again, my very dear friend and brother.                             TRANSLATION   It is also by good fortune that I am seeing you. Having obtained thisopportunity, I feel as if I have taken birth again. Even though one is presentin this world, to meet with intimate friends and dear relatives in this materialworld is extremely difficult.                               PURPORT   Vasudeva had been imprisoned by Kamsa, and therefore, although present inMathura, he was unable to see Nanda Maharaja for many years. Therefore when theymet again, Vasudeva considered this meeting to be another birth.                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT                       naikatra priya-samvasah                        suhrdam citra-karmanam                         oghena vyuhyamananam                        plavanam srotaso yatha                               SYNONYMS   na--not; ekatra--in one place; priya-samvasah--living together with dearfriends and relatives; suhrdam--of friends; citra-karmanam--of all of us whohave had varieties of reactions to our past karma; oghena--by the force;vyuhyamananam--carried away; plavanam--of sticks and other objects floating inthe water; srotasah--of the waves; yatha--as.                             TRANSLATION   Many planks and sticks, unable to stay together, are carried away by theforce of a river's waves. Similarly, although we are intimately related withfriends and family members, we are unable to stay together because of our variedpast deeds and the waves of time.
                               PURPORT   Vasudeva was lamenting because he and Nanda Maharaja could not live together.Yet how could they live together? Vasudeva warns that all of us, even ifintimately related, are carried away by the waves of time according to theresults of past karma.                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                       kaccit pasavyam nirujam                       bhury-ambu-trna-virudham                        brhad vanam tad adhuna                      yatrasse tvam suhrd-vrtah                               SYNONYMS   kaccit--whether; pasavyam--protection of the cows; nirujam--withoutdifficulties or disease; bhuri--sufficient; ambu--water; trna--grass; virudham--plants; brhat vanam--the great forest; tat--all these arrangements are there;adhuna--now; yatra--where; asse--are living; tvam--you; suhrt-vrtah--surroundedby friends.                             TRANSLATION   My dear friend Nanda Maharaja, in the place where you are living with yourfriends, is the forest favorable for the animals, the cows? I hope there is nodisease or inconvenience. The place must be full of water, grass and otherplants.                               PURPORT   For human happiness, one must care for the animals, especially the cows.Vasudeva therefore inquired whether there was a good arrangement for the animalswhere Nanda Maharaja lived. For the proper pursuit of human happiness, theremust be arrangements for the protection of cows. This means that there must beforests and adequate pasturing grounds full of grass and water. If the animalsare happy, there will be an ample supply of milk, from which human beings willbenefit by deriving many milk products with which to live happily. As enjoinedin Bhagavad-gita (18.44), krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam vaisya-karma-svabhavajam.Without giving proper facilities to the animals, how can human society be happy?That people are raising cattle to send to the slaughterhouse is a great sin. Bythis demoniac enterprise, people are ruining their chance for a truly humanlife. Because they are not giving any importance to the instructions of Krsna,the advancement of their so-called civilization resembles the crazy efforts ofmen in a lunatic asylum.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                      bhratar mama sutah kaccin                       matra saha bhavad-vraje                       tatam bhavantam manvano                        bhavadbhyam upalalitah
                               SYNONYMS   bhratah--my dear brother; mama--my; sutah--son (Baladeva, born of Rohini);kaccit--whether; matra saha--with His mother, Rohini; bhavat-vraje--in yourhouse; tatam--as father; bhavantam--unto you; manvanah--thinking; bhavadbhyam--by you and your wife, Yasoda; upalalitah--properly being raised.                             TRANSLATION   My son Baladeva, being raised by you and your wife, Yasodadevi, considers youHis father and mother. Is he living very peacefully in your home with His realmother, Rohini?                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                       pumsas tri-vargo vihitah                        suhrdo hy anubhavitah                         na tesu klisyamanesu                      tri-vargo 'rthaya kalpate                               SYNONYMS   pumsah--of a person; tri-vargah--the three aims of life (religion, economicdevelopment and sense gratification); vihitah--enjoined according to Vedicritualistic ceremonies; suhrdah--toward relatives and friends; hi--indeed;anubhavitah--when they are properly in line; na--not; tesu--in them;klisyamanesu--if they are actually in any difficulty; tri-vargah--these threeaims of life; arthaya--for any purpose; kalpate--does become so.                             TRANSLATION   When one's friends and relatives are properly situated, one's religion,economic development and sense gratification, as described in the Vedicliteratures, are beneficial. Otherwise, if one's friends and relatives are indistress, these three cannot offer any happiness.                               PURPORT   Vasudeva regretfully informed Nanda Maharaja that although he had his wifeand children, he could not properly discharge his duty of maintaining them andwas therefore unhappy.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                           sri-nanda uvaca                         aho te devaki-putrah                         kamsena bahavo hatah                           ekavasistavaraja                        kanya sapi divam gata                               SYNONYMS   sri-nandah uvaca--Nanda Maharaja said; aho--alas; te--your; devaki-putrah--all the sons of your wife Devaki; kamsena--by King Kamsa; bahavah--many; hatah--
have been killed; eka--one; avasista--remaining child; avaraja--the youngest ofall; kanya--a daughter also; sa api--she also; divam gata--gone to the heavenlyplanets.                             TRANSLATION   Nanda Maharaja said: Alas, King Kamsa killed so many of your children, bornof Devaki. And your one daughter, the youngest child of all, entered theheavenly planets.                               PURPORT   When Vasudeva understood from Nanda Maharaja that the mystery of Krsna'sbirth and His having been exchanged with Yasoda's daughter was yet undisclosed,he was happy that things were going on nicely. By saying that Vasudeva'sdaughter, his youngest child, had gone to the heavenly planets, Nanda Maharajaindicated that he did not know that this daughter was born of Yasoda and thatVasudeva had exchanged her with Krsna. Thus the doubts of Vasudeva weredispelled.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                     nunam hy adrsta-nistho 'yam                         adrsta-paramo janah                       adrstam atmanas tattvam                        yo veda na sa muhyati                               SYNONYMS   nunam--certainly; hi--indeed; adrsta--unseen; nisthah ayam--something endsthere; adrsta--the unseen destiny; paramah--ultimate; janah--every living entitywithin this material world; adrstam--that destiny; atmanah--of oneself; tattvam--ultimate truth; yah--anyone who; veda--knows; na--not; sah--he; muhyati--becomes bewildered.                             TRANSLATION   Every man is certainly controlled by destiny, which determines the results ofone's fruitive activities. In other words, one has a son or daughter because ofunseen destiny, and when the son or daughter is no longer present, this also isdue to unseen destiny. Destiny is the ultimate controller of everyone. One whoknows this is never bewildered.                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja consoled his younger brother Vasudeva by saying that destinyis ultimately responsible for everything. Vasudeva should not be unhappy thathis many children had been killed by Kamsa or that the last child, the daughter,had gone to the heavenly planets.                               TEXT 31                                 TEXT                          sri-vasudeva uvaca                        karo vai varsiko datto
                       rajne drsta vayam ca vah                       neha stheyam bahu-titham                       santy utpatas ca gokule                               SYNONYMS   sri-vasudevah uvaca--Sri Vasudeva replied; karah--the taxes; vai--indeed;varsikah--yearly; dattah--have already been paid by you; rajne--to the King;drstah--have been seen; vayam ca--both of us; vah--of you; na--not; iha--in thisplace; stheyam--should be staying; bahu-titham--for many days; santi--may be;utpatah ca--many disturbances; gokule--in your home, Gokula.                             TRANSLATION   Vasudeva said to Nanda Maharaja: Now, my dear brother, since you have paidthe annual taxes to Kamsa and have also seen me, do not stay in this place formany days. It is better to return to Gokula, since I know that there may be somedisturbances there.                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                         iti nandadayo gopah                       proktas te saurina yayuh                        anobhir anadud-yuktais                        tam anujnapya gokulam                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti--thus; nanda-adayah--NandaMaharaja and his companions; gopah--the cowherd men; proktah--being advised; te--they; saurina--by Vasudeva; yayuh--started from that place; anobhih--by thebullock carts; anadut-yuktaih--yoked with oxen; tam anujnapya--taking permissionfrom Vasudeva; gokulam--for Gokula.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: After Vasudeva advised Nanda Maharaja in this way,Nanda Maharaja and his associates, the cowherd men, took permission fromVasudeva, yoked their bulls to the bullock carts, and started riding for Gokula.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports to the Tenth Canto, Fifth Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "The Meeting of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva."                             Chapter Six                   The Killing of the Demon Putana   A summary of the Sixth Chapter is as follows: when Nanda Maharaja, followingthe instructions of Vasudeva, was returning home, he saw a great demoniac womanlying on the road, and then he heard about her death.   While Nanda Maharaja, the King of Vraja, was thinking about Vasudeva's wordsconcerning disturbances in Gokula, he was a little afraid and sought shelter atthe lotus feet of Sri Hari. Meanwhile, Kamsa sent to the village of Gokula aRaksasi named Putana, who was wandering here and there killing small babies. Ofcourse, wherever there is no Krsna consciousness, there is the danger of suchRaksasis, but since the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself was in Gokula,Putana could accept nothing there but her own death.
   One day, Putana arrived from outer space in Gokula, the home of NandaMaharaja, and by displaying her mystic power, she assumed the disguise of a verybeautiful woman. Taking courage, she immediately entered Krsna's bedroom withoutanyone's permission; by the grace of Krsna, no one forbade her to enter thehouse or the room, because that was Krsna's desire. The baby Krsna, whoresembled a fire covered by ashes, looked upon Putana and thought that He wouldhave to kill this demon, the beautiful woman. Enchanted by the influence ofyogamaya and the Personality of Godhead, Putana took Krsna upon her lap, andneither Rohini nor Yasoda objected. The demon Putana offered her breast forKrsna to suck, but her breast was smeared with poison. The child Krsna,therefore, squeezed Putana's breast so severely that in unbearable pain she hadto assume her original body and fell to the ground. Then Krsna began playing onher breast just like a small child. When Krsna was playing, the gopis werepacified and took the child away to their own laps. After this incident, thegopis took precautions because of the attack of the Raksasi. Mother Yasoda gavethe child her breast to suck and then laid Him in bed.   Meanwhile, Nanda and his associates the cowherd men returned from Mathura,and when they saw the great dead body of Putana, they were struck with wonder.Everyone was astonished that Vasudeva had foretold this mishap, and they praisedVasudeva for his power of foresight. The inhabitants of Vraja cut the giganticbody of Putana into pieces, but because Krsna had sucked her breast, she hadbeen freed from all sins, and therefore when the cowherd men burned the piecesof her body in a fire, the smoke filled the air with a very pleasing fragrance.Ultimately, although Putana had desired to kill Krsna, she attained the Lord'sabode. From this incident we gain the instruction that if one is attached toKrsna somehow or other, even as an enemy, one ultimately attains success. Whatthen is to be said of devotees who are naturally attached to Krsna in love? Whenthe inhabitants of Vraja heard about the killing of Putana and the welfare ofthe child, they were very much satisfied. Nanda Maharaja took the baby Krsna onhis lap and was filled with satisfaction.                                TEXT 1                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                      nandah pathi vacah saurer                         na mrseti vicintayan                         harim jagama saranam                         utpatagama-sankitah                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; nandah--Nanda Maharaja; pathi--onhis way back home; vacah--the words; saureh--of Vasudeva; na--not; mrsa--withoutpurpose or cause; iti--thus; vicintayan--while thinking about inauspiciousnessfor his little son, Krsna; harim--unto the Supreme Lord, the controller; jagama--took; saranam--shelter; utpata--of disturbances; agama--with the expectation;sankitah--thus being afraid.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: My dear King, while Nanda Maharaja was on the wayhome, he considered that what Vasudeva had said could not be false or useless.There must have been some danger of disturbances in Gokula. As Nanda Maharajathought about the danger for his beautiful son, Krsna, he was afraid, and hetook shelter at the lotus feet of the supreme controller.
                               PURPORT   Whenever there is danger, the pure devotee thinks of the protection andshelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is also advised in Bhagavad-gita (9.33): anityam asukham lokam imam prapya bhajasva mam. In this materialworld there is danger at every step (padam padam yad vipadam). Therefore adevotee has no other course than to take shelter of the Lord at every step.                                TEXT 2                                 TEXT                        kamsena prahita ghora                         putana bala-ghatini                       sisums cacara nighnanti                         pura-grama-vrajadisu                               SYNONYMS   kamsena--by King Kamsa; prahita--engaged previously; ghora--very fierce;putana--by the name Putana; bala-ghatini--a Raksasi who killed; sisun--smallbabies; cacara--wandered; nighnanti--killing; pura-grama-vraja-adisu--in towns,cities and villages here and there.                             TRANSLATION   While Nanda Maharaja was returning to Gokula, the same fierce Putana whomKamsa had previously engaged to kill babies was wandering about in the towns,cities and villages, doing her nefarious duty.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT                         na yatra sravanadini                       rakso-ghnani sva-karmasu                      kurvanti satvatam bhartur                       yatudhanyas ca tatra hi                               SYNONYMS   na--not; yatra--wherever; sravana-adini--the activities of bhakti-yoga,beginning with hearing and chanting; raksah-ghnani--the sound vibration to killall danger and bad elements; sva-karmasu--if one is engaged in his ownoccupational duty; kurvanti--such things are done; satvatam bhartuh--of theprotector of the devotees; yatudhanyah--disturbing elements, bad elements; ca--also; tatra hi--there must be.                             TRANSLATION   My dear King, wherever people in any position perform their occupationalduties of devotional service by chanting and hearing [sravanam kirtanam visnoh],there cannot be any danger from bad elements. Therefore there was no need foranxiety about Gokula while the Supreme Personality of Godhead was personallypresent.                               PURPORT
   Sukadeva Gosvami spoke this verse to mitigate the anxiety of MaharajaPariksit. Maharaja Pariksit was a devotee of Krsna, and therefore when heunderstood that Putana was causing disturbances in Gokula, he was somewhatperturbed. Sukadeva Gosvami therefore assured him that there was no danger inGokula. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has sung: namasraya kari' yatane tumi,thakaha apana kaje. Everyone is thus advised to seek shelter in the chanting ofthe Hare Krsna maha-mantra and remain engaged in his own occupational duty.There is no loss in this, and the gain is tremendous. Even from a material pointof view, everyone should take to chanting the Hare Krsna mantra to be saved fromall kinds of danger. This world is full of danger (padam padam yad vipadam).Therefore we should be encouraged to chant the Hare Krsna maha-mantra so that inour family, society, neighborhood and nation, everything will be smooth and freefrom danger.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                       sa khe-cary ekadotpatya                         putana nanda-gokulam                         yositva mayayatmanam                         pravisat kama-carini                               SYNONYMS   sa--that (Putana); khe-cari--who traveled in outer space; ekada--once upon atime; utpatya--was flying; putana--the demon Putana; nanda-gokulam--at the placeof Nanda Maharaja, Gokula; yositva--converting into a very beautiful woman;mayaya--by mystic power; atmanam--herself; pravisat--entered; kama-carini--onewho could move according to her own desire.                             TRANSLATION   Once upon a time, Putana Raksasi, who could move according to her desire andwas wandering in outer space, converted herself by mystic power into a verybeautiful woman and thus entered Gokula, the abode of Nanda Maharaja.                               PURPORT   Raksasis learn mystic powers by which they can travel in outer space withoutmachines. In some parts of India there are still such mystical witches, who cansit on a stick and use it to fly from one place to another in a very short time.This art was known to Putana. Assuming the feature of a very beautiful woman,she entered Nanda Maharaja's abode, Gokula.                              TEXTS 5-6                                 TEXT                 tam kesa-bandha-vyatisakta-mallikam                brhan-nitamba-stana-krcchra-madhyamam                   suvasasam kalpita-karna-bhusana-                   tvisollasat-kuntala-manditananam                  valgu-smitapanga-visarga-viksitair                  mano harantim vanitam vrajaukasam                    amamsatambhoja-karena rupinim                 gopyah sriyam drastum ivagatam patim
                               SYNONYMS   tam--her; kesa-bandha-vyatisakta-mallikam--whose arrangement of hair wasdecorated with a garland of mallika flowers; brhat--very, very big; nitamba-stana--by her hips and firm breasts; krcchra-madhyamam--whose slim waist wasoverburdened; su-vasasam--nicely painted or very attractively dressed; kalpita-karna-bhusana--of the earrings arranged on her ears; tvisa--by the brilliance;ullasat--very attractive; kuntala-mandita-ananam--whose beautiful face wassurrounded by black hair; valgu-smita-apanga-visarga-viksitaih--by her castingher smiling glance on everyone very attractively; manah harantim--everyone'sattention was attracted (by her); vanitam--an especially attractive woman;vraja-okasam--of the inhabitants of Gokula; amamsata--thought; ambhoja--holdinga lotus flower; karena--with her hand; rupinim--very beautiful; gopyah--the gopiinhabitants of Gokula; sriyam--the goddess of fortune; drastum--to see; iva--asif; agatam--had come; patim--her husband.                             TRANSLATION   Her hips were full, her breasts were large and firm, seeming to overburdenher slim waist, and she was dressed very nicely. Her hair, adorned with agarland of mallika flowers, was scattered about her beautiful face. Her earringswere brilliant, and as she smiled very attractively, glancing upon everyone, herbeauty drew the attention of all the inhabitants of Vraja, especially the men.When the gopis saw her, they thought that the beautiful goddess of fortune,holding a lotus flower in her hand, had come to see her husband, Krsna.                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT                  bala-grahas tatra vicinvati sisun                  yadrcchaya nanda-grhe 'sad-antakam                  balam praticchanna-nijoru-tejasam                  dadarsa talpe 'gnim ivahitam bhasi                               SYNONYMS   bala-grahah--the witch, whose business was to kill small babies; tatra--standing there; vicinvati--thinking of, searching for; sisun--children;yadrcchaya--independently; nanda-grhe--in the house of Nanda Maharaja; asat-antakam--who could kill all demons; balam--the child; praticchanna--covered;nija-uru-tejasam--whose unlimited power; dadarsa--she saw; talpe--(lying) on thebed; agnim--fire; iva--just like; ahitam--covered; bhasi--within ashes.                             TRANSLATION   While searching for small children, Putana, whose business was to kill them,entered the house of Nanda Maharaja unobstructed, having been sent by thesuperior potency of the Lord. Without asking anyone's permission, she enteredNanda Maharaja's room, where she saw the child sleeping in bed, His unlimitedpower covered like a powerful fire covered by ashes. She could understand thatthis child was not ordinary, but was meant to kill all demons.                               PURPORT   Demons are always busy creating disturbances and killing. But the child lyingon the bed in the house of Nanda Maharaja was meant to kill many demons.
                                TEXT 8                                 TEXT                  vibudhya tam balaka-marika-graham                    caracaratma sa nimiliteksanah                    anantam aropayad ankam antakam                 yathoragam suptam abuddhi-rajju-dhih                               SYNONYMS   vibudhya--understanding; tam--her (Putana); balaka-marika-graham--a witchvery expert in killing small babies; cara-acara-atma--Krsna, the all-pervadingSupersoul; sah--He; nimilita-iksanah--closed His eyes; anantam--the Unlimited;aropayat--she placed; ankam--on her lap; antakam--for her own annihilation;yatha--as; uragam--a snake; suptam--while sleeping; abuddhi--a person who has nointelligence; rajju-dhih--one who thinks a snake to be a rope.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Sri Krsna, the all-pervading Supersoul, lying on the bed, understoodthat Putana, a witch who was expert in killing small children, had come to killHim. Therefore, as if afraid of her, Krsna closed His eyes. Thus Putana tookupon her lap Him who was to be her own annihilation, just as an unintelligentperson places a sleeping snake on his lap, thinking the snake to be a rope.                               PURPORT   In this verse there are two perplexities. When Krsna saw that Putana had cometo kill Him, He thought that since this woman was present with motherlyaffection, although artificial, He had to offer her a benediction. Therefore Helooked at her with a little perplexity and then closed His eyes again. PutanaRaksasi also was perplexed. She was not intelligent enough to understand thatshe was taking a sleeping snake on her lap; she thought the snake to be anordinary rope. The two words antakam and anantam are contradictory. Because ofnot being intelligent, Putana thought that she could kill her antakam, thesource of her annihilation; but because He is ananta, unlimited, no one can killHim.                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT                  tam tiksna-cittam ativama-cestitam                   viksyantara kosa-paricchadasivat                vara-striyam tat-prabhaya ca dharsite                  niriksyamane janani hy atisthatam                               SYNONYMS   tam--that (Putana Raksasi); tiksna-cittam--having a very fierce heart forkilling the child; ati-vama-cestitam--although she was trying to treat the childbetter than a mother; viksya antara--seeing her within the room; kosa-paricchada-asi-vat--like a sharp sword within a soft sheath; vara-striyam--thevery beautiful woman; tat-prabhaya--by her influence; ca--also; dharsite--beingoverwhelmed; niriksyamane--were seeing; janani--the two mothers; hi--indeed;atisthatam--they remained silent, without prohibiting.
                             TRANSLATION   Putana Raksasi's heart was fierce and cruel, but she looked like a veryaffectionate mother. Thus she resembled a sharp sword in a soft sheath. Althoughseeing her within the room, Yasoda and Rohini, overwhelmed by her beauty, didnot stop her, but remained silent because she treated the child like a mother.                               PURPORT   Although Putana was an outsider and although she personified fierce deathbecause the determination within her heart was to kill the child, when shedirectly came and placed the child on her lap to offer the child her breast tosuck, the mothers were so captivated by her beauty that they did not prohibither. Sometimes a beautiful woman is dangerous because everyone, being captivatedby external beauty (maya-mohita), is unable to understand what is in her mind.Those who are captivated by the beauty of the external energy are called maya-mohita. Mohitam nabhijanati mam ebhyah param avyayam (Bg. 7.13). Na te viduhsvartha-gatim hi visnum durasaya ye bahir-artha-maninah (Bhag. 7.5.31). Here, ofcourse, the two mothers Rohini and Yasoda were not maya-mohita, deluded by theexternal energy, but to develop the pastimes of the Lord, they were captivatedby yogamaya. Such maya-moha is the action of yogamaya.                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT                 tasmin stanam durjara-viryam ulbanam                   ghorankam adaya sisor dadav atha               gadham karabhyam bhagavan prapidya tat-                 pranaih samam rosa-samanvito 'pibat                               SYNONYMS   tasmin--in that very spot; stanam--the breast; durjara-viryam--a verypowerful weapon mixed with poison; ulbanam--which was fierce; ghora--the mostferocious Putana; ankam--on her lap; adaya--placing; sisoh--in the mouth of thechild; dadau--pushed; atha--thereupon; gadham--very hard; karabhyam--with bothhands; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prapidya--giving her greatpain; tat-pranaih--her life; samam--along with; rosa-samanvitah--being veryangry at her; apibat--sucked the breast.                             TRANSLATION   On that very spot, the fiercely dangerous Raksasi took Krsna on her lap andpushed her breast into His mouth. The nipple of her breast was smeared with adangerous, immediately effective poison, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Krsna, becoming very angry at her, took hold of her breast, squeezed it veryhard with both hands, and sucked out both the poison and her life.                               PURPORT   Lord Krsna was not angry at Putana for His own sake. Rather, He was angrybecause the Raksasi had killed so many small children in Vrajabhumi. ThereforeHe decided that she should be punished by having to forfeit her life.                               TEXT 11
                                 TEXT                   sa munca muncalam iti prabhasini                    nispidyamanakhila-jiva-marmani                  vivrtya netre caranau bhujau muhuh                  prasvinna-gatra ksipati ruroda ha                               SYNONYMS   sa--she (Putana Raksasi); munca--give up; munca--give up; alam--suck mybreast no longer; iti--thus; prabhasini--crying; nispidyamana--being pressedseverely; akhila-jiva-marmani--in every center of her vitality; vivrtya--openingwide; netre--her two eyes; caranau--two legs; bhujau--two hands; muhuh--againand again; prasvinna-gatra--with her body perspiring; ksipati--throwing; ruroda--cried severely; ha--indeed.                             TRANSLATION   Unbearably pressed in every vital point, the demon Putana began to cry,"Please leave me, leave me! Suck my breast no longer!" Perspiring, her eyes wideopen and her arms and legs flailing, she cried very loudly again and again.                               PURPORT   The Raksasi was severely punished by Krsna. She threw her arms and legsabout, and Krsna also began to kick her with His legs to punish her properly forher mischievous activities.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                   tasyah svanenatigabhira-ramhasa                 sadrir mahi dyaus ca cacala sa-graha                   rasa disas ca pratinedire janah                  petuh ksitau vajra-nipata-sankaya                               SYNONYMS   tasyah--of the great Raksasi Putana; svanena--by the vibration of the sound;ati--very; gabhira--deep; ramhasa--forceful; sa-adrih--with the mountains; mahi--the surface of the world; dyauh ca--and outer space; cacala--trembled; sa-graha--with the stars; rasa--below the planet earth; disah ca--and alldirections; pratinedire--vibrated; janah--people in general; petuh--fell down;ksitau--on the surface of the world; vajra-nipata-sankaya--by suspecting thatthunderbolts were falling.                             TRANSLATION   As Putana screamed loudly and forcefully, the earth with its mountains, andouter space with its planets, trembled. The lower planets and all directionsvibrated, and people fell down, fearing that thunderbolts were falling uponthem.                               PURPORT
   Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura remarks that in this verse the word rasarefers to the planetary systems below the earth, such as Rasatala, Atala,Vitala, Sutala and Talatala.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT                 nisa-carittham vyathita-stana vyasur                  vyadaya kesams caranau bhujav api                  prasarya gosthe nija-rupam asthita                    vajrahato vrtra ivapatan nrpa                               SYNONYMS   nisa-cari--the Raksasi; ittham--in this way; vyathita-stana--being severelyaggrieved because of pressure on her breast; vyasuh--lost her life; vyadaya--opening her mouth wide; kesan--bunch of hairs; caranau--her two legs; bhujau--her two hands; api--also; prasarya--expanding; gosthe--in the pasturing ground;nija-rupam asthita--remained in her original demoniac form; vajra-ahatah--killedby the thunderbolt of Indra; vrtrah--Vrtrasura; iva--as if; apatat--fell down;nrpa--O King.                             TRANSLATION   In this way the demon Putana, very much aggrieved because her breast wasbeing attacked by Krsna, lost her life. O King Pariksit, opening her mouth wideand spreading her arms, legs and hair, she fell down in the pasturing ground inher original form as a Raksasi, as Vrtrasura had fallen when killed by thethunderbolt of Indra.                               PURPORT   Putana was a great Raksasi who knew the art of covering her original form bymystic power, but when she was killed her mystic power could not hide her, andshe appeared in her original form.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                        patamano 'pi tad-dehas                      tri-gavyuty-antara-druman                        curnayam asa rajendra                       mahad asit tad adbhutam                               SYNONYMS   patamanah api--even while falling down; tat-dehah--her gigantic body; tri-gavyuti-antara--within a limit of twelve miles; druman--all kinds of trees;curnayam asa--smashed; rajendra--O King Pariksit; mahat asit--was quitegigantic; tat--that body; adbhutam--and very, very wonderful.                             TRANSLATION   O King Pariksit, when the gigantic body of Putana fell to the ground, itsmashed all the trees within a limit of twelve miles. Appearing in a giganticbody, she was certainly extraordinary.
                               PURPORT   Because of the grievous hurt imposed upon her by Krsna's sucking her breast,Putana, while dying, not only left the room but abandoned the village and felldown in the pasturing ground in her gigantic body.                             TEXTS 15-17                                 TEXT                       isa-matrogra-damstrasyam                         giri-kandara-nasikam                      ganda-saila-stanam raudram                        prakirnaruna-murdhajam                        andha-kupa-gabhiraksam                         pulinaroha-bhisanam                      baddha-setu-bhujorv-anghri                        sunya-toya-hradodaram                      santatrasuh sma tad viksya                        gopa gopyah kalevaram                      purvam tu tan-nihsvanita-                      bhinna-hrt-karna-mastakah                               SYNONYMS   isa-matra--like the front of a plow; ugra--fierce; damstra--the teeth; asyam--having a mouth in which; giri-kandara--like mountain caves; nasikam--thenostrils of whom; ganda-saila--like big slabs of stone; stanam--the breasts ofwhom; raudram--very fierce; prakirna--scattered; aruna-murdha-jam--whose hairwas the color of copper; andha-kupa--like blind wells; gabhira--deep; aksam--eyesockets; pulina-aroha-bhisanam--whose thighs were fearful like the banks of ariver; baddha-setu-bhuja-uru-anghri--whose arms, thighs and feet were stronglybuilt bridges; sunya-toya-hrada-udaram--whose abdomen was like a lake withoutwater; santatrasuh sma--became frightened; tat--that; viksya--seeing; gopah--thecowherd men; gopyah--and the cowherd women; kalevaram--such a gigantic body;purvam tu--before that; tat-nihsvanita--because of her loud vibration; bhinna--were shocked; hrt--whose hearts; karna--ears; mastakah--and heads.                             TRANSLATION   The Raksasi's mouth was full of teeth, each resembling the front of a plow,her nostrils were deep like mountain caves, and her breasts resembled big slabsof stone fallen from a hill. Her scattered hair was the color of copper. Thesockets of her eyes appeared like deep blind wells, her fearful thighs resembledthe banks of a river, her arms, legs and feet seemed like big bridges, and herabdomen appeared like a dried-up lake. The hearts, ears and heads of the cowherdmen and women were already shocked by the Raksasi's screaming, and when they sawthe fierce wonder of her body, they were even more frightened.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                         balam ca tasya urasi                        kridantam akutobhayam
                      gopyas turnam samabhyetya                       jagrhur jata-sambhramah                               SYNONYMS   balam ca--the child also; tasyah--of that (Raksasi Putana); urasi--on theupper portion of the breast; kridantam--engaged in playing; akutobhayam--withoutfear; gopyah--all the cowherd women; turnam--immediately; samabhyetya--comingnear; jagrhuh--picked up; jata-sambhramah--with the same affection and respectthey always maintained.                             TRANSLATION   Without fear, the child Krsna was playing on the upper portion of PutanaRaksasi's breast, and when the gopis saw the child's wonderful activities, theyimmediately came forward with great jubilation and picked Him up.                               PURPORT   Here is the Supreme Personality of Godhead--Krsna. Although the RaksasiPutana could increase or decrease her bodily size by her mystic abilities andthus gain proportionate power, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is equallypowerful in any transcendental form. Krsna is the real Personality of Godheadbecause whether as a child or as a grown-up young man, He is the same person. Hedoes not need to become powerful by meditation or any other external endeavor.Therefore when the greatly powerful Putana expanded her body, Krsna remained thesame small child and fearlessly played on the upper portion of her breast.Sadaisvarya-purna. Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always fullin all potencies, regardless of whether He is present in this form or that. Hispotencies are always full. Parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate. He can display allpotencies under any circumstances.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                        yasoda-rohinibhyam tah                        samam balasya sarvatah                       raksam vidadhire samyag                       go-puccha-bhramanadibhih                               SYNONYMS   yasoda-rohinibhyam--with mother Yasoda and mother Rohini, who principallytook charge of the child; tah--the other gopis; samam--equally as important asYasoda and Rohini; balasya--of the child; sarvatah--from all dangers; raksam--protection; vidadhire--executed; samyak--completely; go-puccha-bhramana-adibhih--by waving around the switch of a cow.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, mother Yasoda and Rohini, along with the other elderly gopis,waved about the switch of a cow to give full protection to the child Sri Krsna.                               PURPORT   When Krsna was saved from such a great danger, mother Yasoda and Rohini wereprincipally concerned, and the other elderly gopis, who were almost equally
concerned, followed the activities of mother Yasoda and Rohini. Here we findthat in household affairs, ladies could take charge of protecting a child simplyby taking help from the cow. As described here, they knew how to wave about theswitch of a cow so as to protect the child from all types of danger. There areso many facilities afforded by cow protection, but people have forgotten thesearts. The importance of protecting cows is therefore stressed by Krsna inBhagavad-gita (krsi-go-raksya-vanijyam vaisya-karma svabhavajam). Even now inthe Indian villages surrounding Vrndavana, the villagers live happily simply bygiving protection to the cow. They keep cow dung very carefully and dry it touse as fuel. They keep a sufficient stock of grains, and because of givingprotection to the cows, they have sufficient milk and milk products to solve alleconomic problems. Simply by giving protection to the cow, the villagers live sopeacefully. Even the urine and stool of cows have medicinal value.                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                        go-mutrena snapayitva                        punar go-rajasarbhakam                       raksam cakrus ca sakrta                        dvadasangesu namabhih                               SYNONYMS   go-mutrena--with the urine of the cows; snapayitva--after thoroughly washing;punah--again; go-rajasa--with the dust floating because of the movements of thecows; arbhakam--unto the child; raksam--protection; cakruh--executed; ca--also;sakrta--with the cow dung; dvadasa-angesu--in twelve places (dvadasa-tilaka);namabhih--by imprinting the holy names of the Lord.                             TRANSLATION   The child was thoroughly washed with cow urine and then smeared with the dustraised by the movements of the cows. Then different names of the Lord wereapplied with cow dung on twelve different parts of His body, beginning with theforehead, as done in applying tilaka. In this way, the child was givenprotection.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                       gopyah samsprsta-salila                        angesu karayoh prthak                       nyasyatmany atha balasya                         bija-nyasam akurvata                               SYNONYMS   gopyah--the gopis; samsprsta-salilah--touching a cup of water and drinking;angesu--on their bodies; karayoh--on their two hands; prthak--separately;nyasya--after placing the letters of the mantra; atmani--on their own; atha--then; balasya--of the child; bija-nyasam--the process of mantra-nyasa; akurvata--executed.                             TRANSLATION
   The gopis first executed the process of acamana, drinking a sip of water fromthe right hand. They purified their bodies and hands with the nyasa-mantra andthen applied the same mantra upon the body of the child.                               PURPORT   Nyasa-mantra includes acamana, or first drinking a sip of water kept in theright hand. There are different visnu-mantras to purify the body. The gopis, andin fact any householders, knew the process for being purified by chanting Vedichymns. The gopis executed this process first to purify themselves and then topurify the child Krsna. One executes the process of anga-nyasa and kara-nyasasimply by drinking a little sip of water and chanting the mantra. The mantra ispreceded with the first letter of the name, followed by anusvara and the wordnamah: om namo 'jas tavanghri avyat, mam mano manimams tava januni avyat, and soon. By losing Indian culture, Indian householders have forgotten how to executethe anga-nyasa and are simply busy in sense gratification, without any advancedknowledge of human civilization.                             TEXTS 22-23                                 TEXT              avyad ajo 'nghri manimams tava janv athoru              yajno 'cyutah kati-tatam jatharam hayasyah               hrt kesavas tvad-ura isa inas tu kantham              visnur bhujam mukham urukrama isvarah kam              cakry agratah saha-gado harir astu pascat              tvat-parsvayor dhanur-asi madhu-hajanas ca                 konesu sankha urugaya upary upendras             tarksyah ksitau haladharah purusah samantat                               SYNONYMS   avyat--may protect; ajah--Lord Aja; anghri--legs; maniman--Lord Maniman;tava--Your; janu--knees; atha--thereafter; uru--thighs; yajnah--Lord Yajna;acyutah--Lord Acyuta; kati-tatam--the upper part of the waist; jatharam--abdomen; hayasyah--Lord Hayagriva; hrt--the heart; kesavah--Lord Kesava; tvat--Your; urah--chest; isah--the supreme controller, Lord Isa; inah--Surya, the sun-god; tu--but; kantham--neck; visnuh--Lord Visnu; bhujam--arms; mukham--themouth; urukramah--Lord Urukrama; isvarah--Lord Isvara; kam--head; cakri--thecarrier of the disc; agratah--in front; saha-gadah--the carrier of the club;harih--Lord Hari; astu--may He remain; pascat--on the back; tvat-parsvayoh--onboth sides; dhanuh-asi--the carrier of the bow and the sword; madhu-ha--thekiller of the demon Madhu; ajanah--Lord Visnu; ca--and; konesu--in the corners;sankhah--the carrier of the conchshell; urugayah--who is well worshiped; upari--above; upendrah--Lord Upendra; tarksyah--Garuda; ksitau--on the surface;haladharah--Lord Haladhara; purusah--the Supreme Person; samantat--on all sides.                             TRANSLATION   [Sukadeva Gosvami informed Maharaja Pariksit that the gopis, following theproper system, protected Krsna, their child, with this mantra.] May Aja protectYour legs, may Maniman protect Your knees, Yajna Your thighs, Acyuta the upperpart of Your waist, and Hayagriva Your abdomen. May Kesava protect Your heart,Isa Your chest, the sun-god Your neck, Visnu Your arms, Urukrama Your face, andIsvara Your head. May Cakri protect You from the front; may Sri Hari, Gadadhari,the carrier of the club, protect You from the back; and may the carrier of the
bow, who is known as the enemy of Madhu, and Lord Ajana, the carrier of thesword, protect Your two sides. May Lord Urugaya, the carrier of the conchshell,protect You from all corners; may Upendra protect You from above; may Garudaprotect You on the ground; and may Lord Haladhara, the Supreme Person, protectYou on all sides.                               PURPORT   Even in the houses of the cultivators, who were not very advanced in themodern ways of civilization, the ladies used to know how to chant mantras togive protection to children with the help of cow dung and cow urine. This was asimple and practical way to give the greatest protection from the greatestdangers. People should know how to do this, for this is a part of Vediccivilization.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                         indriyani hrsikesah                        pranan narayano 'vatu                       svetadvipa-patis cittam                         mano yogesvaro 'vatu                               SYNONYMS   indriyani--all the senses; hrsikesah--Lord Hrsikesa, the proprietor of allthe senses; pranan--all kinds of life air; narayanah--Lord Narayana; avatu--mayHe give protection; svetadvipa-patih--the master of Svetadvipa, Visnu; cittam--the core of the heart; manah--the mind; yogesvarah--Lord Yogesvara; avatu--mayHe give protection.                             TRANSLATION   May Hrsikesa protect Your senses, and Narayana Your life air. May the masterof Svetadvipa protect the core of Your heart, and may Lord Yogesvara protectYour mind.                             TEXTS 25-26                                 TEXT                      prsnigarbhas tu te buddhim                        atmanam bhagavan parah                       kridantam patu govindah                        sayanam patu madhavah                      vrajantam avyad vaikuntha                       asinam tvam sriyah patih                       bhunjanam yajnabhuk patu                       sarva-graha-bhayankarah                               SYNONYMS   prsnigarbhah--Lord Prsnigarbha; tu--indeed; te--Your; buddhim--intelligence;atmanam--Your soul; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parah--transcendental; kridantam--while playing; patu--may He protect; govindah--LordGovinda; sayanam--while sleeping; patu--may He protect; madhavah--Lord Madhava;
vrajantam--while walking; avyat--may He protect; vaikunthah--Lord Vaikuntha;asinam--while sitting down; tvam--unto You; sriyah patih--Narayana, the husbandof the goddess of fortune (may protect); bhunjanam--while enjoying life;yajnabhuk--Yajnabhuk; patu--may He protect; sarva-graha-bhayam-karah--who isfearful to all evil planets.                             TRANSLATION   May Lord Prsnigarbha protect Your intelligence, and the Supreme Personalityof Godhead Your soul. While You are playing, may Govinda protect You, and whileYou are sleeping may Madhava protect You. May Lord Vaikuntha protect You whileYou are walking, and may Lord Narayana, the husband of the goddess of fortune,protect You while You are sitting. Similarly, may Lord Yajnabhuk, the fearfulenemy of all evil planets, always protect You while You enjoy life.                             TEXTS 27-29                                 TEXT                        dakinyo yatudhanyas ca                      kusmanda ye 'rbhaka-grahah                        bhuta-preta-pisacas ca                        yaksa-rakso-vinayakah                        kotara revati jyestha                          putana matrkadayah                        unmada ye hy apasmara                       deha-pranendriya-druhah                        svapna-drsta mahotpata                       vrddha bala-grahas ca ye                       sarve nasyantu te visnor                        nama-grahana-bhiravah                               SYNONYMS   dakinyah yatudhanyah ca kusmandah--witches and devils, enemies of children;ye--those who are; arbhaka-grahah--like evil stars for children; bhuta--evilspirits; preta--evil hobgoblins; pisacah--similar bad spirits; ca--also; yaksa--the living entities known as Yaksas; raksah--those known as Raksasas; vinayakah--those by the name Vinayaka; kotara--by the name Kotara; revati--by the nameRevati; jyestha--by the name Jyestha; putana--by the name Putana; matrka-adayah--and evil women like Matrka; unmadah--those who cause madness; ye--which others;hi--indeed; apasmarah--causing loss of memory; deha-prana-indriya--to the body,life air and senses; druhah--give trouble; svapna-drstah--the evil spirits thatcause bad dreams; maha-utpatah--those causing great disturbances; vrddhah--themost experienced; bala-grahah ca--and those attacking children; ye--who; sarve--all of them; nasyantu--let be vanquished; te--those; visnoh--of Lord Visnu;nama-grahana--by the chanting of the name; bhiravah--become afraid.                             TRANSLATION   The evil witches known as Dakinis, Yatudhanis and Kusmandas are the greatestenemies of children, and the evil spirits like Bhutas, Pretas, Pisacas, Yaksas,Raksasas and Vinayakas, as well as witches like Kotara, Revati, Jyestha, Putanaand Matrka, are always ready to give trouble to the body, the life air and thesenses, causing loss of memory, madness and bad dreams. Like the mostexperienced evil stars, they all create great disturbances, especially for
children, but one can vanquish them simply by uttering Lord Visnu's name, forwhen Lord Visnu's name resounds, all of them become afraid and go away.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.33):                 advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam                adyam purana-purusam nava-yauvanam ca               vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   "I worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda, who is the originalperson--nondual, infallible, and without beginning. Although He expands intounlimited forms, He is still the original, and although He is the oldest person,He always appears as a fresh youth. Such eternal, blissful and all-knowing formsof the Lord cannot be understood by the academic wisdom of the Vedas, but theyare always manifest to pure, unalloyed devotees."   While decorating the body with tilaka, we give protection to the body bychanting twelve names of Visnu. Although Govinda, or Lord Visnu, is one, He hasdifferent names and forms with which to act differently. But if one cannotremember all the names at one time, one may simply chant, "Lord Visnu, LordVisnu, Lord Visnu," and always think of Lord Visnu. Visnor aradhanam param: thisis the highest form of worship. If one remembers Visnu always, even though oneis disturbed by many bad elements, one can be protected without a doubt. TheAyurveda-sastra recommends, ausadhi cintayet visnum: even while taking medicine,one should remember Visnu, because the medicine is not all and all and LordVisnu is the real protector. The material world is full of danger (padam padamyad vipadam). Therefore one must become a Vaisnava and think of Visnuconstantly. This is made easier by the chanting of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.Therefore Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has recommended, kirtaniyah sada harih, paramvijayate sri-krsna-sankirtanam, and kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah paramvrajet.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        iti pranaya-baddhabhir                        gopibhih krta-raksanam                        payayitva stanam mata                        sannyavesayad atmajam                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti--in this way; pranaya-baddhabhih--who were bound with maternal affection; gopibhih--by the elderlygopis, headed by mother Yasoda; krta-raksanam--all measures were taken toprotect the child; payayitva--and after that, feeding the child; stanam--thenipple; mata--mother Yasoda; sannyavesayat--made to lie down on the bed;atmajam--her son.                             TRANSLATION   Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: All the gopis, headed by mother Yasoda,were bound by maternal affection. After they thus chanted mantras to protect the
child, mother Yasoda gave the child the nipple of her breast to suck and thengot Him to lie down on His bed.                               PURPORT   When a baby drinks milk from the breast of his mother, this is a good sign ofhealth. So the elderly gopis were not satisfied with chanting mantras to giveprotection to Krsna; they also tested whether their child's health was in order.When the child sucked the breast, this confirmed that He was healthy, and whenthe gopis were fully satisfied, they had the child lie down on His bed.                               TEXT 31                                 TEXT                         tavan nandadayo gopa                        mathuraya vrajam gatah                         vilokya putana-deham                         babhuvur ativismitah                               SYNONYMS   tavat--in the meantime; nanda-adayah--headed by Nanda Maharaja; gopah--allthe cowherd men; mathurayah--from Mathura; vrajam--to Vrndavana; gatah--cameback; vilokya--when they saw; putana-deham--the gigantic body of Putana lyingdead; babhuvuh--became; ati--very much; vismitah--struck with wonder.                             TRANSLATION   Meanwhile, all the cowherd men, headed by Nanda Maharaja, returned fromMathura, and when they saw on the way the gigantic body of Putana lying dead,they were struck with great wonder.                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja's wonder may be understood in various ways. First of all, thecowherd men had never before seen such a gigantic body in Vrndavana, andtherefore they were struck with wonder. Then they began to consider where such abody had come from, whether it had dropped from the sky, or whether, by somemistake or by the power of some mystic yogini, they had come to some place otherthan Vrndavana. They could not actually guess what had happened, and thereforethey were struck with wonder.                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                        nunam batarsih sanjato                         yogeso va samasa sah                        sa eva drsto hy utpato                         yad ahanakadundubhih                               SYNONYMS   nunam--certainly; bata--O my friends; rsih--a great saintly person; sanjatah--has become; yoga-isah--a master of mystic power; va--or; samasa--has become;sah--he (Vasudeva); sah--that; eva--indeed; drstah--has been seen (by us); hi--
because; utpatah--kind of disturbance; yat--that which; aha--predicted;anakadundubhih--Anakadundubhi (another name of Vasudeva).                             TRANSLATION   Nanda Maharaja and the other gopas exclaimed: My dear friends, you must knowthat Anakadundubhi, Vasudeva, has become a great saint or a master of mysticpower. Otherwise how could he have foreseen this calamity and predicted it tous?                               PURPORT   This verse illustrates the difference between ksatriyas and innocent vaisyas.By studying the political situation, Vasudeva could see what would happen,whereas Nanda Maharaja, the king of the agriculturalists, could only guess thatVasudeva was a great saintly person and had developed mystic powers. Vasudevaactually had all mystic powers under his control; otherwise he could not havebecome the father of Krsna. But in fact he foresaw the calamities in Vraja bystudying Kamsa's political activities and thus warned Nanda Maharaja to takeprecautions, although Nanda Maharaja thought that Vasudeva had predicted thisincident through wonderful mystic powers. By mystic powers gained through thepractice of hatha-yoga, one can study and understand the future.                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                         kalevaram parasubhis                      chittva tat te vrajaukasah                         dure ksiptvavayavaso                       nyadahan kastha-vestitam                               SYNONYMS   kalevaram--the gigantic body of Putana; parasubhih--with the aid of axes;chittva--after cutting to pieces; tat--that (body); te--all of those; vraja-okasah--inhabitants of Vraja; dure--far, far away; ksiptva--after throwing;avayavasah--different parts of the body, piece by piece; nyadahan--burned toashes; kastha-vestitam--covered by wood.                             TRANSLATION   The inhabitants of Vraja cut the gigantic body of Putana into pieces with thehelp of axes. Then they threw the pieces far away, covered them with wood andburned them to ashes.                               PURPORT   It is the practice that after a snake has been killed, its body is cut intovarious pieces for fear that it may come to life again simply by interactingwith air. Merely killing a serpent is not sufficient; after it is killed, itmust be cut to pieces and burned, and then the danger will be over. Putanaresembled a great serpent, and therefore the cowherd men took the sameprecautions by burning her body to ashes.                               TEXT 34                                 TEXT
                         dahyamanasya dehasya                       dhumas caguru-saurabhah                      utthitah krsna-nirbhukta-                        sapady ahata-papmanah                               SYNONYMS   dahyamanasya--while being burnt to ashes; dehasya--of the body of Putana;dhumah--the smoke; ca--and; aguru-saurabhah--turned into saintly scented smokeof the aguru herb; utthitah--emanating from her body; krsna-nirbhukta--becauseof Krsna's having sucked her breast; sapadi--immediately; ahata-papmanah--hermaterial body became spiritualized or relieved of all material conditions.                             TRANSLATION   Because of Krsna's having sucked the breast of the Raksasi Putana, when Krsnakilled her she was immediately freed of all material contamination. Her sinfulreactions automatically vanished, and therefore when her gigantic body was beingburnt, the smoke emanating from her body was fragrant like aguru incense.                               PURPORT   Such are the effects of Krsna consciousness. If one somehow or other becomesKrsna conscious by applying his senses in the service of the Lord, one isimmediately freed from material contamination. Srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah punya-sravana-kirtanah (Bhag. 1.2.17). Hearing about the activities of Krsna is thebeginning of purified life. Punya-sravana-kirtanah: simply by hearing andchanting, one becomes purified. Therefore, in discharging devotional service,sravana-kirtana (hearing and chanting) is most important. Then, with purifiedsenses, one begins to render service to the Lord (hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam).Bhaktir ucyate: this is called bhakti. When Putana was somehow or other,directly or indirectly, induced to render some service to the Lord by feedingHim with her breast, she was immediately purified, so much so that when hernasty material body was burnt to ashes, it gave off the fragrance of aguru, themost agreeably scented herb.                             TEXTS 35-36                                 TEXT                        putana loka-bala-ghni                         raksasi rudhirasana                         jighamsayapi haraye                      stanam dattvapa sad-gatim                     kim punah sraddhaya bhaktya                         krsnaya paramatmane                      yacchan priyatamam kim nu                       raktas tan-mataro yatha                               SYNONYMS   putana--Putana, the professional Raksasi; loka-bala-ghni--who used to killhuman children; raksasi--the she-demon; rudhira-asana--simply hankering forblood; jighamsaya--with the desire to kill Krsna (being envious of Krsna andhaving been instructed by Kamsa); api--still; haraye--unto the SupremePersonality of Godhead; stanam--her breast; dattva--after offering; apa--
obtained; sat-gatim--the most elevated position of spiritual existence; kim--what to speak of; punah--again; sraddhaya--with faith; bhaktya--by devotion;krsnaya--unto Lord Krsna; paramatmane--who is the Supreme Person; yacchan--offering; priya-tamam--the dearmost; kim--something; nu--indeed; raktah--thosewho have an affinity; tat-matarah--Krsna's affectionate mothers (offering thebeloved child their breasts); yatha--exactly like.                             TRANSLATION   Putana was always hankering for the blood of human children, and with thatdesire she came to kill Krsna; but because she offered her breast to the Lord,she attained the greatest achievement. What then is to be said of those who hadnatural devotion and affection for Krsna as mothers and who offered Him theirbreasts to suck or offered something very dear, as a mother offers something toa child?                               PURPORT   Putana had no affection for Krsna; rather, she was envious and wanted to killHim. Nonetheless, because with or without knowledge she offered her breast, sheattained the highest achievement in life. But the offerings of devoteesattracted to Krsna in parental love are always sincere. A mother likes to offersomething to her child with affection and love; there is no question of envy. Sohere we can make a comparative study. If Putana could attain such an exaltedposition in spiritual life by neglectfully, enviously making an offering toKrsna, what is to be said of mother Yasoda and the other gopis, who served Krsnawith such great affection and love, offering everything for Krsna'ssatisfaction? The gopis automatically achieved the highest perfection. ThereforeSri Caitanya Mahaprabhu recommended the affection of the gopis, either inmaternal affection or in conjugal love, as the highest perfection in life (ramyakacid upasana vrajavadhu-vargena ya kalpita).                             TEXTS 37-38                                 TEXT                    padbhyam bhakta-hrdi-sthabhyam                      vandyabhyam loka-vanditaih                       angam yasyah samakramya                       bhagavan api tat-stanam                       yatudhany api sa svargam                          avapa janani-gatim                      krsna-bhukta-stana-ksirah                        kim u gavo 'numatarah                               SYNONYMS   padbhyam--by the two lotus feet; bhakta-hrdi-sthabhyam--which are alwaysthought of by pure devotees, in whose heart the Lord is therefore situatedconstantly; vandyabhyam--which are always to be praised; loka-vanditaih--by LordBrahma and Lord Siva, who are praised by all the inhabitants of the threeworlds; angam--the body; yasyah--of whom (Putana); samakramya--embracing;bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api--also; tat-stanam--thatbreast; yatudhani api--although she was a witch (whose only business was to killsmall children and who had tried to kill Krsna also); sa--she; svargam--thetranscendental abode; avapa--achieved; janani-gatim--the position of a mother;krsna-bhukta-stana-ksirah--therefore, because their breasts were sucked by
Krsna, who drank the milk flowing from their bodies; kim u--what to speak of;gavah--the cows; anumatarah--exactly like mothers (who allowed their nipples tobe sucked by Krsna).                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is always situated within the coreof the heart of the pure devotee, and He is always offered prayers by suchworshipable personalities as Lord Brahma and Lord Siva. Because Krsna embracedPutana's body with great pleasure and sucked her breast, although she was agreat witch, she attained the position of a mother in the transcendental worldand thus achieved the highest perfection. What then is to be said of the cowswhose nipples Krsna sucked with great pleasure and who offered their milk veryjubilantly with affection exactly like that of a mother?                               PURPORT   These verses explain how devotional service rendered to the SupremePersonality of Godhead, whether directly or indirectly, knowingly orunknowingly, becomes successful. Putana was neither a devotee nor a nondevotee;she was actually a demoniac witch instructed by Kamsa to kill Krsna.Nonetheless, in the beginning she assumed the form of a very beautiful woman andapproached Krsna exactly like an affectionate mother, so that mother Yasoda andRohini did not doubt her sincerity. The Lord took all this into consideration,and thus she was automatically promoted to a position like that of motherYasoda. As explained by Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, there are various rolesone may play in such a position. Putana was immediately promoted toVaikunthaloka, which is also sometimes described as Svarga. The Svarga mentionedin this verse is not the material heavenly planet, but the transcendental world.In Vaikunthaloka, Putana attained the position of a nurse (dhatry-ucitam), asdescribed by Uddhava. Putana was elevated to the position of a nurse andmaidservant in Goloka Vrndavana to assist mother Yasoda.                             TEXTS 39-40                                 TEXT                         payamsi yasam apibat                       putra-sneha-snutany alam                        bhagavan devaki-putrah                       kaivalyady-akhila-pradah                         tasam aviratam krsne                        kurvatinam suteksanam                        na punah kalpate rajan                       samsaro 'jnana-sambhavah                               SYNONYMS   payamsi--milk (coming from the body); yasam--of all of whom; apibat--LordKrsna drank; putra-sneha-snutani--that milk coming from the bodies of the gopis,not artificially but because of maternal affection; alam--sufficiently;bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; devaki-putrah--who appeared as theson of Devaki; kaivalya-adi--like liberation or merging into the Brahmaneffulgence; akhila-pradah--the bestower of all similar blessings; tasam--of allof them (of all the gopis); aviratam--constantly; krsne--unto Lord Krsna;kurvatinam--making; suta-iksanam--as a mother looks upon her child; na--never;punah--again; kalpate--can be imagined; rajan--O King Pariksit; samsarah--the
material bondage of birth and death; ajnana-sambhavah--which is to be acceptedby foolish persons ignorantly trying to become happy.                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, is the bestower of manybenedictions, including liberation [kaivalya], or oneness with the Brahmaneffulgence. For that Personality of Godhead, the gopis always felt maternallove, and Krsna sucked their breasts with full satisfaction. Therefore, becauseof their relationship as mother and son, although the gopis were engaged invarious family activities, one should never think that they returned to thismaterial world after leaving their bodies.                               PURPORT   The advantage of Krsna consciousness is described herein. Krsna consciousnessgradually develops on the transcendental platform. One may think of Krsna as thesupreme personality, one may think of Krsna as the supreme master, one may thinkof Krsna as the supreme friend, one may think of Krsna as the supreme son, orone may think of Krsna as the supreme conjugal lover. If one is connected withKrsna in any of these transcendental relationships, the course of one's materiallife is understood to have already ended. As confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (4.9),tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti: for such devotees, going back home,back to Godhead, is guaranteed. Na punah kalpate rajan samsaro jnana-sambhavah.This verse also guarantees that devotees who constantly think of Krsna in aparticular relationship will never return to this material world. In thismaterial world of samsara, there are the same relationships. One thinks, "Hereis my son," "Here is my wife," "Here is my lover," or "Here is my friend." Butthese relationships are temporary illusions. Ajnana-sambhavah: such aconsciousness awakens in ignorance. But when the same relationships awaken inKrsna consciousness, one's spiritual life is revived, and one is guaranteed toreturn home, back to Godhead. Even though the gopis who were friends of Rohiniand mother Yasoda and who allowed their breasts to be sucked by Krsna were notdirectly Krsna's mothers, they all had the same chance as Rohini and Yasoda togo back to Godhead and act as Krsna's mothers-in-law, servants and so on. Theword samsara refers to attachment for one's body, home, husband or wife, andchildren, but although the gopis and all the other inhabitants of Vrndavana hadthe same affection and attachment for husband and home, their central affectionwas for Krsna in some transcendental relationship, and therefore they wereguaranteed to be promoted to Goloka Vrndavana in the next life, to live withKrsna eternally in spiritual happiness. The easiest way to attain spiritualelevation, to be liberated from this material world, and to go back home, backto Godhead, is recommended by Bhaktivinoda Thakura: krsnera samsara kara chadi'anacara. One should give up all sinful activities and remain in the family ofKrsna. Then one's liberation is guaranteed.                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT                       kata-dhumasya saurabhyam                        avaghraya vrajaukasah                         kim idam kuta eveti                        vadanto vrajam ayayuh                               SYNONYMS
   kata-dhumasya--of the smoke emanating from the fire burning the differentparts of Putana's body; saurabhyam--the fragrance; avaghraya--when they smelledthrough their nostrils; vraja-okasah--the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi in distantplaces; kim idam--what is this fragrance; kutah--where does it come from; eva--indeed; iti--in this way; vadantah--speaking; vrajam--the place of NandaMaharaja, Vrajabhumi; ayayuh--reached.                             TRANSLATION   Upon smelling the fragrance of the smoke emanating from Putana's burningbody, many inhabitants of Vrajabhumi in distant places were astonished. "Whereis this fragrance coming from?" they asked. Thus they went to the spot wherePutana's body was being burnt.                               PURPORT   The aroma of the smoke emanating from a burning fire is not always veryfavorable. Therefore upon smelling such a wonderful fragrance, the inhabitantsof Vraja were astonished.                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                       te tatra varnitam gopaih                          putanagamanadikam                      srutva tan-nidhanam svasti                        sisos casan suvismitah                               SYNONYMS   te--all those persons who arrived; tatra--there (in the vicinity of NandaMaharaja's estate); varnitam--described; gopaih--by the cowherd men; putana-agamana-adikam--everything about how Putana the witch had come there and playedhavoc; srutva--after hearing; tat-nidhanam--and about how Putana had died;svasti--all auspiciousness; sisoh--for the baby; ca--and; asan--offered; su-vismitah--being struck with great wonder because of what had happened.                             TRANSLATION   When the inhabitants of Vraja who had come from distant places heard thewhole story of how Putana had come and then been killed by Krsna, they werecertainly astonished, and they offered their blessings to the child for Hiswonderful deed of killing Putana. Nanda Maharaja, of course, was very muchobliged to Vasudeva, who had foreseen the incident, and simply thanked him,thinking how wonderful Vasudeva was.                               TEXT 43                                 TEXT                       nandah sva-putram adaya                        pretyagatam udara-dhih                      murdhny upaghraya paramam                        mudam lebhe kurudvaha                               SYNONYMS
   nandah--Maharaja Nanda; sva-putram adaya--taking his son Krsna on his lap;pretya-agatam--as if Krsna had returned from death (no one could even imaginethat from such danger a child could be saved); udara-dhih--because he was alwaysliberal and simple; murdhni--on the head of Krsna; upaghraya--formally smelling;paramam--highest; mudam--peace; lebhe--achieved; kuru-udvaha--O MaharajaPariksit.                             TRANSLATION   O Maharaja Pariksit, best of the Kurus, Nanda Maharaja was very liberal andsimple. He immediately took his son Krsna on his lap as if Krsna had returnedfrom death, and by formally smelling his son's head, Nanda Maharaja undoubtedlyenjoyed transcendental bliss.                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja could not understand how the inhabitants of his house hadallowed Putana to enter the house, nor could he imagine the gravity of thesituation. He did not understand that Krsna had wanted to kill Putana and thatHis pastimes were performed by yogamaya. Nanda Maharaja simply thought thatsomeone had entered his house and created havoc. This was Nanda Maharaja'ssimplicity.                               TEXT 44                                 TEXT                        ya etat putana-moksam                       krsnasyarbhakam adbhutam                      srnuyac chraddhaya martyo                        govinde labhate ratim                               SYNONYMS   yah--anyone who; etat--this; putana-moksam--salvation of Putana; krsnasya--ofKrsna; arbhakam--the childhood pastimes; adbhutam--wonderful; srnuyat--shouldhear; sraddhaya--with faith and devotion; martyah--any person within thismaterial world; govinde--for the Supreme Person, Govinda, Adi-purusa; labhate--gains; ratim--attachment.                             TRANSLATION   Any person who hears with faith and devotion about how Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, killed Putana, and who thus invests his hearing in suchchildhood pastimes of Krsna, certainly attains attachment for Govinda, thesupreme, original person.                               PURPORT   The incident in which the great witch attempted to kill the child but waskilled herself is certainly wonderful. Therefore this verse uses the wordadbhutam, meaning "specifically wonderful." Krsna has left us many wonderfulnarrations about Him. Simply by reading these narrations, as they are describedin Krsna, the Supreme personality of Godhead, one gains salvation from thismaterial world and gradually develops attachment to and devotion for Govinda,Adi-purusa.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Sixth Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "The Killing of the Demon Putana."
                            Chapter Seven                  The Killing of the Demon Trnavarta   In this chapter, Sri Krsna's pastimes of breaking the cart (sakata-bhanjana),killing the asura known as Trnavarta, and demonstrating the entire universewithin His mouth are especially described.   When Sukadeva Gosvami saw that Maharaja Pariksit was eagerly waiting to hearabout Lord Krsna's pastimes as a child, he was very much pleased, and hecontinued to speak. When Sri Krsna was only three months old and was just tryingto turn backside up, before He even attempted to crawl, mother Yasoda wanted toobserve a ritualistic ceremony with her friends for the good fortune of thechild. Such a ritualistic ceremony is generally performed with ladies who alsohave small children. When mother Yasoda saw that Krsna was falling asleep,because of other engagements she put the child underneath a household cart,called sakata, and while the child was sleeping, she engaged herself in otherbusiness pertaining to the auspicious ritualistic ceremony. Underneath the cartwas a cradle, and mother Yasoda placed the child in that cradle. The child wassleeping, but suddenly He awakened and, as usual for a child, began to kick Hissmall legs. This kicking shook the cart, which collapsed with a great sound,breaking completely and spilling all its contents. Children who were playingnearby immediately informed mother Yasoda that the cart had broken, andtherefore she hastily arrived there in great anxiety with the other gopis.Mother Yasoda immediately took the child on her lap and allowed Him to suck herbreast. Then various types of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies were performed withthe help of the brahmanas. Not knowing the real identity of the child, thebrahmanas showered the child with blessings.   Another day, when mother Yasoda was sitting with her child on her lap, shesuddenly observed that he had assumed the weight of the entire universe. She wasso astonished that she had to put the child down, and in the meantime Trnavarta,one of the servants of Kamsa, appeared there as a whirlwind and took the childaway. The whole tract of land known as Gokula became surcharged with dust, noone could see where the child had been taken, and all the gopis were overwhelmedbecause He had been taken away in the dust storm. But up in the sky, the asura,being overburdened by the child, could not carry the child far away, although healso could not drop the child because the child had caught him so tightly thatit was difficult for him to separate the child from his body. Thus Trnavartahimself fell down from a very great height, the child grasping him tightly bythe shoulder, and immediately died. The demon having fallen, the gopis pickedthe child up and delivered Him to the lap of mother Yasoda. Thus mother Yasodawas struck with wonder, but because of yogamaya's influence, no one couldunderstand who Krsna was and what had actually happened. Rather, everyone beganto praise fortune for the child's having been saved from such a calamity. NandaMaharaja, of course, was thinking of the wonderful foretelling of Vasudeva andbegan to praise him as a great yogi. Later, when the child was on the lap ofmother Yasoda, the child yawned, and mother Yasoda could see within His mouththe entire universal manifestation.                              TEXTS 1-2                                 TEXT                             sri-rajovaca                          yena yenavatarena                        bhagavan harir isvarah                         karoti karna-ramyani                       mano-jnani ca nah prabho                  yac-chrnvato 'paity aratir vitrsna
                 sattvam ca suddhyaty acirena pumsah                 bhaktir harau tat-puruse ca sakhyam                    tad eva haram vada manyase cet                               SYNONYMS   sri-raja uvaca--the King inquired (from Sukadeva Gosvami); yena yenaavatarena--the pastimes exhibited by different varieties of incarnations;bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; harih--the Lord; isvarah--thecontroller; karoti--presents; karna-ramyani--were all very pleasing to the ear;manah-jnani--very attractive to the mind; ca--also; nah--of us; prabho--my lord,Sukadeva Gosvami; yat-srnvatah--of anyone who simply hears these narrations;apaiti--vanishes; aratih--unattractiveness; vitrsna--dirty things within themind that make us uninterested in Krsna consciousness; sattvam ca--theexistential position in the core of the heart; suddhyati--becomes purified;acirena--very soon; pumsah--of any person; bhaktih harau--devotional attachmentand service to the Lord; tat-puruse--with Vaisnavas; ca--also; sakhyam--attraction to association; tat eva--that only; haram--the activities of theLord, which should be heard and kept on the neck as a garland; vada--kindlyspeak; manyase--you think it fit; cet--if.                             TRANSLATION   King Pariksit said: My lord, Sukadeva Gosvami, all the various activitiesexhibited by the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead arecertainly pleasing to the ear and to the mind. Simply by one's hearing of theseactivities, the dirty things in one's mind immediately vanish. Generally we arereluctant to hear about the activities of the Lord, but Krsna's childhoodactivities are so attractive that they are automatically pleasing to the mindand ear. Thus one's attachment for hearing about material things, which is theroot cause of material existence, vanishes, and one gradually developsdevotional service to the Supreme Lord, attachment for Him, and friendship withdevotees who give us the contribution of Krsna consciousness. If you think itfit, kindly speak about those activities of the Lord.                               PURPORT   As stated in the prema-vivarta:               krsna-bahirmukha haiya bhoga-vancha kare                 nikata-stha maya tare japatiya dhare   Our material existence is maya, or illusion, in which we desire differentvarieties of material enjoyment and therefore change to different varieties ofbodies (bhramayan sarva-bhutani yantrarudhani mayaya). Asann api klesada asadehah: as long as we have these temporary bodies, they give us many varieties oftribulation--adhyatmika, adhibhautika and adhidaivika. This is the root cause ofall suffering, but this root cause of suffering can be removed by revival of ourKrsna consciousness. All the Vedic literatures presented by Vyasadeva and othergreat sages are therefore intended to revive our Krsna consciousness, whichbegins to revive with sravana-kirtanam. Srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah (Bhag.1.2.17). Srimad-Bhagavatam and other Vedic literatures exist simply to give us achance to hear about Krsna. Krsna has different avataras, or incarnations, allof which are wonderful and which arouse one's inquisitiveness, but generallysuch avataras as Matsya, Kurma and Varaha are not as attractive as Krsna. Firstof all, however, we have no attraction for hearing about Krsna, and this is theroot cause of our suffering.
   But Pariksit Maharaja specifically mentions that the wonderful activities ofbaby Krsna, which amazed mother Yasoda and the other inhabitants of Vraja, areespecially attractive. From the very beginning of His childhood, Krsna killedPutana, Trnavarta and Sakatasura and showed the entire universe within Hismouth. Thus the pastimes of Krsna, one after another, kept mother Yasoda and allthe inhabitants of Vraja in great astonishment. The process to revive one'sKrsna consciousness is adau sraddha tatah sadhu-sangah (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu1.4.15). The pastimes of Krsna can be properly received from devotees. If onehas developed a little bit of Krsna consciousness by hearing from Vaisnavasabout the activities of Krsna, one becomes attached to Vaisnavas who areinterested only in Krsna consciousness. Therefore Pariksit Maharaja recommendsthat one hear about Krsna's childhood activities, which are more attractive thanthe activities of other incarnations, such as Matsya, Kurma and Varaha. Wantingto hear more and more from Sukadeva Gosvami, Maharaja Pariksit requested him tocontinue describing Krsna's childhood activities, which are especially easy tohear and which create more and more inquisitiveness.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT                        athanyad api krsnasya                         tokacaritam adbhutam                         manusam lokam asadya                        taj-jatim anurundhatah                               SYNONYMS   atha--also; anyat api--other pastimes also; krsnasya--of child Krsna; toka-acaritam adbhutam--they are also wonderful childhood pastimes; manusam--as ifplaying as a human child; lokam asadya--appearing on this planet earth in humansociety; tat-jatim--exactly like a human child; anurundhatah--who was imitating.                             TRANSLATION   Please describe other pastimes of Krsna, the Supreme Personality, whoappeared on this planet earth, imitating a human child and performing wonderfulactivities like killing Putana.                               PURPORT   Maharaja Pariksit requested Sukadeva Gosvami to narrate other childhoodpastimes exhibited by Krsna while playing as a human child. The SupremePersonality of Godhead incarnates at different times in different planets anduniverses, and according to the nature of those places, He exhibits Hisunlimited potency. That a child sitting on the lap of his mother was able tokill the gigantic Putana is extremely wonderful for the inhabitants of thisplanet, but on other planets the inhabitants are more advanced, and thereforethe pastimes the Lord performs there are still more wonderful. Krsna'sappearance on this planet like a human being makes us more fortunate than thedemigods in the higher planets, and therefore Maharaja Pariksit was very muchinterested in hearing about Him.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca
                   kadacid autthanika-kautukaplave                   janmarksa-yoge samaveta-yositam                  vaditra-gita-dvija-mantra-vacakais                    cakara sunor abhisecanam sati                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak (at the request ofMaharaja Pariksit); kadacit--at that time (when Krsna was three months old);autthanika-kautuka-aplave--when Krsna was three or four months old and His bodywas developing, He attempted to turn around, and this pleasing occasion wasobserved with a festival and bathing ceremony; janma-rksa-yoge--at that time,there was also a conjunction of the moon with the auspicious constellationRohini; samaveta-yositam--(the ceremony was observed) among the assembled women,a ceremony of mothers; vaditra-gita--different varieties of music and singing;dvija-mantra-vacakaih--with chanting of Vedic hymns by qualified brahmanas;cakara--executed; sunoh--of her son; abhisecanam--the bathing ceremony; sati--mother Yasoda.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: When mother Yasoda's baby was slanting His body toattempt to rise and turn around, this attempt was observed by a Vedic ceremony.In such a ceremony, called utthana, which is performed when a child is due toleave the house for the first time, the child is properly bathed. Just afterKrsna turned three months old, mother Yasoda celebrated this ceremony with otherwomen of the neighborhood. On that day, there was a conjunction of the moon withthe constellation Rohini. As the brahmanas joined by chanting Vedic hymns andprofessional musicians also took part, this great ceremony was observed bymother Yasoda                               PURPORT   There is no question of overpopulation or of children's being a burden fortheir parents in a Vedic society. Such a society is so well organized and peopleare so advanced in spiritual consciousness that childbirth is never regarded asa burden or a botheration. The more a child grows, the more his parents becomejubilant, and the child's attempts to turn over are also a source of jubilation.Even before the child is born, when the mother is pregnant, many recommendedritualistic ceremonies are performed. For example, when the child has beenwithin the womb for three months and for seven months, there is a ceremony themother observes by eating with neighboring children. This ceremony is calledsvada-bhaksana. Similarly, before the birth of the child there is thegarbhadhana ceremony. In Vedic civilization, childbirth or pregnancy is neverregarded as a burden; rather, it is a cause for jubilation. In contrast, peoplein modern civilization do not like pregnancy or childbirth, and when there is achild, they sometimes kill it. We can just consider how human society has fallensince the inauguration of Kali-yuga. Although people still claim to becivilized, at the present moment there is actually no human civilization, butonly an assembly of two-legged animals.                                TEXT 5                                 TEXT                   nandasya patni krta-majjanadikam                 vipraih krta-svastyayanam supujitaih                 annadya-vasah-srag-abhista-dhenubhih
                  sanjata-nidraksam asisayac chanaih                               SYNONYMS   nandasya--of Maharaja Nanda; patni--the wife (mother Yasoda); krta-majjana-adikam--after she and the other members of the house had bathed and the childhad been bathed also; vipraih--by the brahmanas; krta-svastyayanam--engagingthem in chanting auspicious Vedic hymns; su-pujitaih--who were all received andworshiped with proper respect; anna-adya--by offering them sufficient grains andother eatables; vasah--garments; srak-abhista-dhenubhih--by offering flowergarlands and very desirable cows; sanjata-nidra--had become sleepy; aksam--whoseeyes; asisayat--laid the child down; sanaih--for the time being.                             TRANSLATION   After completing the bathing ceremony for the child, mother Yasoda receivedthe brahmanas by worshiping them with proper respect and giving them ample foodgrains and other eatables, clothing, desirable cows, and garlands. The brahmanasproperly chanted Vedic hymns to observe the auspicious ceremony, and when theyfinished and mother Yasoda saw that the child felt sleepy, she lay down on thebed with the child until He was peacefully asleep.                               PURPORT   An affectionate mother takes great care of her child and is always anxious tosee that the child is not disturbed even for a moment. As long as the childwants to remain with the mother, the mother stays with the child, and the childfeels very comfortable. Mother Yasoda saw that her child felt sleepy, and togive Him all facilities for sleep, she lay down with the child, and when He waspeaceful, she got up to attend to her other household affairs.                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                   autthanikautsukya-mana manasvini                    samagatan pujayati vrajaukasah                  naivasrnod vai ruditam sutasya sa                  rudan stanarthi caranav udaksipat                               SYNONYMS   autthanika-autsukya-manah--mother Yasoda was very busy celebrating theutthana ceremony of her child; manasvini--very liberal in distributing food,clothing, ornaments and cows, according to necessity; samagatan--to theassembled guests; pujayati--just to satisfy them; vraja-okasah--to theinhabitants of Vraja; na--not; eva--certainly; asrnot--did hear; vai--indeed;ruditam--the crying; sutasya--of her child; sa--mother Yasoda; rudan--crying;stana-arthi--Krsna, who was hankering to drink His mother's milk by sucking herbreast; caranau udaksipat--out of anger, threw His two legs hither and thither.                             TRANSLATION   The liberal mother Yasoda, absorbed in celebrating the utthana ceremony, wasbusy receiving guests, worshiping them with all respect and offering themclothing, cows, garlands and grains. Thus she could not hear the child cryingfor His mother. At that time, the child Krsna, demanding to drink the milk ofHis mother's breast, angrily threw His legs upward.
                               PURPORT   Krsna had been placed underneath a household handcart, but this handcart wasactually another form of the Sakatasura, a demon who had come there to kill thechild. Now, on the plea of demanding to suck His mother's breast, Krsna tookthis opportunity to kill the demon. Thus He kicked Sakatasura just to exposehim. Although Krsna's mother was engaged in receiving guests, Lord Krsna wantedto draw her attention by killing the Sakatasura, and therefore he kicked thatcart-shaped demon. Such are the pastimes of Krsna. Krsna wanted to draw theattention of His mother, but while doing so He created a great havoc notunderstandable by ordinary persons. These narrations are wonderfully enjoyable,and those who are fortunate are struck with wonder upon hearing of theseextraordinary activities of the Lord. Although the less intelligent regard themas mythological because a dull brain cannot understand them, they are realfacts. These narrations are actually so enjoyable and enlightening that MaharajaPariksit and Sukadeva Gosvami took pleasure in them, and other liberatedpersons, following in their footsteps, become fully jubilant by hearing aboutthe wonderful activities of the Lord.                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT                  adhah-sayanasya sisor ano 'lpaka-                 pravala-mrdv-anghri-hatam vyavartata                  vidhvasta-nana-rasa-kupya-bhajanam                 vyatyasta-cakraksa-vibhinna-kubaram                               SYNONYMS   adhah-sayanasya--who was put underneath the handcart; sisoh--of the child;anah--the cart; alpaka--not very much grown; pravala--just like a new leaf;mrdu-anghri-hatam--struck by His beautiful, delicate legs; vyavartata--turnedover and fell down; vidhvasta--scattered; nana-rasa-kupya-bhajanam--utensilsmade of various metals; vyatyasta--dislocated; cakra-aksa--the two wheels andthe axle; vibhinna--broken; kubaram--the pole of the handcart.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Sri Krsna was lying down underneath the handcart in one corner of thecourtyard, and although His little legs were as soft as leaves, when He struckthe cart with His legs, it turned over violently and collapsed. The wheelsseparated from the axle, the hubs and spokes fell apart, and the pole of thehandcart broke. On the cart there were many little utensils made of variousmetals, and all of them scattered hither and thither.                               PURPORT   Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura has commented on this verse as follows.When Lord Krsna was of a very tender age, His hands and legs resembled soft newleaves, yet simply by touching the handcart with His legs, He made the cart fallto pieces. It was quite possible for Him to act in this way and yet not exertHimself very much. The Lord in His Vamana avatara had to extend His foot to thegreatest height to penetrate the covering of the universe, and when the Lordkilled the gigantic demon Hiranyakasipu, He had to assume the special bodilyfeature of Nrsimhadeva. But in His Krsna avatara, the Lord did not need to exertsuch energy. Therefore, krsnas tu bhagavan svayam: Krsna is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself. In other incarnations, the Lord had to exertsome energy according to the time and circumstances, but in this form Heexhibited unlimited potency. Thus the handcart collapsed, its joints broken, andall the metal pots and utensils scattered.   The Vaisnava-tosani remarks that although the handcart was higher than thechild, the child could easily touch the wheel of the cart, and this wassufficient to send the demon down to the earth. The Lord simultaneously pushedthe demon to the earth and superficially broke the handcart.                                TEXT 8                                 TEXT                 drstva yasoda-pramukha vraja-striya                   autthanike karmani yah samagatah                   nandadayas cadbhuta-darsanakulah                 katham svayam vai sakatam viparyagat                               SYNONYMS   drstva--after seeing; yasoda-pramukhah--headed by mother Yasoda; vraja-striyah--all the ladies of Vraja; autthanike karmani--in the celebration of theutthana ceremony; yah--those who; samagatah--assembled there; nanda-adayah ca--and the men, headed by Nanda Maharaja; adbhuta-darsana--by seeing the wonderfulcalamity (that the heavily loaded cart had broken upon the small baby, who stilllay there unhurt); akulah--and thus they were very much perturbed as to how ithad happened; katham--how; svayam--by itself; vai--indeed; sakatam--thehandcart; viparyagat--became so heavily damaged, dismantled.                             TRANSLATION   When mother Yasoda and the other ladies who had assembled for the utthanafestival, and all the men, headed by Nanda Maharaja, saw the wonderfulsituation, they began to wonder how the handcart had collapsed by itself. Theybegan to wander here and there, trying to find the cause, but were unable to doso.                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT                        ucur avyavasita-matin                        gopan gopis ca balakah                          rudatanena padena                       ksiptam etan na samsayah                               SYNONYMS   ucuh--said; avyavasita-matin--who had lost all intelligence in the presentsituation; gopan--to the cowherd men; gopih ca--and to the ladies; balakah--thechildren; rudata anena--as soon as the child cried; padena--with one leg;ksiptam etat--this cart was dashed apart and immediately fell dismantled; nasamsayah--there is no doubt about it.                             TRANSLATION   The assembled cowherd men and ladies began to contemplate how this thing hadhappened. "Is it the work of some demon or evil planet?" they asked. At that
time, the small children present asserted that the cart had been kicked apart bythe baby Krsna. As soon as the crying baby bad kicked the cart's wheel, the carthad collapsed. There was no doubt about it.                               PURPORT   We have heard of people's being haunted by ghosts. Having no gross materialbody, a ghost seeks shelter of a gross body to stay in and haunt. The Sakatasurawas a ghost who had taken shelter of the handcart and was looking for theopportunity to do mischief to Krsna. When Krsna kicked the cart with His smalland very delicate legs, the ghost was immediately pushed down to the earth andhis shelter dismantled, as already described. This was possible for Krsnabecause He has full potency, as confirmed in the Brahma-samhita (5.32):                 angani yasya sakalendriya-vrttimanti                pasyanti panti kalayanti ciram jaganti                ananda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   Krsna's body is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha, or ananda-cinmaya-rasa-vigraha. Thatis, any of the parts of His ananda-cinmaya body can act for any other part. Suchare the inconceivable potencies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. TheSupreme Lord does not need to acquire these potencies; He already has them. ThusKrsna kicked His little legs, and His whole purpose was fulfilled. Also, whenthe handcart broke, an ordinary child could have been injured in many ways, butbecause Krsna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He enjoyed the dismantlingof the cart, and nothing injured Him. Everything done by Him is ananda-cinmaya-rasa, full transcendental bliss. Thus Krsna factually enjoyed.   The nearby children saw that actually Krsna had kicked the wheel of the cartand this was how the accident happened. By the arrangement of yogamaya, all thegopis and gopas thought that the accident had taken place because of some badplanet or some ghost, but in fact everything was done by Krsna and enjoyed byHim. Those who enjoy the activities of Krsna are also on the platform of ananda-cinmaya-rasa; they are liberated from the material platform. When one developsthe practice of hearing krsna-katha, he is certainly transcendental to materialexistence, as confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhuyayakalpate). Unless one is on the spiritual platform, one cannot enjoy thetranscendental activities of Krsna; or in other words, whoever engages inhearing the transcendental activities of Krsna is not on the material platform,but on the transcendental, spiritual platform.                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT                        na te sraddadhire gopa                        bala-bhasitam ity uta                        aprameyam balam tasya                        balakasya na te viduh                               SYNONYMS   na--not; te--the cowherd men and ladies; sraddadhire--put their faith (insuch statements); gopah--the cowherd men and women; bala-bhasitam--childish talkfrom the assembled children; iti uta--thus spoken; aprameyam--unlimited,inconceivable; balam--the power; tasya balakasya--of the small baby Krsna; na--not; te--the gopis and gopas; viduh--were aware of.
                             TRANSLATION   The assembled gopis and gopas, unaware that Krsna is always unlimited, couldnot believe that baby Krsna had such inconceivable power. They could not believethe statements of the children, and therefore they neglected these statements asbeing childish talk.                               TEXT 11                                 TEXT                         rudantam sutam adaya                         yasoda graha-sankita                      krta-svastyayanam vipraih                       suktaih stanam apayayat                               SYNONYMS   rudantam--crying; sutam--son; adaya--picking up; yasoda--mother Yasoda;graha-sankita--fearing some bad planet; krta-svastyayanam--immediately performeda ritualistic ceremony for good fortune; vipraih--by calling all the brahmanas;suktaih--by Vedic hymns; stanam--her breast; apayayat--made the child suck.                             TRANSLATION   Thinking that some bad planet had attacked Krsna, mother Yasoda picked up thecrying child and allowed Him to suck her breast. Then she called for experiencedbrahmanas to chant Vedic hymns and perform an auspicious ritualistic ceremony.                               PURPORT   Whenever there is some danger or some inauspicious occurrence, it is thecustom of Vedic civilization to have qualified brahmanas immediately chant Vedichymns to counteract it. Mother Yasoda did this properly and allowed the baby tosuck her breast.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                      purvavat sthapitam gopair                       balibhih sa-paricchadam                       vipra hutvarcayam cakrur                       dadhy-aksata-kusambubhih                               SYNONYMS   purva-vat--as the handcart had been situated before; sthapitam--againassembled with the pots situated properly; gopaih--by the cowherd men; balibhih--all of whom were very strong and stout and who could therefore assemble theparts without difficulty; sa-paricchadam--with all the paraphernalia kept on it;viprah--the brahmanas; hutva--after performing a fire ceremony; arcayam cakruh--performed ritualistic ceremonies; dadhi--with curd; aksata--grains of rice;kusa--and kusa grass; ambubhih--with water.                             TRANSLATION
   After the strong, stout cowherd men assembled the pots and paraphernalia onthe handcart and set it up as before, the brahmanas performed a ritualisticceremony with a fire sacrifice to appease the bad planet, and then, with ricegrains, kusa, water and curd, they worshiped the Supreme Lord.                               PURPORT   The handcart was loaded with heavy utensils and other paraphernalia. To setthe cart back in its original position required much strength, but this waseasily done by the cowherd men. Then, according to the system of the gopa jati,various Vedic ceremonies were performed to appease the calamitous situation.                             TEXTS 13-15                                 TEXT                       ye 'suyanrta-dambhersa-                        himsa-mana-vivarjitah                        na tesam satya-silanam                         asiso viphalah krtah                          iti balakam adaya                        samarg-yajur-upakrtaih                       jalaih pavitrausadhibhir                        abhisicya dvijottamaih                        vacayitva svastyayanam                        nanda-gopah samahitah                      hutva cagnim dvijatibhyah                       pradad annam maha-gunam                               SYNONYMS   ye--those brahmanas who; asuya--envy; anrta--untruthfulness; dambha--falsepride; irsa--grudges; himsa--being disturbed by the opulence of others; mana--false prestige; vivarjitah--completely devoid of; na--not; tesam--of suchbrahmanas; satya-silanam--who are endowed with perfect brahminicalqualifications (satya, sama, dama, etc.); asisah--the blessings; viphalah--useless; krtah--have become; iti--considering all these things; balakam--thechild; adaya--taking care of; sama--according to the Sama Veda; rk--according tothe Rg Veda; yajuh--and according to the Yajur Veda; upakrtaih--purified by suchmeans; jalaih--with water; pavitra-ausadhibhih--mixed with pure herbs;abhisicya--after bathing (the child); dvija-uttamaih--with ceremonies performedby first-class brahmanas with the above qualifications; vacayitva--requested tobe chanted; svasti-ayanam--auspicious hymns; nanda-gopah--Maharaja Nanda, thehead of the cowherd men; samahitah--liberal and good; hutva--after offeringoblations; ca--also; agnim--unto the sacred fire; dvijatibhyah--unto thosefirst-class brahmanas; pradat--gave in charity; annam--food grains; maha-gunam--excellent.                             TRANSLATION   When brahmanas are free from envy, untruthfulness, unnecessary pride,grudges, disturbance by the opulence of others, and false prestige, theirblessings never go in vain. Considering this, Nanda Maharaja soberly took Krsnaon his lap and invited such truthful brahmanas to perform a ritualistic ceremonyaccording to the holy hymns of the Sama Veda, Rg Veda and Yajur Veda. Then,while the hymns were being chanted, he bathed the child with water mixed with
pure herbs, and after performing a fire ceremony, he sumptuously fed all thebrahmanas with first-class grains and other food.                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja was very confident about the qualifications of the brahmanasand their blessings. He was fully confident that simply if the good brahmanasshowered their blessings, the child Krsna would be happy. The blessings ofqualified brahmanas can bring happiness not only to Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, but to everyone. Because Krsna is self-sufficient, Hedoes not require anyone's blessings, yet Nanda Maharaja thought that Krsnarequired the blessings of the brahmanas. What then is to be said of others? Inhuman society, therefore, there must be an ideal class of men, brahmanas, whocan bestow blessings upon others, namely, upon the ksatriyas, vaisyas andsudras, so that everyone will be happy. Krsna therefore says in Bhagavad-gita(4.13) that human society must have four social orders (catur-varnyam mayasrstam guna-karma-vibhagasah); it is not that everyone should become a sudra ora vaisya and human society will prosper. As enunciated in Bhagavad-gita, theremust be a class of brahmanas with qualities like satya (truthfulness), sama(peacefulness), dama (self-control) and titiksa (tolerance).   Here also, in the Bhagavatam, Nanda Maharaja invites qualified brahmanas.There may be caste brahmanas, and we have all respect for them, but their birthin brahmana families does not mean that they are qualified to bestow blessingsupon the other members of human society. This is the verdict of the sastras. InKali-yuga, caste brahmanas are accepted as brahmanas. Vipratve sutram eva hi(Bhag. 12.2.3): in Kali-yuga, simply by putting on a thread worth two paise, onebecomes a brahmana. Such brahmanas were not called for by Nanda Maharaja. Asstated by Narada Muni (Bhag. 7.11.35), yasya yal laksanam proktam. The symptomsof a brahmana are stated in sastra, and one must be qualified with thesesymptoms.   The blessings of brahmanas who are not envious, disturbed or puffed up withpride and false prestige and who are fully qualified with truthfulness will beuseful. Therefore a class of men must be trained as brahmanas from the verybeginning. Brahmacari guru-kule vasan danto guror hitam (Bhag. 7.12.1). The worddantah is very important. Dantah refers to one who is not envious, disturbing orpuffed up with false prestige. With the Krsna consciousness movement, we aretrying to introduce such brahmanas in society. Brahmanas must ultimately beVaisnavas, and if one is a Vaisnava, he has already acquired the qualificationsof a brahmana. Brahma-bhutah prasannatma (Bg. 18.54). The word brahma-bhutarefers to becoming a brahmana, or understanding what is Brahman (brahma janatitibrahmanah). One who is brahma-bhuta is always happy (prasannatma). Na socati nakanksati: he is never disturbed about material necessities. Samah sarvesubhutesu: he is ready to bestow blessings upon everyone equally. Mad-bhaktimlabhate param: then he becomes a Vaisnava. In this age, Srila BhaktisiddhantaSarasvati Thakura introduced the sacred thread ceremony for his Vaisnavadisciples, with the idea that people should understand that when one becomes aVaisnava he has already acquired the qualifications of a brahmana. Therefore inthe International Society for Krishna Consciousness, those who are twiceinitiated so as to become brahmanas must bear in mind their great responsibilityto be truthful, control the mind and senses, be tolerant, and so on. Then theirlife will be successful. It was such brahmanas that Nanda Maharaja invited tochant the Vedic hymns, not ordinary brahmanas. Verse thirteen distinctlymentions himsa-mana. The word mana refers to false prestige or false pride.Those who were falsely proud, thinking that they were brahmanas because theywere born in brahmana families, were never invited by Nanda Maharaja on suchoccasions.   Verse fourteen mentions pavitrausadhi. In any ritualistic ceremony, manyherbs and leaves were required. These were known as pavitra-patra. Sometimes
there were nimba leaves, sometimes bael leaves, mango leaves, asvattha leaves oramalaki leaves. Similarly, there were panca-gavya, panca-sasya and panca-ratna.Although Nanda Maharaja belonged to the vaisya community, everything was knownto him.   The most important word in these verses is maha-gunam, indicating that thebrahmanas were offered very palatable food of exalted quality. Such palatabledishes were generally prepared with two things, namely food grains and milkproducts. Bhagavad-gita (18.44) therefore enjoins that human society must giveprotection to the cows and encourage agriculture (krsi-go-raksya-vanijyamvaisya-karma svabhavajam). Simply by expert cooking, hundreds and thousands ofpalatable dishes can be prepared from agricultural produce and milk products.This is indicated here by the words annam maha-gunam. Still today in India, fromthese two things, namely food grains and milk, hundreds and thousands ofvarieties of food are prepared, and then they are offered to the SupremePersonality of Godhead. (Catur-vidha-sri-bhagavat-prasada. patram puspam phalamtoyam yo me bhaktya prayacchati.) Then the prasada is distributed. Even today inJagannatha-ksetra and other big temples, very palatable dishes are offered tothe Deity, and prasada is distributed profusely. Cooked by first-class brahmanaswith expert knowledge and then distributed to the public, this prasada is also ablessing from the brahmanas or Vaisnavas. There are four kinds of prasada(catur-vidha). Salty, sweet, sour and pungent tastes are made with differenttypes of spices, and the food is prepared in four divisions, called carvya,cusya, lehya and pehya--prasada that is chewed, prasada that is licked, prasadatasted with the tongue, and prasada that is drunk. Thus there are many varietiesof prasada, prepared very nicely with grains and ghee, offered to the Deity anddistributed to the brahmanas and Vaisnavas and then to the general public. Thisis the way of human society. Killing the cows and spoiling the land will notsolve the problem of food. This is not civilization. Uncivilized men living inthe jungle and being unqualified to produce food by agriculture and cowprotection may eat animals, but a perfect human society advanced in knowledgemust learn how to produce first-class food simply by agriculture and protectionof cows.                               TEXT 16                                 TEXT                         gavah sarva-gunopeta                       vasah-srag-rukma-malinih                         atmajabhyudayarthaya                        pradat te canvayunjata                               SYNONYMS   gavah--cows; sarva-guna-upetah--being fully qualified by giving sufficientmilk, etc.; vasah--well dressed; srak--with flower garlands; rukma-malinih--andwith garlands of gold; atmaja-abhyudaya-arthaya--for the purpose of his son'saffluence; pradat--gave in charity; te--those brahmanas; ca--also; anvayunjata--accepted them.                             TRANSLATION   Nanda Maharaja, for the sake of the affluence of his own son Krsna, gave thebrahmanas cows fully decorated with garments, flower garlands and goldnecklaces. These cows, fully qualified to give ample milk, were given to thebrahmanas in charity, and the brahmanas accepted them and bestowed blessingsupon the whole family, and especially upon Krsna.
                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja first fed the brahmanas sumptuously and then gave them incharity first-class cows fully decorated with golden necklaces, garments andflower garlands.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                       vipra mantra-vido yuktas                     tair yah proktas tathasisah                       ta nisphala bhavisyanti                        na kadacid api sphutam                               SYNONYMS   viprah--the brahmanas; mantra-vidah--completely expert in chanting the Vedichymns; yuktah--perfect mystic yogis; taih--by them; yah--whatsoever; proktah--was spoken; tatha--becomes just so; asisah--all blessings; tah--such words;nisphalah--useless, without fruit; bhavisyanti na--never will become; kadacit--at any time; api--indeed; sphutam--always factual, as it is.                             TRANSLATION   The brahmanas, who were completely expert in chanting the Vedic hymns, wereall yogis fully equipped with mystic powers. Whatever blessings they spoke werecertainly never fruitless.                               PURPORT   Brahmanas fully equipped with the brahminical qualifications are always yogisfully powerful in mystic yoga. Their words never fail. In every transaction withother members of society, brahmanas are certainly dependable. In this age,however, one must take into account that the brahmanas are uncertain in theirqualifications. Because there are no yajnic brahmanas, all yajnas are forbidden.The only yajna recommended in this age is sankirtana-yajna. Yajnaih sankirtana-prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah (Bhag. 11.5.32). Yajna is meant to satisfy Visnu(yajnarthat karmano 'nyatra loko 'yam karma-bandhanah). Because in this agethere are no qualified brahmanas, people should perform yajna by chanting theHare Krsna mantra (yajnaih sankirtana-prayair yajanti hi sumedhasah). Life ismeant for yajna, and yajna is performed by the chanting of Hare Krsna, HareKrsna, Krsna Krsna, Hare Hare. Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                          ekadaroham arudham                         lalayanti sutam sati                        garimanam sisor vodhum                         na sehe giri-kutavat                               SYNONYMS   ekada--one time (estimated to have been when Krsna was one year old); aroham--on His mother's lap; arudham--who was sitting; lalayanti--was patting; sutam--her son; sati--mother Yasoda; garimanam--because of an increase in heaviness;
sisoh--of the child; vodhum--to bear Him; na--not; sehe--was able; giri-kuta-vat--appearing like the weight of a mountain peak.                             TRANSLATION   One day, a year after Krsna's appearance, mother Yasoda was patting her sonon her lap. But suddenly she felt the child to be heavier than a mountain peak,and she could no longer bear His weight.                               PURPORT   Lalayanti. Sometimes a mother lifts her child, and when the child falls inher hands, the child laughs, and the mother also enjoys pleasure. Yasoda used todo this, but this time Krsna became very heavy, and she could not bear Hisweight. Under the circumstances, it is to be understood that Krsna was aware ofthe coming of Trnavartasura, who would take Him far away from His mother. Krsnaknew that when Trnavarta came and took Him away from His mother's lap, motherYasoda would be greatly bereaved. He did not want His mother to suffer anydifficulty from the demon. Therefore, because He is the source of everything(janmady asya yatah), He assumed the heaviness of the entire universe. The childwas on the lap of Yasoda, who was therefore in possession of everything in theworld, but when the child assumed such heaviness, she had to put Him down inorder to give Trnavartasura an opportunity to take Him away and play with Himfor some time before the child returned to the lap of His mother.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                       bhumau nidhaya tam gopi                         vismita bhara-pidita                        maha-purusam adadhyau                         jagatam asa karmasu                               SYNONYMS   bhumau--on the ground; nidhaya--placing; tam--the child; gopi--mother Yasoda;vismita--being astonished; bhara-pidita--being aggrieved by the weight of thechild; maha-purusam--Lord Visnu, Narayana; adadhyau--took shelter of; jagatam--as if the weight of the whole world; asa--engaged herself; karmasu--in otherhousehold affairs.                             TRANSLATION   Feeling the child to be as heavy as the entire universe and therefore beinganxious, thinking that perhaps the child was being attacked by some other ghostor demon, the astonished mother Yasoda put the child down on the ground andbegan to think of Narayana. Foreseeing disturbances, she called for thebrahmanas to counteract this heaviness, and then she engaged in her otherhousehold affairs. She had no alternative than to remember the lotus feet ofNarayana, for she could not understand that Krsna was the original source ofeverything.                               PURPORT   Mother Yasoda did not understand that Krsna is the heaviest of all heavythings and that Krsna rests within everything (mat-sthani sarva-bhutani). Asconfirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.4), maya tatam idam sarvam jagad avyakta-murtina:
Krsna is everywhere in His impersonal form, and everything rests upon Him.Nonetheless, na caham tesv avasthitah: Krsna is not everywhere. Mother Yasodawas unable to understand this philosophy because she was dealing with Krsna asHis real mother by the arrangement of yogamaya. Not understanding the importanceof Krsna, she could only seek shelter of Narayana for Krsna's safety and callthe brahmanas to counteract the situation.                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                       daityo namna trnavartah                       kamsa-bhrtyah pranoditah                         cakravata-svarupena                         jaharasinam arbhakam                               SYNONYMS   daityah--another demon; namna--by the name; trnavartah--Trnavartasura; kamsa-bhrtyah--a servant of Kamsa; pranoditah--having been induced by him; cakravata-svarupena--in the form of a whirlwind; jahara--swept away; asinam--the sitting;arbhakam--child.                             TRANSLATION   While the child was sitting on the ground, a demon named Trnavarta, who was aservant of Kamsa's, came there as a whirlwind, at Kamsa's instigation, and veryeasily carried the child away into the air.                               PURPORT   Krsna's heaviness was unbearable for the child's mother, but whenTrnavartasura came, he immediately carried the child away. This was anotherdemonstration of Krsna's inconceivable energy. When the Trnavarta demon came,Krsna became lighter than the grass so that the demon could carry Him away. Thiswas ananda-cinmaya-rasa, Krsna's blissful, transcendental pleasure.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                        gokulam sarvam avrnvan                      musnams caksumsi renubhih                         irayan sumaha-ghora-                        sabdena pradiso disah                               SYNONYMS   gokulam--the whole tract of land known as Gokula; sarvam--everywhere;avrnvan--covering; musnan--taking away; caksumsi--the power of vision; renubhih--by particles of dust; irayan--was vibrating; su-maha-ghora--very fierce andheavy; sabdena--with a sound; pradisah disah--entered everywhere, in alldirections.                             TRANSLATION
   Covering the whole land of Gokula with particles of dust, that demon, actingas a strong whirlwind, covered everyone's vision and began vibrating everywherewith a greatly fearful sound.                               PURPORT   Trnavartasura assumed the form of a whirlwind and covered with a dust stormthe whole tract of land known as Gokula, so that no one could see even thenearest thing.                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT                       muhurtam abhavad gostham                          rajasa tamasavrtam                        sutam yasoda napasyat                       tasmin nyastavati yatah                               SYNONYMS   muhurtam--for a moment; abhavat--there was; gostham--throughout the wholepasturing ground; rajasa--by big particles of dust; tamasa avrtam--covered withdarkness; sutam--her son; yasoda--mother Yasoda; na apasyat--could not find;tasmin--in that very spot; nyastavati--she had placed Him; yatah--where.                             TRANSLATION   For a moment, the whole pasturing ground was overcast with dense darknessfrom the dust storm, and mother Yasoda was unable to find her son where she hadplaced Him.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                        napasyat kascanatmanam                         param capi vimohitah                        trnavarta-nisrstabhih                        sarkarabhir upadrutah                               SYNONYMS   na--not; apasyat--saw; kascana--anyone; atmanam--himself; param ca api--oranother; vimohitah--being illusioned; trnavarta-nisrstabhih--thrown byTrnavartasura; sarkarabhih--by the sands; upadrutah--and thus being disturbed.                             TRANSLATION   Because of the bits of sand thrown about by Trnavarta, people could not seethemselves or anyone else, and thus they were illusioned and disturbed.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                  iti khara-pavana-cakra-pamsu-varse                   suta-padavim abalavilaksya mata
                    atikarunam anusmaranty asocad                 bhuvi patita mrta-vatsaka yatha gauh                               SYNONYMS   iti--thus; khara--very strong; pavana-cakra--by a whirlwind; pamsu-varse--when there were showers of dust and small dust particles; suta-padavim--theplace of her son; abala--the innocent woman; avilaksya--not seeing; mata--because of being His mother; ati-karunam--very pitifully; anusmaranti--she wasthinking of her son; asocat--lamented extraordinarily; bhuvi--on the ground;patita--fell down; mrta-vatsaka--who has lost her calf; yatha--like; gauh--acow.                             TRANSLATION   Because of the dust storm stirred up by the strong whirlwind, mother Yasodacould find no trace of her son, nor could she understand why. Thus she fell downon the ground like a cow who has lost her calf and began to lament verypitifully.                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT                    ruditam anunisamya tatra gopyo               bhrsam anutapta-dhiyo 'sru-purna-mukhyah                   rurudur anupalabhya nanda-sunum                   pavana uparata-pamsu-varsa-vege                               SYNONYMS   ruditam--mother Yasoda, crying pitifully; anunisamya--after hearing; tatra--there; gopyah--the other ladies, the gopis; bhrsam--highly; anutapta--lamentingsympathetically after mother Yasoda; dhiyah--with such feelings; asru-purna-mukhyah--and the other gopis, their faces full of tears; ruruduh--they werecrying; anupalabhya--without finding; nanda-sunum--the son of Nanda Maharaja,Krsna; pavane--when the whirlwind; uparata--had ceased; pamsu-varsa-vege--itsforce of showering dust.                             TRANSLATION   When the force of the dust storm and the winds subsided, Yasoda's friends,the other gopis, approached mother Yasoda, hearing her pitiful crying. Notseeing Krsna present, they too felt very much aggrieved and joined mother Yasodain crying, their eyes full of tears.                               PURPORT   This attachment of the gopis to Krsna is wonderful and transcendental. Thecenter of all the activities of the gopis was Krsna. When Krsna was there theywere happy, and when Krsna was not there, they were unhappy. Thus when motherYasoda was lamenting Krsna's absence, the other ladies also began to cry.                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                        trnavartah santa-rayo
                        vatya-rupa-dharo haran                       krsnam nabho-gato gantum                      nasaknod bhuri-bhara-bhrt                               SYNONYMS   trnavartah--the demon Trnavarta; santa-rayah--the force of the blast reduced;vatya-rupa-dharah--who had assumed the form of a forceful whirlwind; haran--andhad thus taken away; krsnam--Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nabhah-gatah--went up to the top of the sky; gantum--to go further; na asaknot--was notable; bhuri-bhara-bhrt--because Krsna then became more powerful and heavy thanthe demon.                             TRANSLATION   Having assumed the form of a forceful whirlwind, the demon Trnavarta tookKrsna very high in the sky, but when Krsna became heavier than the demon, thedemon had to stop his force and could go no further.                               PURPORT   Here is a competition in yogic power between Krsna and Trnavartasura. Bypracticing mystic yoga, asuras generally attain some perfection in the eightsiddhis, or perfections, namely anima, laghima, mahima, prapti, prakamya,isitva, vasitva and kamavasayita. But although a demon may acquire such powersto a very limited extent, he cannot compete with the mystic power of Krsna, forKrsna is Yogesvara, the source of all mystic power (yatra yogesvaro harih). Noone can compete with Krsna. Sometimes, of course, having acquired a fragmentalportion of Krsna's mystic power, asuras demonstrate their power to the foolishpublic and assert themselves to be God, not knowing that God is the supremeYogesvara. Here also we see that Trnavarta assumed the mahima-siddhi and tookKrsna away as if Krsna were an ordinary child. But Krsna also became a mysticmahima-siddha. When mother Yasoda was carrying Him, He became so heavy that Hismother, who was usually accustomed to carrying Him, could not bear Him and hadto place Him down on the ground. Thus Trnavarta had been able to take Krsna awayin the presence of mother Yasoda. But when Krsna, high in the sky, assumed themahima-siddhi, the demon, unable to go further, was obliged to stop his forceand come down according to Krsna's desire. One should not, therefore, competewith Krsna's mystic power.   Devotees automatically have all mystic power, but they do not like to competewith Krsna. Instead, they fully surrender to Krsna, and their yogic power isdemonstrated by Krsna's mercy. Devotees can show mystic yoga so powerful that ademon could not even dream of it, but they never try to demonstrate it for theirpersonal sense gratification. Whatever they do is for the service of the Lord,and therefore they are always in a position superior to that of the demons.There are many karmis, yogis and jnanis who artificially try to compete withKrsna, and thus ordinary, foolish people who do not care to hear Srimad-Bhagavatam from authorities consider some rascal yogi to be Bhagavan, theSupreme Personality of Godhead. At the present moment there are many so-calledbabas who present themselves as incarnations of God by showing someinsignificant mystic wonder, and foolish people regard them as God because oflacking knowledge of Krsna.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                        tam asmanam manyamana
                         atmano guru-mattaya                        gale grhita utsrastum                       nasaknod adbhutarbhakam                               SYNONYMS   tam--Krsna; asmanam--very heavy stone like a lump of iron; manyamanah--thinking like that; atmanah guru-mattaya--because of being heavier than he couldpersonally perceive; gale--his neck; grhite--being embraced or encircled by Hisarms; utsrastum--to give up; na asaknot--was not able; adbhuta-arbhakam--thiswonderful child who was different from an ordinary child.                             TRANSLATION   Because of Krsna's weight, Trnavarta considered Him to be like a greatmountain or a hunk of iron. But because Krsna had caught the demon's neck, thedemon was unable to throw Him off. He therefore thought of the child aswonderful, since he could neither bear the child nor cast aside the burden.                               PURPORT   Trnavarta intended to take Krsna up in the sky and kill Him, but Krsnaenjoyed the pastime of riding on Trnavarta's body and traveling for a while inthe sky. Thus Trnavarta's attempt to kill Krsna failed, while Krsna, ananda-cinmaya-rasa-vigraha, enjoyed this pastime. Now, since Trnavarta was fallingbecause of Krsna's heaviness, he wanted to save himself by throwing Krsna offfrom his neck, but was unable to do so because Krsna held him very tightly.Consequently, this would be the last time for Trnavarta's yogic power. Now hewas going to die by the arrangement of Krsna.                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                        gala-grahana-niscesto                        daityo nirgata-locanah                        avyakta-ravo nyapatat                        saha-balo vyasur vraje                               SYNONYMS   gala-grahana-niscestah--because of Krsna's grasping the neck of the demonTrnavarta, the demon choked and could not do anything; daityah--the demon;nirgata-locanah--his eyes popped out because of pressure; avyakta-ravah--becauseof choking, he could not even make a sound; nyapatat--fell down; saha-balah--with the child; vyasuh vraje--lifeless on the ground of Vraja.                             TRANSLATION   With Krsna grasping him by the throat, Trnavarta choked, unable to make evena sound or even to move his hands and legs. His eyes popping out, the demon losthis life and fell, along with the little boy, down to the ground of Vraja.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                    tam antariksat patitam silayam
                     visirna-sarvavayavam karalam                   puram yatha rudra-sarena viddham                    striyo rudatyo dadrsuh sametah                               SYNONYMS   tam--unto the demon Trnavarta; antariksat--from outer space; patitam--fallen;silayam--on a slab of stone; visirna--scattered, separated; sarva-avayavam--allthe parts of his body; karalam--very fierce hands and legs; puram--the place ofTripurasura; yatha--as; rudra-sarena--by the arrow of Lord Siva; viddham--pierced; striyah--all the women, the gopis; rudatyah--although crying becauseKrsna was separated from them; dadrsuh--they saw in front of them; sametah--alltogether.                             TRANSLATION   While the gopis who had gathered were crying for Krsna, the demon fell fromthe sky onto a big slab of stone, his limbs dislocated, as if he had beenpierced by the arrow of Lord Siva like Tripurasura.                               PURPORT   In transcendental life, as soon as devotees of the Lord merge in lamentation,they immediately experience the Lord's transcendental activities and merge intranscendental bliss. Actually such devotees are always in transcendental bliss,and such apparent calamities provide a further impetus for that bliss.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                  pradaya matre pratihrtya vismitah                    krsnam ca tasyorasi lambamanam                   tam svastimantam purusada-nitam                   vihayasa mrtyu-mukhat pramuktam                  gopyas ca gopah kila nanda-mukhya                   labdhva punah prapur ativa modam                               SYNONYMS   pradaya--after picking up; matre--unto His mother (Yasoda); pratihrtya--delivered; vismitah--all surprised; krsnam ca--and Krsna; tasya--of the demon;urasi--on the chest; lambamanam--situated; tam--Krsna; svastimantam--endowedwith all auspiciousness; purusada-nitam--who was taken by the man-eating demon;vihayasa--into the sky; mrtyu-mukhat--from the mouth of death; pramuktam--nowliberated; gopyah--the gopis; ca--and; gopah--the cowherd men; kila--indeed;nanda-mukhyah--headed by Nanda Maharaja; labdhva--after getting; punah--again(their son); prapuh--enjoyed; ativa--very much; modam--bliss.                             TRANSLATION   The gopis immediately picked Krsna up from the chest of the demon anddelivered Him, free from all inauspiciousness, to mother Yasoda. Because thechild, although taken into the sky by the demon, was unhurt and now free fromall danger and misfortune, the gopis and cowherd men, headed by Nanda Maharaja,were extremely happy.                               PURPORT
   The demon fell flat from the sky, and Krsna was playing on his chest veryhappily, uninjured and free from misfortune. Not at all disturbed because ofbeing taken high in the sky by the demon, Krsna was playing and enjoying. Thisis ananda-cinmaya-rasa-vigraha. In any condition, Krsna is sac-cid-ananda-vigraha. He has no unhappiness. Others might have thought that He was indifficulty, but because the demon's chest was sufficiently broad to play on, thebaby was happy in all respects. It was most astonishing that although the demonwent so high in the sky, the child did not fall down. Therefore, the child hadbeen saved virtually from the mouth of death. Now that He was saved, all theinhabitants of Vrndavana were happy.                               TEXT 31                                 TEXT                   aho bataty-adbhutam esa raksasa                 balo nivrttim gamito 'bhyagat punah                 himsrah sva-papena vihimsitah khalah                  sadhuh samatvena bhayad vimucyate                               SYNONYMS   aho--alas; bata--indeed; ati--very much; adbhutam--this incident iswonderfully astonishing; esah--this (child); raksasa--by the man-eating demon;balah--the innocent child Krsna; nivrttim--taken away just to be killed andeaten; gamitah--went away; abhyagat punah--but He has come back again unhurt;himsrah--one who is envious; sva-papena--because of his own sinful activities;vihimsitah--now (that demon) has been killed; khalah--because he was envious andpolluted; sadhuh--any person who is innocent and free from sinful life;samatvena--being equal to everyone; bhayat--from all kinds of fear; vimucyate--becomes relieved.                             TRANSLATION   It is most astonishing that although this innocent child was taken away bythe Raksasa to be eaten, He has returned without having been killed or eveninjured. Because this demon was envious, cruel and sinful, he has been killedfor his own sinful activities. This is the law of nature. An innocent devotee isalways protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and a sinful person isalways vanquished for his sinful life.                               PURPORT   Krsna conscious life means innocent devotional life, and a sadhu is one whois fully devoted to Krsna. As confirmed by Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (9.30),bhajate mam ananya-bhak sadhur eva sa mantavyah: anyone fully attached to Krsnais a sadhu. Nanda Maharaja and the gopis and other cowherd men could notunderstand that Krsna was the Supreme Personality of Godhead playing as a humanchild and that His life was not in danger under any circumstances. Rather,because of their intense parental love for Krsna, they thought that Krsna was aninnocent child and had been saved by the Supreme Lord.   In the material world, because of intense lust and desire for enjoyment, onebecomes implicated in sinful life more and more (kama esa krodha esa rajo-guna-samudbhavah). Therefore the quality of fear is one of the aspects of materiallife (ahara-nidra-bhaya-maithunam ca). But if one becomes Krsna conscious, theprocess of devotional service, sravanam kirtanam, diminishes one's polluted lifeof material existence, and one is purified and protected by the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah punya-sravana-kirtanah. Indevotional life, one has faith in this process. Such faith is one of the sixkinds of surrender. Raksisyatiti visvasah (Hari-bhakti-vilasa 11.676). One ofthe processes of surrender is that one should simply depend on Krsna, convincedthat He will give one all protection. That Krsna will protect His devotee is afact, and Nanda Maharaja and the other inhabitants of Vrndavana accepted thisvery simply, although they did not know that the Supreme Lord Himself waspresent before them. There have been many instances in which a devotee likePrahlada Maharaja or Dhruva Maharaja has been put in difficulty even by hisfather but has been saved under all circumstances. Therefore our only businessis to become Krsna conscious and depend fully on Krsna for all protection.                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                 kim nas tapas cirnam adhoksajarcanam                  purtesta-dattam uta bhuta-sauhrdam                   yat samparetah punar eva balako               distya sva-bandhun pranayann upasthitah                               SYNONYMS   kim--what kind of; nah--by us; tapah--austerity; cirnam--has been done for avery long time; adhoksaja--of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arcanam--worshiping; purta--constructing public roads, etc.; ista--activities for publicbenefit; dattam--giving charity; uta--or else; bhuta-sauhrdam--because of lovefor the general public; yat--by the result of which; samparetah--even though thechild was practically lost in death; punah eva--even again because of piousactivities; balakah--the child; distya--by fortune; sva-bandhun--all Hisrelatives; pranayan--to please; upasthitah--is present here.                             TRANSLATION   Nanda Maharaja and the others said: We must previously have performedausterities for a very long time, worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead,performed pious activities for public life, constructing public roads and wells,and also given charity, as a result of which this boy, although faced withdeath, has returned to give happiness to His relatives.                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja confirmed that by pious activities one can become a sadhu sothat one will be happy at home and one's children will be protected. In sastrathere are many injunctions for karmis and jnanis, especially for karmis, bywhich they can become pious and happy even in material life. According to Vediccivilization, one should perform activities for the benefit of the public, suchas constructing public roads, planting trees on both sides of the road so thatpeople can walk in the shade, and constructing public wells so that everyone cantake water without difficulty. One should perform austerity to control one'sdesires, and one must simultaneously worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.Thus one becomes pious, and as a result one is happy even in material conditionsof life.                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT
                        drstvadbhutani bahuso                         nanda-gopo brhadvane                         vasudeva-vaco bhuyo                         manayam asa vismitah                               SYNONYMS   drstva--after seeing; adbhutani--the very wonderful and astonishingincidents; bahusah--many times; nanda-gopah--Nanda Maharaja, the head of thecowherd men; brhadvane--in Brhadvana; vasudeva-vacah--the words spoken byVasudeva when Nanda Maharaja was in Mathura; bhuyah--again and again; manayamasa--accepted how true they were; vismitah--in great astonishment.                             TRANSLATION   Having seen all these incidents in Brhadvana, Nanda Maharaja became more andmore astonished, and he remembered the words spoken to him by Vasudeva inMathura.                               TEXT 34                                 TEXT                          ekadarbhakam adaya                        svankam aropya bhamini                        prasnutam payayam asa                        stanam sneha-paripluta                               SYNONYMS   ekada--once upon a time; arbhakam--the child; adaya--taking; sva-ankam--onher own lap; aropya--and placing Him; bhamini--mother Yasoda; prasnutam--breastmilk oozing out; payayam asa--fed the child; stanam--her breast; sneha-paripluta--with great affection and love.                             TRANSLATION   One day mother Yasoda, having taken Krsna up and placed Him on her lap, wasfeeding Him milk from her breast with maternal affection. The milk was flowingfrom her breast, and the child was drinking it.                             TEXTS 35-36                                 TEXT                         pita-prayasya janani                        sutasya rucira-smitam                        mukham lalayati rajan                         jrmbhato dadrse idam                    kham rodasi jyotir-anikam asah                  suryendu-vahni-svasanambudhims ca                   dvipan nagams tad-duhitrr vanani                    bhutani yani sthira-jangamani                               SYNONYMS
   pita-prayasya--of child Krsna, who was being offered breast milk and wasalmost satisfied; janani--mother Yasoda; sutasya--of her son; rucira-smitam--seeing the child fully satisfied and smiling; mukham--the face; lalayati--patting and softly rubbing with her hand; rajan--O King; jrmbhatah--while thechild was yawning; dadrse--she saw; idam--the following; kham--the sky; rodasi--both the higher planetary system and the earth; jyotih-anikam--the luminaries;asah--the directions; surya--the sun; indu--the moon; vahni--fire; svasana--theair; ambudhin--the seas; ca--and; dvipan--the islands; nagan--the mountains;tat-duhitrh--the daughters of the mountains (the rivers); vanani--forests;bhutani--all kinds of living entities; yani--which are; sthira-jangamani--nonmoving and moving.                             TRANSLATION   O King Pariksit, when the child Krsna was almost finished drinking Hismother's milk and mother Yasoda was touching Him and looking at His beautiful,brilliantly smiling face, the baby yawned, and mother Yasoda saw in His mouththe whole sky, the higher planetary system and the earth, the luminaries in alldirections, the sun, the moon, fire, air, the seas, islands, mountains, rivers,forests, and all kinds of living entities, moving and nonmoving.                               PURPORT   By the arrangement of yogamaya, Krsna's pastimes with mother Yasoda were allregarded as ordinary. So here was an opportunity for Krsna to show His motherthat the whole universe is situated within Him. In His small form, Krsna waskind enough to show His mother the virat-rupa, the universal form, so that shecould enjoy seeing what kind of child she had on her lap. The rivers have beenmentioned here as the daughters of the mountains (nagams tad-duhitrh). It is theflowing of the rivers that makes big forests possible. There are living entitieseverywhere, some of them moving and some of them not moving. No place is vacant.This is a special feature of God's creation.                               TEXT 37                                 TEXT                       sa viksya visvam sahasa                        rajan sanjata-vepathuh                         sammilya mrgasavaksi                         netre asit suvismita                               SYNONYMS   sa--mother Yasoda; viksya--by seeing; visvam--the whole universe; sahasa--suddenly within the mouth of her son; rajan--O King (Maharaja Pariksit);sanjata-vepathuh--whose heart was beating; sammilya--opening; mrgasava-aksi--like the eyes of a deer cub; netre--her two eyes; asit--became; su-vismita--astonished.                             TRANSLATION   When mother Yasoda saw the whole universe within the mouth of her child, herheart began to throb, and in astonishment she wanted to close her restless eyes.                               PURPORT
   Because of her pure maternal love, mother Yasoda thought that this wonderfulchild playing so many tricks must have had some disease. She did not appreciatethe wonders shown by her child; rather, she wanted to close her eyes. She wasexpecting another danger, and therefore her eyes became restless like those of adeer cub. This was all the arrangement of yogamaya. The relationship betweenmother Yasoda and Krsna is one of pure maternal love. In that love, motherYasoda did not very much appreciate the display of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead's opulences.   At the beginning of this chapter, two extra verses sometimes appear:                         evam bahuni karmani                        gopanam sam sa-yositam                        nandasya gehe vavrdhe                       kurvan visnu-janardanah   "In this way, to chastise and kill the demons, the child Krsna demonstratedmany activities in the house of Nanda Maharaja, and the inhabitants of Vrajaenjoyed these incidents."                        evam sa vavrdhe visnur                        nanda-gehe janardanah                        kurvann anisam anandam                         gopalanam sa-yositam   "To increase the transcendental pleasure of the gopas and the gopis, Krsna,the killer of all demons, was thus raised by His father and mother, Nanda andYasoda."   Sripada Vijayadhvaja Tirtha also adds another verse after the third verse inthis chapter:                         vistareneha karunyat                        sarva-papa-pranasanam                       vaktum arhasi dharma-jna                       dayalus tvam iti prabho   "Pariksit Maharaja then requested Sukadeva Gosvami to continue speaking suchnarrations about the pastimes of Krsna, so that the King could enjoy from themtranscendental bliss."Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Seventh Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "The Killing of the Demon Trnavarta."                            Chapter Eight         Lord Krsna Shows the Universal Form Within His Mouth   The summary of the Eighth Chapter is as follows. This chapter describes theceremony of giving a name to Krsna. It also describes His crawling, His playingwith the cows, and His eating earth and again showing the universal form to Hismother.   One day, Vasudeva sent for Gargamuni, the family priest of the yadu-vamsa,and thus Gargamuni went to the house of Nanda Maharaja, who received him verywell and requested him to give names to Krsna and Balarama. Gargamuni, ofcourse, reminded Nanda Maharaja that Kamsa was looking for the son of Devaki andsaid that if he performed the ceremony very gorgeously, the ceremony would cometo the notice of Kamsa, who would then suspect that Krsna was the son of Devaki.Nanda Maharaja therefore requested Gargamuni to perform this ceremony withoutanyone's knowledge, and Gargamuni did so. Because Balarama, the son of Rohini,increases the transcendental bliss of others, His name is Rama, and because ofHis extraordinary strength, He is called Baladeva. He attracts the Yadus tofollow His instructions, and therefore His name is Sankarsana. Krsna, the son of
Yasoda, previously appeared in many other colors, such as white, red and yellow,and He had now assumed the color black. Because He was sometimes the son ofVasudeva, His name is Vasudeva. According to His various activities andqualities, He has many other names. After thus informing Nanda Maharaja andcompleting the name-giving ceremony, Gargamuni advised Nanda Maharaja to protecthis son very carefully and then departed.   Sukadeva Gosvami next described how the two children crawled, walked on Theirsmall legs, played with the cows and calves, stole butter and other milkproducts and broke the butter pots. In this way, he described many naughtyactivities of Krsna and Balarama. The most wonderful of these occurred whenKrsna's playmates complained to mother Yasoda that Krsna was eating earth.Mother Yasoda wanted to open Krsna's mouth to see the evidence so that she couldchastise Him. Sometimes she assumed the position of a chastising mother, and atthe next moment she was overwhelmed with maternal love. After describing allthis to Maharaja Pariksit, Sukadeva Gosvami, at Maharaja Pariksit's request,praised the fortune of mother Yasoda and Nanda. Nanda and Yasoda were formerlyDrona and Dhara, and by the order of Brahma they came to this earth and had theSupreme Personality of Godhead as their son.                                TEXT 1                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        gargah purohito rajan                         yadunam sumaha-tapah                        vrajam jagama nandasya                         vasudeva-pracoditah                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; gargah--Gargamuni; purohitah--thepriest; rajan--O King Pariksit; yadunam--of the Yadu dynasty; su-maha-tapah--highly elevated in austerity and penance; vrajam--to the village known asVrajabhumi; jagama--went; nandasya--of Maharaja Nanda; vasudeva-pracoditah--being inspired by Vasudeva.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: O Maharaja Pariksit, the priest of the Yadu dynasty,namely Gargamuni, who was highly elevated in austerity and penance, was theninspired by Vasudeva to go see Nanda Maharaja at his home.                                TEXT 2                                 TEXT                       tam drstva parama-pritah                       pratyutthaya krtanjalih                         anarcadhoksaja-dhiya                         pranipata-purahsaram                               SYNONYMS   tam--him (Gargamuni); drstva--after seeing; parama-pritah--Nanda Maharaja wasvery much pleased; pratyutthaya--standing up to receive him; krta-anjalih--withfolded hands; anarca--worshiped; adhoksaja-dhiya--although Gargamuni was visible
to the senses, Nanda Maharaja maintained a very high respect for him; pranipata-purahsaram--Nanda Maharaja fell down before him and offered obeisances.                             TRANSLATION   When Nanda Maharaja saw Gargamuni present at his home, Nanda was so pleasedthat he stood up to receive him with folded hands. Although seeing Gargamuniwith his eyes, Nanda Maharaja could appreciate that Gargamuni was adhoksaja;that is, he was not an ordinary person seen by material senses.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT                        supavistam krtatithyam                         gira sunrtaya munim                       nandayitvabravid brahman                        purnasya karavama kim                               SYNONYMS   su-upavistam--when Gargamuni was seated very comfortably; krta-atithyam--andhe had been properly received as a guest; gira--by words; sunrtaya--very sweet;munim--Gargamuni; nandayitva--pleasing him in this way; abravit--said; brahman--O brahmana; purnasya--of one who is full in everything; karavama kim--what can Ido for you (kindly order me).                             TRANSLATION   When Gargamuni had been properly received as a guest and was very comfortablyseated, Nanda Maharaja submitted with gentle and submissive words: Dear sir,because you are a devotee, you are full in everything. Yet my duty is to serveyou. Kindly order me. What can I do for you?                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                        mahad-vicalanam nrnam                         grhinam dina-cetasam                        nihsreyasaya bhagavan                       kalpate nanyatha kvacit                               SYNONYMS   mahat-vicalanam--the movement of great personalities; nrnam--in the houses ofordinary persons; grhinam--especially householders; dina-cetasam--who are verysimple-minded, being engaged in family maintenance and nothing more;nihsreyasaya--a great personality has no reason to go to the grhastha but tobenefit him; bhagavan--O most powerful devotee; kalpate--is to be taken thatway; na anyatha--not for any other purpose; kvacit--at any time.                             TRANSLATION   O my lord, O great devotee, persons like you move from one place to anothernot for their own interests but for the sake of poor-hearted grhasthas[householders]. Otherwise they have no interest in going from one place toanother.
                               PURPORT   As factually stated by Nanda Maharaja, Gargamuni, being a devotee, had noneeds. Similarly, when Krsna comes He has no needs, for He is purna, atmarama.Nonetheless, He descends to this material world to protect the devotees andvanquish miscreants (paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam). This is themission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and devotees also have the samemission. One who executes this mission of para-upakara, performing welfareactivities for people in general, is recognized by Krsna, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, as being very, very dear to Him (na ca tasman manusyesukascin me priya-krttamah). Similarly, Caitanya Mahaprabhu has advised this para-upakara, and He has especially advised the inhabitants of India:               bharata-bhumite haila manusya-janma yara                janma sarthaka kari' kara para-upakara   "One who has taken his birth as a human being in the land of India [Bharata-varsa] should make his life successful and work for the benefit of all otherpeople." (Cc. Adi 9.41) On the whole, the duty of a pure Vaisnava devotee is toact for the welfare of others.   Nanda Maharaja could understand that Gargamuni had come for this purpose andthat his own duty now was to act according to Gargamuni's advice. Thus he said,"Please tell me what is my duty." This should be the attitude of everyone,especially the householder. The varnasrama society is organized into eightdivisions: brahmana, ksatriya, vaisya, sudra, brahmacarya, grhastha, vanaprasthaand sannyasa. Nanda Maharaja represented himself as grhinam, a householder. Abrahmacari factually has no needs, but grhi, householders, are engaged in sensegratification. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.44), bhogaisvarya-prasaktanamtayapahrta-cetasam. Everyone has come to this material world for sensegratification, and the position of those who are too attached to sensegratification and who therefore accept the grhastha-asrama is very precarious.Since everyone in this material world is searching for sense gratification,grhasthas are required to be trained as mahat, great mahatmas. Therefore NandaMaharaja specifically used the word mahad-vicalanam. Gargamuni had no interestto serve by going to Nanda Maharaja, but Nanda Maharaja, as a grhastha, wasalways perfectly ready to receive instructions from a mahatma to gain the realbenefit in life. Thus he was ready to execute Gargamuni's order.                                TEXT 5                                 TEXT                        jyotisam ayanam saksad                      yat taj jnanam atindriyam                        pranitam bhavata yena                         puman veda paravaram                               SYNONYMS   jyotisam--knowledge of astrology (along with other aspects of culture inhuman society, and specifically in civilized society, there must be knowledge ofastrology); ayanam--the movements of the stars and planets in relationship tohuman society; saksat--directly; yat tat jnanam--such knowledge; ati-indriyam--which an ordinary person cannot understand because it is beyond his vision;pranitam bhavata--you have prepared a perfect book of knowledge; yena--by which;puman--any person; veda--can understand; para-avaram--the cause and effect ofdestiny.
                             TRANSLATION   O great saintly person, you have compiled the astrological knowledge by whichone can understand past and present unseen things. By the strength of thisknowledge, any human being can understand what he has done in his past life andhow it affects his present life. This is known to you.                               PURPORT   The word "destiny" is now defined. Unintelligent persons who do notunderstand the meaning of life are just like animals. Animals do not know thepast, present and future of life, nor are they able to understand it. But ahuman being can understand this, if he is sober. Therefore, as stated inBhagavad-gita (2.13), dhiras tatra na muhyati: a sober person is not bewildered.The simple truth is that although life is eternal, in this material world onechanges from one body to another. Foolish people, especially in this age, do notunderstand this simple truth. Krsna says:                       dehino 'smin yatha dehe                        kaumaram yauvanam jara                       tatha dehantara-praptir                       dhiras tatra na muhyati   "As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youthto old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change." (Bg. 2.13) Krsna, thegreatest authority, says that the body will change. And as soon as the bodychanges, one's whole program of work changes also. Today I am a human being or agreat personality, but with a little deviation from nature's law, I shall haveto accept a different type of body. Today I am a human being, but tomorrow I maybecome a dog, and then whatever activities I have performed in this life will bea failure. This simple truth is now rarely understood, but one who is a dhiracan understand this. Those in this material world for material enjoyment shouldknow that because their present position will cease to exist, they must becareful in how they act. This is also stated by Rsabhadeva. Na sadhu manye yataatmano 'yam asann api klesada asa dehah (Bhag. 5.5.4). Although this body istemporary, as long as we have to live in this body we must suffer. Whether onehas a short life or a long life, one must suffer the threefold miseries ofmaterial life. Therefore any gentleman, dhira, must be interested in jyotisa,astrology.   Nanda Maharaja was trying to take advantage of the opportunity afforded byGargamuni's presence, for Gargamuni was a great authority in this knowledge ofastrology, by which one can see the unseen events of past, present and future.It is the duty of a father to understand the astrological position of hischildren and do what is needed for their happiness. Now, taking advantage of theopportunity afforded by the presence of Gargamuni, Nanda Maharaja suggested thatGargamuni prepare a horoscope for Nanda's two sons, Krsna and Balarama.                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                    tvam hi brahma-vidam sresthah                       samskaran kartum arhasi                         balayor anayor nrnam                        janmana brahmano guruh
                               SYNONYMS   tvam--Your Holiness; hi--indeed; brahma-vidam--of all brahmanas, or personswho understand what is Brahman (brahma janatiti brahmanah); sresthah--you arethe best; samskaran--ceremonies performed for reformation (because by thesereformatory activities one takes one's second birth: samskarad bhaved dvijah);kartum arhasi--because you have kindly come here, kindly execute; balayoh--ofthese two sons (Krsna and Balarama); anayoh--of both of Them; nrnam--not only ofThem, but of all human society; janmana--as soon as he takes birth; brahmanah--immediately the brahmana becomes; guruh--the guide. *                             TRANSLATION   My lord, you are the best of the brahmanas, especially because you are fullyaware of the jyotih-sastra, the astrological science. Therefore you arenaturally the spiritual master of every human being. This being so, since youhave kindly come to my house, kindly execute the reformatory activities for mytwo sons.                               PURPORT   The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, says in Bhagavad-gita (4.13),catur-varnyam maya srstam guna-karma-vibhagasah: the four varnas--brahmana,ksatriya, vaisya and sudra--must be present in society. The brahmanas arerequired for the guidance of the whole society. If there is no such institutionas varnasrama-dharma and if human society has no such guide as the brahmana,human society will be hellish. In Kali-yuga, especially at the present moment,there is no such thing as a real brahmana, and therefore society is in a chaoticcondition. Formerly there were qualified brahmanas, but at present, althoughthere are certainly persons who think themselves brahmanas, they actually haveno ability to guide society. The Krsna consciousness movement is therefore verymuch eager to reintroduce the varnasrama system into human society so that thosewho are bewildered or less intelligent will be able to take guidance fromqualified brahmanas.   Brahmana means Vaisnava. After one becomes a brahmana, the next stage ofdevelopment in human society is to become a Vaisnava. People in general must beguided to the destination or goal of life, and therefore they must understandVisnu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The whole system of Vedic knowledgeis based on this principle, but people have lost the clue (na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum), and they are simply pursuing sense gratification, with therisk of gliding down to a lower grade of life (mrtyu-samsara-vartmani). Itdoesn't matter whether one is born a brahmana or not. No one is born a brahmana;everyone is born a sudra. But by the guidance of a brahmana and by samskara, onecan become dvija, twice-born, and then gradually become a brahmana. Brahmanismis not a system meant to create a monopoly for a particular class of men.Everyone should be educated so as to become a brahmana. At least there must bean opportunity to allow everyone to attain the destination of life. Regardlessof whether one is born in a brahmana family, a ksatriya family or a sudrafamily, one may be guided by a proper brahmana and be promoted to the highestplatform of being a Vaisnava. Thus the Krsna consciousness movement affords anopportunity to develop the right destiny for human society. Nanda Maharaja tookadvantage of the opportunity of Gargamuni's presence by requesting him toperform the necessary reformatory activities for his sons to guide Them towardthe destination of life.                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT
                           sri-garga uvaca                         yadunam aham acaryah                       khyatas ca bhuvi sarvada                       sutam maya samskrtam te                         manyate devaki-sutam                               SYNONYMS   sri-gargah uvaca--Gargamuni said; yadunam--of the Yadu dynasty; aham--I am;acaryah--the priestly guide, or purohita; khyatah ca--this is already known;bhuvi--everywhere; sarvada--always; sutam--the son; maya--by me; samskrtam--having undergone the purificatory process; te--of you; manyate--would beconsidered; devaki-sutam--the son of Devaki.                             TRANSLATION   Gargamuni said: My dear Nanda Maharaja, I am the priestly guide of the Yadudynasty. This is known everywhere. Therefore, if I perform the purificatoryprocess for your sons, Kamsa will consider Them the sons of Devaki.                               PURPORT   Gargamuni indirectly disclosed that Krsna was the son of Devaki, not ofYasoda. Since Kamsa was already searching for Krsna, if the purificatory processwere undertaken by Gargamuni, Kamsa might be informed, and that would create acatastrophe. It may be argued that although Gargamuni was the priest of the Yadudynasty, Nanda Maharaja also belonged to that dynasty. Nanda Maharaja, however,was not acting as a ksatriya. Therefore Gargamuni said, "If I act as yourpriest, this will confirm that Krsna is the son of Devaki."                              TEXTS 8-9                                 TEXT                      kamsah papa-matih sakhyam                         tava canakadundubheh                        devakya astamo garbho                       na stri bhavitum arhati                       iti sancintayan chrutva                         devakya darika-vacah                         api hanta gatasankas                      tarhi tan no 'nayo bhavet                               SYNONYMS   kamsah--King Kamsa; papa-matih--very, very sinful, having a polluted mind;sakhyam--friendship; tava--your; ca--also; anaka-dundubheh--of Vasudeva;devakyah--of Devaki; astamah garbhah--the eighth pregnancy; na--not; stri--awoman; bhavitum arhati--is possible to be; iti--in this way; sancintayan--considering; srutva--and hearing (this news); devakyah--of Devaki; darika-vacah--the message from the daughter; api--although there was; hanta gata-asankah--there is a possibility that Kamsa would take steps to kill this child; tarhi--therefore; tat--that incident; nah--for us; anayah bhavet--may not be very good.                             TRANSLATION
   Kamsa is both a great diplomat and a very sinful man. Therefore, having heardfrom Yogamaya, the daughter of Devaki, that the child who will kill him hasalready been born somewhere else, having heard that the eighth pregnancy ofDevaki could not bring forth a female child, and having understood yourfriendship with Vasudeva, Kamsa, upon hearing that the purificatory process hasbeen performed by me, the priest of the Yadu dynasty, may certainly consider allthese points and suspect that Krsna is the son of Devaki and Vasudeva. Then hemight take steps to kill Krsna. That would be a catastrophe.                               PURPORT   Kamsa knew very well that Yogamaya was, after all, the maidservant of Krsnaand Visnu and that although Yogamaya had appeared as the daughter of Devaki, shemight have been forbidden to disclose this fact. Actually this was what hadhappened. Gargamuni argued very soberly that his taking part in performing thereformatory process for Krsna would give rise to many doubts, so that Kamsamight take very severe steps to kill the child. Kamsa had already sent manydemons to attempt to kill this child, but none of them had survived. IfGargamuni were to perform the purificatory process, Kamsa's suspicions would befully confirmed, and he would take very severe steps. Gargamuni gave thiswarning to Nanda Maharaja.                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT                           sri-nanda uvaca                        alaksito 'smin rahasi                        mamakair api go-vraje                        kuru dvijati-samskaram                        svasti-vacana-purvakam                               SYNONYMS   sri-nandah uvaca--Nanda Maharaja said (to Gargamuni); alaksitah--withoutKamsa's knowledge; asmin--in this cow shed; rahasi--in a very solitary place;mamakaih--even by my relatives; api--a still more secluded place; go-vraje--inthe cow shed; kuru--just execute; dvijati-samskaram--the purificatory process ofsecond birth (samskarad bhaved dvijah); svasti-vacana-purvakam--by chanting theVedic hymns to perform the purificatory process.                             TRANSLATION   Nanda Maharaja said: My dear great sage, if you think that your performingthis process of purification will make Kamsa suspicious, then secretly chant theVedic hymns and perform the purifying process of second birth here in the cowshed of my house, without the knowledge of anyone else, even my relatives, forthis process of purification is essential.                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja did not like the idea of avoiding the purificatory process.Despite the many obstacles, he wanted to take advantage of Gargamuni's presenceand do what was needed. The purificatory process is essential specifically forbrahmanas, ksatriyas and vaisyas. Therefore, since Nanda Maharaja presentedhimself as a vaisya, this process of purification was essential. Formerly, suchinstitutional activities were compulsory. Catur-varnyam maya srstam guna-karma-vibhagasah (Bg. 4.13). Without these activities of purification, the society
would be considered a society of animals. To take advantage of Gargamuni'spresence, Nanda Maharaja wanted to perform the nama-karana ceremonies, evensecretly, without any gorgeous arrangements. Therefore, the opportunity forpurification should be regarded as the essential duty of human society. In Kali-yuga, however, people have forgotten the essence. Mandah sumanda-matayo manda-bhagya hy upadrutah (Bhag. 1.1.10). In this age, people are all bad andunfortunate, and they do not accept Vedic instructions to make their lifesuccessful. Nanda Maharaja, however, did not want to neglect anything. To keepintact a happy society advanced in spiritual knowledge, he took full advantageof Gargamuni's presence to do what was necessary. How degraded society hasbecome within five thousand years. Mandah sumanda-matayo manda-bhagyah. Thehuman life is obtained after many, many millions of births, and it is intendedfor purification. Previously, a father was eager to give all kinds of help toelevate his children, but at present, because of being misguided, people areprepared even to kill to avoid the responsibility of raising children.                               TEXT 11                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                       evam samprarthito viprah                        sva-cikirsitam eva tat                         cakara nama-karanam                         gudho rahasi balayoh                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; evam--in this way; samprarthitah--being eagerly requested; viprah--the brahmana Gargamuni; sva-cikirsitam eva--which he already desired to do and for which he had gone there; tat--that;cakara--performed; nama-karanam--the name-giving ceremony; gudhah--confidentially; rahasi--in a secluded place; balayoh--of the two boys (Krsna andBalarama).                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Having thus been especially requested by NandaMaharaja to do that which he already desired to do, Gargamuni performed thename-giving ceremony for Krsna and Balarama in a solitary place.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                           sri-garga uvaca                         ayam hi rohini-putro                        ramayan suhrdo gunaih                         akhyasyate rama iti                       baladhikyad balam viduh                        yadunam aprthag-bhavat                        sankarsanam usanty api                               SYNONYMS   sri-gargah uvaca--Gargamuni said; ayam--this; hi--indeed; rohini-putrah--theson of Rohini; ramayan--pleasing; suhrdah--all His friends and relatives;gunaih--by transcendental qualities; akhyasyate--will be called; ramah--by the
name Rama, the supreme enjoyer; iti--in this way; bala-adhikyat--because ofextraordinary strength; balam viduh--will be known as Balarama; yadunam--of theYadu dynasty; aprthak-bhavat--because of not being separated from you;sankarsanam--by the name Sankarsana, or uniting two families; usanti--attracts;api--also.                             TRANSLATION   Gargamuni said: This child, the son of Rohini, will give all happiness to Hisrelatives and friends by His transcendental qualities. Therefore He will beknown as Rama. And because He will manifest extraordinary bodily strength, Hewill also be known as Bala. Moreover, because He unites two families--Vasudeva'sfamily and the family of Nanda Maharaja--He will be known as Sankarsana.                               PURPORT   Baladeva was actually the son of Devaki, but He was transferred from Devaki'swomb to that of Rohini. This fact was not disclosed. According to a statement inthe Hari-vamsa:                        pratyuvaca tato ramah                     sarvams tan abhitah sthitan                         yadavesv api sarvesu                       bhavanto mama vallabhah   Gargamuni did disclose to Nanda Maharaja that Balarama would be known asSankarsana because of uniting two families--the yadu-vamsa and the vamsa ofNanda Maharaja--one of which was known as ksatriya and the other as vaisya. Bothfamilies had the same original forefather, the only difference being that NandaMaharaja was born of a vaisya wife whereas Vasudeva was born of a ksatriya wife.Later, Nanda Maharaja married a vaisya wife, and Vasudeva married a ksatriyawife. So although the families of Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva both came from thesame father, they were divided as ksatriya and vaisya. Now Baladeva united them,and therefore He was known as Sankarsana.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT                      asan varnas trayo hy asya                        grhnato 'nuyugam tanuh                       suklo raktas tatha pita                        idanim krsnatam gatah                               SYNONYMS   asan--were assumed; varnah trayah--three colors; hi--indeed; asya--of yourson Krsna; grhnatah--accepting; anuyugam tanuh--transcendental bodies accordingto the different yugas; suklah--sometimes white; raktah--sometimes red; tatha--as well as; pitah--sometimes yellow; idanim krsnatam gatah--at the presentmoment He has assumed a blackish color.                             TRANSLATION   Your son Krsna appears as an incarnation in every millennium. In the past, Heassumed three different colors--white, red and yellow--and now He has appearedin a blackish color. [In another Dvapara-yuga, He appeared (as Lord Ramacandra)
in the color of suka, a parrot. All such incarnations have now assembled inKrsna.]                               PURPORT   Partially explaining the position of Lord Krsna and partially covering thefacts, Gargamuni indicated, "Your son is a great personality, and He can changethe color of His body in different ages." The word grhnatah indicates that Krsnais free to make His choice. In other words, He is the Supreme Personality ofGodhead and may therefore do whatever He desires. In Vedic literature thedifferent colors assumed by the Personality of Godhead in different millenniumsare stated, and therefore when Gargamuni said, "Your son has assumed thesecolors," he indirectly said, "He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead." Becauseof Kamsa's atrocities, Gargamuni tried to avoid disclosing this fact, but heindirectly informed Nanda Maharaja that Krsna, his son, was the SupremePersonality of Godhead.   It may be noted that Srila Jiva Gosvami, in his book Krama-sandarbha, hasenunciated the purport of this verse. In every millennium, Krsna appears in adifferent form, either as white, red or yellow, but this time He personallyappeared in His original, blackish form and, as predicted by Gargamuni,exhibited the power of Narayana. Because in this form the Supreme personality ofGodhead exhibits Himself fully, His name is Sri Krsna, the all-attractive.   Factually, Krsna is the source of all avataras, and therefore all thedifferent features of the different avataras are present in Krsna. When Krsnaincarnates, all the features of other incarnations are already present withinHim. Other incarnations are partial representations of Krsna, who is the full-fledged incarnation of the Supreme Being. It is to be understood that theSupreme Being, whether appearing as sukla, rakta or pita (white, red or yellow),is the same person. When He appears in different incarnations, He appears indifferent colors, just like the sunshine, which contains seven colors. Sometimesthe colors of sunshine are represented separately; otherwise the sunshine isobserved mainly as bright light. The different avataras, such as the manvantara-avataras, lila-avataras and dasa-avataras, are all included in the krsna-avatara. When Krsna appears, all the avataras appear with Him. As described inSrimad-Bhagavatam (1.3.26):                        avatara hy asankhyeya                      hareh sattva-nidher dvijah                        yathavidasinah kulyah                       sarasah syuh sahasrasah   The avataras incessantly appear, like incessantly flowing water. No one cancount how many waves there are in flowing water, and similarly there is nolimitation of the avataras. And Krsna is the full representation of all avatarasbecause He is the source of all avataras. Krsna is amsi, whereas others areamsa, part of Krsna. All living entities, including us, are amsas (mamaivamsojiva-loke jiva-bhutah sanatanah). These amsas are of different magnitude. Humanbeings (who are minute amsas) and the demigods, visnu-tattva and all otherliving beings are all part of the Supreme. Nityo nityanam cetanas cetananam(Katha Upanisad 2.2.13). Krsna is the full representation of all livingentities, and when Krsna is present, all avataras are included in Him.   The Eleventh Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam describes the incarnations for eachyuga in chronological order. The Bhagavatam says, krte suklas catur-bahuh,tretayam rakta-varno'sau, dvapare bhagavan syamah and krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam.We actually see that in Kali-yuga, Bhagavan has appeared in pita-varna, or ayellow color, as Gaurasundara, although the Bhagavatam speaks of krsna-varnam.To adjust all these statements, one should understand that although in someyugas some of the colors are prominent, in every yuga, whenever Krsna appears,
all the colors are present. Krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam: although CaitanyaMahaprabhu appears without krsna, or a blackish color, He is understood to beKrsna Himself. Idanim krsnatam gatah. The same original Krsna who appears indifferent varnas has now appeared. The word asan indicates that He is alwayspresent. Whenever the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in His fullfeature, He is understood to be krsna-varnam, although He appears in differentcolors. Prahlada Maharaja states that Caitanya Mahaprabhu is channa; that is,although He is Krsna, He is covered by a yellow color. Thus the GaudiyaVaisnavas accept the conclusion that although Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared inpita color, He is Krsna.                       krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam                       sangopangastra-parsadam                      yajnaih sankirtana-prayair                        yajanti hi sumedhasah   (Bhag. 11.5.32)                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                        prag ayam vasudevasya                       kvacij jatas tavatmajah                         vasudeva iti sriman                        abhijnah sampracaksate                               SYNONYMS   prak--before; ayam--this child; vasudevasya--of Vasudeva; kvacit--sometimes;jatah--was born; tava--your; atmajah--Krsna, who has taken birth as your child;vasudevah--therefore He may be given the name Vasudeva; iti--thus; sriman--verybeautiful; abhijnah--those who are learned; sampracaksate--also say that Krsnais Vasudeva.                             TRANSLATION   For many reasons, this beautiful son of yours sometimes appeared previouslyas the son of Vasudeva. Therefore, those who are learned sometimes call thischild Vasudeva.                               PURPORT   Gargamuni indirectly disclosed, "This child was originally born as the son ofVasudeva, although He is acting as your child. Generally He is your child, butsometimes He is the son of Vasudeva."                               TEXT 15                                 TEXT                         bahuni santi namani                         rupani ca sutasya te                          guna-karmanurupani                       tany aham veda no janah                               SYNONYMS
   bahuni--various; santi--there are; namani--names; rupani--forms; ca--also;sutasya--of the son; te--your; guna-karma-anu-rupani--according to Hisattributes and activities; tani--them; aham--I; veda--know; no janah--notordinary persons.                             TRANSLATION   For this son of yours there are many forms and names according to Histranscendental qualities and activities. These are known to me, but people ingeneral do not understand them.                               PURPORT   Bahuni: the Lord has many names. Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam adyampurana-purusam nava-yauvanam ca. As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.33), theLord is one, but He has many forms and many names. It was not that becauseGargamuni gave the child the name Krsna, that was His only name. He has othernames, such as Bhaktavatsala, Giridhari, Govinda and Gopala. If we analyze thenirukti, or semantic derivation, of the word "Krsna," we find that na signifiesthat He stops the repetition of birth and death, and krs means sattartha, or"existence." (Krsna is the whole of existence.) Also, krs means "attraction,"and na means ananda, or "bliss." Krsna is known as Mukunda because He wants togive everyone spiritual, eternal, blissful life. Unfortunately, because of theliving entity's little independence, the living entity wants to "deprogram" theprogram of Krsna. This is the material disease. Nonetheless, because Krsna wantsto give transcendental bliss to the living entities, He appears in variousforms. Therefore He is called Krsna. Because Gargamuni was an astrologer, heknew what others did not know. Yet Krsna has so many names that even Gargamunidid not know them all. It is to be concluded that Krsna, according to Histranscendental activities, has many names and many forms.                               TEXT 16                                 TEXT                        esa vah sreya adhasyad                         gopa-gokula-nandanah                         anena sarva-durgani                        yuyam anjas tarisyatha                               SYNONYMS   esah--this child; vah--for all of you people; sreyah--the most auspicious;adhasyat--will act all-auspiciously; gopa-gokula-nandanah--just like a cowherdboy, born in a family of cowherd men as the son of the estate of Gokula; anena--by Him; sarva-durgani--all kinds of miserable conditions; yuyam--all of you;anjah--easily; tarisyatha--will overcome.                             TRANSLATION   To increase the transcendental bliss of the cowherd men of Gokula, this childwill always act auspiciously for you. And by His grace only, you will surpassall difficulties.                               PURPORT   For the cowherd men and the cows, Krsna is the supreme friend. Therefore Heis worshiped by the prayer namo brahmanya-devaya go-brahmana-hitaya ca. His
pastimes in Gokula, His dhama, are always favorable to the brahmanas and thecows. His first business is to give all comfort to the cows and the brahmanas.In fact, comfort for the brahmanas is secondary, and comfort for the cows is Hisfirst concern. Because of His presence, all people would overcome alldifficulties and always be situated in transcendental bliss.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                         puranena vraja-pate                        sadhavo dasyu-piditah                          arajake raksyamana                       jigyur dasyun samedhitah                               SYNONYMS   pura--formerly; anena--by Krsna; vraja-pate--O King of Vraja; sadhavah--thosewho were honest; dasyu-piditah--being disturbed by rogues and thieves; arajake--when there was an irregular government; raksyamanah--were protected; jigyuh--conquered; dasyun--the rogues and thieves; samedhitah--flourished.                             TRANSLATION   O Nanda Maharaja, as recorded in history, when there was an irregular,incapable government, Indra having been dethroned, and people were beingharassed and disturbed by thieves, this child appeared in order to protect thepeople and enable them to flourish, and He curbed the rogues and thieves.                               PURPORT   Indra is the king of the universe. Demons, thieves and rogues always disturbIndra (indrari-vyakulam lokam), but when indraris, the enemies of Indra, becomeprominent, Krsna appears. Krsnas tu bhagavan svayam. indrari-vyakulam lokammrdayanti yuge yuge (Bhag. 1.3.28).                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                        ya etasmin maha-bhagah                       pritim kurvanti manavah                       narayo 'bhibhavanty etan                        visnu-paksan ivasurah                               SYNONYMS   ye--those persons who; etasmin--unto this child; maha-bhagah--very fortunate;pritim--affection; kurvanti--execute; manavah--such persons; na--not; arayah--the enemies; abhibhavanti--do overcome; etan--those who are attached to Krsna;visnu-paksan--the demigods, who always have Lord Visnu on their side; iva--like;asurah--the demons.                             TRANSLATION   Demons [asuras] cannot harm the demigods, who always have Lord Visnu on theirside. Similarly, any person or group attached to Krsna is extremely fortunate.Because such persons are very much affectionate toward Krsna, they cannot be
defeated by demons like the associates of Kamsa [or by the internal enemies, thesenses].                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                      tasman nandatmajo 'yam te                         narayana-samo gunaih                        sriya kirtyanubhavena                         gopayasva samahitah                               SYNONYMS   tasmat--therefore; nanda--O Nanda Maharaja; atmajah--your son; ayam--this;te--of you; narayana-samah--is as good as Narayana (Narayana Himself showingtranscendental qualities); gunaih--by qualities; sriya--by opulence; kirtya--especially by His name and fame; anubhavena--and by His influence; gopayasva--just raise this child; samahitah--with great attention and precaution.                             TRANSLATION   In conclusion, therefore, O Nanda Maharaja, this child of yours is as good asNarayana. In His transcendental qualities, opulence, name, fame and influence,He is exactly like Narayana. You should all raise this child very carefully andcautiously.                               PURPORT   In this verse, the word narayana-samah is significant. Narayana has no equal.He is asamaurdhva: no one is equal to Him, and no one is greater than He is. Asstated in sastra:                        yas tu narayanam devam                       brahma-rudradi-daivataih                         samatvenaiva vikseta                      sa pasandi bhaved dhruvam   One who equates Narayana even with great exalted demigods like Lord Siva orLord Brahma is a pasandi, an agnostic. No one can equal Narayana. Nonetheless,Gargamuni used the word sama, meaning "equal," because he wanted to treat Krsnaas the Supreme Personality of Godhead who had become Nanda Maharaja's son.Gargamuni wanted to impress upon the mind of Nanda Maharaja, "Your worshipableDeity, Narayana, is so pleased with you that He has sent you a son almost equalto Him in qualifications. Therefore you may designate your son with a similarname, such as Mukunda or Madhusudana. But you must always remember that wheneveryou want to do something very good, there will be many hindrances. Therefore youshould raise and protect this child with great care. If you can protect thischild very cautiously, as Narayana always protects you, the child will be asgood as Narayana." Gargamuni also indicated that although the child wasexaltedly qualified like Narayana, He would enjoy more than Narayana as rasa-vihari, the central enjoyer of the rasa dance. As stated in the Brahma-samhita,laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam: He would be served by many gopis, whowould all be as good as the goddess of fortune.                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT
                            sri-suka uvaca                        ity atmanam samadisya                       garge ca sva-grham gate                        nandah pramudito mene                        atmanam purnam asisam                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti--thus; atmanam--about theAbsolute Truth, the Supreme Soul; samadisya--after fully instructing; garge--when Gargamuni; ca--also; sva-grham--to his own abode; gate--had departed;nandah--Maharaja Nanda; pramuditah--became extremely pleased; mene--considered;atmanam--his own self; purnam asisam--full of all good fortune.                             TRANSLATION   Srila Sukadeva Gosvami continued: After Gargamuni, having instructed NandaMaharaja about Krsna, departed for his own home, Nanda Maharaja was very pleasedand considered himself full of all good fortune.                               PURPORT   Krsna is the Supersoul, and Nanda Maharaja is the individual soul. By theinstructions of Gargamuni, both of them were blessed. Nanda Maharaja wasthinking of Krsna's safety from the hands of demons like Putana and Sakatasura,and because he possessed such a son, he thought of himself as most fortunate.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                         kalena vrajatalpena                         gokule rama-kesavau                       janubhyam saha panibhyam                        ringamanau vijahratuh                               SYNONYMS   kalena--of time; vrajata--passing; alpena--a very small duration; gokule--inGokula, Vraja-dhama; rama-kesavau--both Balarama and Krsna; janubhyam--by thestrength of Their knees; saha panibhyam--resting on Their hands; ringamanau--crawling; vijahratuh--enjoyed childhood play.                             TRANSLATION   After a short time passed, both brothers, Rama and Krsna, began to crawl onthe ground of Vraja with the strength of Their hands and knees and thus enjoyTheir childhood play.                               PURPORT   One brahmana devotee says:    srutim apare smrtim itare bharatam anye bhajantu bhava-bhitah            aham iha nandam vande yasyalinde param brahma
   "Let others, fearing material existence, worship the Vedas, the Vedicsupplementary puranas and the Mahabharata, but I shall worship Nanda Maharaja,in whose courtyard the Supreme Brahman is crawling." For a highly exalteddevotee, kaivalya, merging into the existence of the Supreme, appears no betterthan hell (narakayate). But here one can simply think of the crawling of Krsnaand Balarama in the courtyard of Nanda Maharaja and always merge intranscendental happiness. As long as one is absorbed in thoughts of krsna-lila,especially Krsna's childhood pastimes, as Pariksit Maharaja desired to be, oneis always merged in actual kaivalya. Therefore Vyasadeva compiled Srimad-Bhagavatam. Lokasyajanato vidvams cakre satvata-samhitam (Bhag. 1.7.6).Vyasadeva compiled Srimad-Bhagavatam, under the instruction of Narada, so thatanyone can take advantage of this literature, think of Krsna's pastimes andalways be liberated.    srutim apare smrtim itare bharatam anye bhajantu bhava-bhitah            aham iha nandam vande yasyalinde param brahma                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT               tav anghri-yugmam anukrsya sarisrpantau                ghosa-praghosa-ruciram vraja-kardamesu                tan-nada-hrsta-manasav anusrtya lokam               mugdha-prabhitavad upeyatur anti matroh                               SYNONYMS   tau--Krsna and Balarama; anghri-yugmam anukrsya--dragging Their legs;sarisrpantau--crawling like snakes; ghosa-praghosa-ruciram--producing a soundwith Their ankle bells that was very, very sweet to hear; vraja-kardamesu--inthe mud created by cow dung and cow urine on the earth of Vrajabhumi; tat-nada--by the sound of those ankle bells; hrsta-manasau--being very much pleased;anusrtya--following; lokam--other persons; mugdha--thus being enchanted;prabhita-vat--then again being afraid of them; upeyatuh--immediately returned;anti matroh--toward Their mothers.                             TRANSLATION   When Krsna and Balarama, with the strength of Their legs, crawled in themuddy places created in Vraja by cow dung and cow urine, Their crawlingresembled the crawling of serpents, and the sound of Their ankle bells was verycharming. Very much pleased by the sound of other people's ankle bells, Theyused to follow these people as if going to Their mothers, but when They saw thatthese were other people, They became afraid and returned to Their real mothers,Yasoda and Rohini.                               PURPORT   When Krsna and Balarama were crawling about Vrajabhumi, They were enchantedby the sound of ankle bells. Thus They sometimes followed other people, whowould enjoy the crawling of Krsna and Balarama and exclaim, "Oh, see how Krsnaand Balarama are crawling!" Upon hearing this, Krsna and Balarama couldunderstand that these were not Their mothers They were following, and They wouldreturn to Their actual mothers. Thus the crawling of Krsna and Balarama wasenjoyed by the people of the neighborhood, as well as by mother Yasoda andRohini and the two children Themselves.
                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT              tan-matarau nija-sutau ghrnaya snuvantyau               pankanga-raga-rucirav upagrhya dorbhyam             dattva stanam prapibatoh sma mukham niriksya               mugdha-smitalpa-dasanam yayatuh pramodam                               SYNONYMS   tat-matarau--Their mothers (Rohini and Yasoda); nija-sutau--their ownrespective sons; ghrnaya--with great affection; snuvantyau--allowed to suck theflowing milk from their breasts very happily; panka-anga-raga-rucirau--whosebeautiful transcendental bodies were covered with muddy cow dung and urine;upagrhya--taking care of; dorbhyam--by their arms; dattva--delivering Them;stanam--the breast; prapibatoh--when the babies were sucking; sma--indeed;mukham--the mouth; niriksya--and seeing; mugdha-smita-alpa-dasanam--smiling withlittle teeth coming out of Their mouths (they were more and more attracted);yayatuh--and enjoyed; pramodam--transcendental bliss.                             TRANSLATION   Dressed with muddy earth mixed with cow dung and cow urine, the babies lookedvery beautiful, and when They went to Their mothers, both Yasoda and Rohinipicked Them up with great affection, embraced Them and allowed Them to suck themilk flowing from their breasts. While sucking the breast, the babies smiled,and Their small teeth were visible. Their mothers, upon seeing those beautifulteeth, enjoyed great transcendental bliss.                               PURPORT   As the mothers cared for their respective babies, by the arrangement ofyogamaya the babies thought, "Here is My mother," and the mothers thought, "Hereis my son." Because of affection, milk naturally flowed from the mothers'breasts, and the babies drank it. When the mothers saw small teeth coming in,they would count them and be happy, and when the babies saw Their mothersallowing Them to drink their breast milk, the babies also felt transcendentalpleasure. As this transcendental affection continued between Rohini and Balaramaand Yasoda and Krsna, they all enjoyed transcendental bliss.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                 yarhy angana-darsaniya-kumara-lilav              antar-vraje tad abalah pragrhita-pucchaih                vatsair itas tata ubhav anukrsyamanau              preksantya ujjhita-grha jahrsur hasantyah                               SYNONYMS   yarhi--when; angana-darsaniya--visible only to the ladies within the house;kumara-lilau--the pastimes Sri Krsna and Balarama exhibited as children; antah-vraje--within the inside of Vraja, in the house of Nanda Maharaja; tat--at thattime; abalah--all the ladies; pragrhita-pucchaih--the ends of their tails havingbeen caught by Krsna and Balarama; vatsaih--by the calves; itah tatah--here andthere; ubhau--both Krsna and Balarama; anukrsyamanau--being dragged;
preksantyah--seeing such things; ujjhita--given up; grhah--their householdaffairs; jahrsuh--enjoyed very much; hasantyah--while laughing.                             TRANSLATION   Within the house of Nanda Maharaja, the cowherd ladies would enjoy seeing thepastimes of the babies Rama and Krsna. The babies would catch the ends of thecalves' tails, and the calves would drag Them here and there. When the ladiessaw these pastimes, they certainly stopped their household activities andlaughed and enjoyed the incidents.                               PURPORT   While crawling in curiosity, Krsna and Balarama would sometimes catch theends of the tails of calves. The calves, feeling that someone had caught them,would begin to flee here and there, and the babies would hold on very tightly,being afraid of how the calves were moving. The calves, seeing that the babieswere holding them tightly, would also become afraid. Then the ladies would cometo rescue the babies and gladly laugh. This was their enjoyment.                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT            srngy-agni-damstry-asi-jala-dvija-kantakebhyah               krida-parav aticalau sva-sutau niseddhum               grhyani kartum api yatra na taj-jananyau                 sekata apatur alam manaso 'navastham                               SYNONYMS   srngi--with the cows; agni--fire; damstri--monkeys and dogs; asi--swords;jala--water; dvija--birds; kantakebhyah--and thorns; krida-parau ati-calau--thebabies, being too restless, engaged in play; sva-sutau--their own two sons;niseddhum--just to stop Them; grhyani--household duties; kartum api--byexecuting; yatra--when; na--not; tat-jananyau--Their mothers (Rohini andYasoda); sekate--able; apatuh--obtained; alam--indeed; manasah--of the mind;anavastham--equilibrium.                             TRANSLATION   When mother Yasoda and Rohini were unable to protect the babies fromcalamities threatened by horned cows, by fire, by animals with claws and teethsuch as monkeys, dogs and cats, and by thorns, swords and other weapons on theground, they were always in anxiety, and their household engagements weredisturbed. At that time, they were fully equipoised in the transcendentalecstasy known as the distress of material affection, for this was aroused withintheir minds.                               PURPORT   All these pastimes of Krsna, and the great enjoyment exhibited by themothers, are transcendental; nothing about them is material. They are describedin the Brahma-samhita as ananda-cinmaya-rasa. In the spiritual world there isanxiety, there is crying, and there are other feelings similar to those of thematerial world, but because the reality of these feelings is in thetranscendental world, of which this world is only an imitation, mother Yasodaand Rohini enjoyed them transcendentally.
                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                         kalenalpena rajarse                        ramah krsnas ca gokule                       aghrsta-janubhih padbhir                         vicakramatur anjasa                               SYNONYMS   kalena alpena--within a very short time; rajarse--O King (Maharaja Pariksit);ramah krsnah ca--both Rama and Krsna; gokule--in the village of Gokula; aghrsta-janubhih--without the help of crawling on Their knees; padbhih--by Their legsalone; vicakramatuh--began to walk; anjasa--very easily.                             TRANSLATION   O King Pariksit, within a very short time both Rama and Krsna began to walkvery easily in Gokula on Their legs, by Their own strength, without the need tocrawl.                               PURPORT   Instead of crawling with Their knees, the babies could now stand up byholding on to something and walk little by little, without difficulty, by thestrength of Their legs.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                       tatas tu bhagavan krsno                       vayasyair vraja-balakaih                       saha-ramo vraja-strinam                        cikride janayan mudam                               SYNONYMS   tatah--thereafter; tu--but; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead;krsnah--Lord Krsna; vayasyaih--with Their playmates; vraja-balakaih--with othersmall children in Vraja; saha-ramah--along with Balarama; vraja-strinam--of allthe ladies of Vraja; cikride--played very happily; janayan--awakening; mudam--transcendental bliss.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, Lord Krsna, along with Balarama, began to play with the otherchildren of the cowherd men, thus awakening the transcendental bliss of thecowherd women.                               PURPORT   The word saha-ramah, meaning "along with Balarama," is significant in thisverse. In such transcendental pastimes, Krsna is the chief hero, and Balaramaprovides additional help.
                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                        krsnasya gopyo ruciram                        viksya kaumara-capalam                      srnvantyah kila tan-matur                         iti hocuh samagatah                               SYNONYMS   krsnasya--of Krsna; gopyah--all the gopis; ruciram--very attractive; viksya--observing; kaumara-capalam--the restlessness of the childish pastimes;srnvantyah--just to hear them again and again; kila--indeed; tat-matuh--in thepresence of His mother; iti--thus; ha--indeed; ucuh--said; samagatah--assembledthere.                             TRANSLATION   Observing the very attractive childish restlessness of Krsna, all the gopisin the neighborhood, to hear about Krsna's activities again and again, wouldapproach mother Yasoda and speak to her as follows.                               PURPORT   Krsna's activities are always very attractive to devotees. Therefore theneighbors, who were friends of mother Yasoda, informed mother Yasoda of whateverthey saw Krsna doing in the neighborhood. Mother Yasoda, just to hear about theactivities of her son, stopped her household duties and enjoyed the informationgiven by the neighborhood friends.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT           vatsan muncan kvacid asamaye krosa-sanjata-hasah      steyam svadv atty atha dadhi-payah kalpitaih steya-yogaih       markan bhoksyan vibhajati sa cen natti bhandam bhinnatti            dravyalabhe sagrha-kupito yaty upakrosya tokan                               SYNONYMS   vatsan--the calves; muncan--releasing; kvacit--sometimes; asamaye--at oddtimes; krosa-sanjata-hasah--after this, when the head of the house is angry,Krsna begins to smile; steyam--obtained by stealing; svadu--very tasteful; atti--eats; atha--thus; dadhi-payah--pot of curd and milk; kalpitaih--devised; steya-yogaih--by some sort of stealing process; markan--to the monkeys; bhoksyan--giving to eat; vibhajati--divides their portion; sah--the monkey; cet--if; na--not; atti--eats; bhandam--the pot; bhinnatti--He breaks; dravya-alabhe--wheneatables are unavailable or He cannot find such pots; sa-grha-kupitah--Hebecomes angry at the residents of the house; yati--He goes away; upakrosya--irritating and pinching; tokan--the small children.                             TRANSLATION   "Our dear friend Yasoda, your son sometimes comes to our houses before themilking of the cows and releases the calves, and when the master of the housebecomes angry, your son merely smiles. Sometimes He devises some process by
which He steals palatable curd, butter and milk, which He then eats and drinks.When the monkeys assemble, He divides it with them, and when the monkeys havetheir bellies so full that they won't take more, He breaks the pots. Sometimes,if He gets no opportunity to steal butter or milk from a house, He will be angryat the householders, and for His revenge He will agitate the small children bypinching them. Then, when the children begin crying, Krsna will go away.                               PURPORT   The narration of Krsna's naughty childhood activities would be presented tomother Yasoda in the form of complaints. Sometimes Krsna would enter the houseof a neighbor, and if He found no one there, He would release the calves beforethe time for the cows to be milked. The calves are actually supposed to bereleased when their mothers are milked, but Krsna would release them before thattime, and naturally the calves would drink all the milk from their mothers. Whenthe cowherd men saw this, they would chase Krsna and try to catch Him, saying,"Here is Krsna doing mischief," but He would flee and enter another house, whereHe would again devise some means to steal butter and curd. Then the cowherd menwould again try to capture Him, saying, "Here is the butter thief. Bettercapture Him!" And they would be angry. But Krsna would simply smile, and theywould forget everything. Sometimes, in their presence, He would begin eating thecurd and butter. There was no need for Krsna to eat butter, since His belly wasalways full, but He would try to eat it, or else He would break the pots anddistribute the contents to the monkeys. In this way, Krsna was always engaged inmischief-making. If in any house He could not find any butter or curd to steal,He would go into a room and agitate the small children sleeping there bypinching them, and when they cried He would go away.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT           hastagrahye racayati vidhim pithakolukhaladyais        chidram hy antar-nihita-vayunah sikya-bhandesu tad-vit         dhvantagare dhrta-mani-ganam svangam artha-pradipam            kale gopyo yarhi grha-krtyesu suvyagra-cittah                               SYNONYMS   hasta-agrahye--when the destination is out of the reach of His hands;racayati--He arranges to make; vidhim--a means; pithaka--by wooden planks piledtogether; ulukhala-adyaih--and by overturning the stone mortar for grindingspices; chidram--a hole; hi--indeed; antah-nihita--about the contents of thepot; vayunah--with such knowledge; sikya--hanging by a swing; bhandesu--in thepots; tat-vit--expert in that knowledge, or in full knowledge; dhvanta-agare--ina very dark room; dhrta-mani-ganam--because of being decorated with valuablejewels; sva-angam--His own body; artha-pradipam--is the light required forseeing in darkness; kale--after that, in due course of time; gopyah--the elderlygopis; yarhi--as soon as; grha-krtyesu--in discharging household affairs; su-vyagra-cittah--are busily engaged.                             TRANSLATION   "When the milk and curd are kept high on a swing hanging from the ceiling andKrsna and Balarama cannot reach it, They arrange to reach it by piling upvarious planks and turning upside down the mortar for grinding spices. Beingquite aware of the contents of a pot, They pick holes in it. While the elderlygopis go about their household affairs, Krsna and Balarama sometimes go into a
dark room, brightening the place with the valuable jewels and ornaments on Theirbodies and taking advantage of this light by stealing.                               PURPORT   Formerly, in every household, yogurt and butter were kept for use inemergencies. But Krsna and Balarama would pile up planks so that They couldreach the pots and would then pick holes in the pots with Their hands so thatthe contents would leak out and They could drink it. This was another means forstealing butter and milk. When the butter and milk were kept in a dark room,Krsna and Balarama would go there and make the place bright with the valuablejewels on Their bodies. On the whole, Krsna and Balarama engaged in stealingbutter and milk from the neighborhood houses in many ways.                               TEXT 31                                 TEXT            evam dharstyany usati kurute mehanadini vastau            steyopayair viracita-krtih supratiko yathaste         ittham stribhih sa-bhaya-nayana-sri-mukhalokinibhir        vyakhyatartha prahasita-mukhi na hy upalabdhum aicchat                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this way; dharstyani--naughty activities; usati--in a neat and cleanplace; kurute--sometimes does; mehana-adini--passing stool and urine; vastau--inour houses; steya-upayaih--and by inventing different devices to steal butterand milk; viracita-krtih--is very expert; su-pratikah--is now sitting down herelike a very good, well-behaved child; yatha aste--while staying here; ittham--all these topics of conversation; stribhih--by the gopis; sa-bhaya-nayana--justnow sitting there with fearful eyes; sri-mukha--such a beautiful face;alokinibhih--by the gopis, who were enjoying the pleasure of seeing; vyakhyata-artha--and while complaining against Him before mother Yasoda; prahasita-mukhi--they were smiling and enjoying; na--not; hi--indeed; upalabdhum--to chastise andthreaten (rather, she enjoyed how Krsna was sitting there as a very good boy);aicchat--she desired.                             TRANSLATION   "When Krsna is caught in His naughty activities, the master of the house willsay to Him, 'Oh, You are a thief,' and artificially express anger at Krsna.Krsna will then reply, 'I am not a thief. You are a thief.' Sometimes, beingangry, Krsna passes urine and stool in a neat, clean place in our houses. Butnow, our dear friend Yasoda, this expert thief is sitting before you like a verygood boy." Sometimes all the gopis would look at Krsna sitting there, His eyesfearful so that His mother would not chastise Him, and when they saw Krsna'sbeautiful face, instead of chastising Him they would simply look upon His faceand enjoy transcendental bliss. Mother Yasoda would mildly smile at all thisfun, and she would not want to chastise her blessed transcendental child.                               PURPORT   Krsna's business in the neighborhood was not only to steal but sometimes topass stool and urine in a neat, clean house. When caught by the master of thehouse, Krsna would chastise him, saying, "You are a thief." Aside from being athief in His childhood affairs, Krsna acted as an expert thief when He was youngby attracting young girls and enjoying them in the rasa dance. This is Krsna's
business. He is also violent, as the killer of many demons. Although mundanepeople like nonviolence and other such brilliant qualities, God, the AbsoluteTruth, being always the same, is good in any activities, even so-called immoralactivities like stealing, killing and violence. Krsna is always pure, and He isalways the Supreme Absolute Truth. Krsna may do anything supposedly abominablein material life, yet still He is attractive. Therefore His name is Krsna,meaning "all-attractive." This is the platform on which transcendental lovingaffairs and service are exchanged. Because of the features of Krsna's face, themothers were so attracted that they could not chastise Him. Instead ofchastising Him, they smiled and enjoyed hearing of Krsna's activities. Thus thegopis remained satisfied, and Krsna enjoyed their happiness. Therefore anothername of Krsna is Gopi-jana-vallabha because He invented such activities toplease the gopis.                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                         ekada kridamanas te                         ramadya gopa-darakah                       krsno mrdam bhaksitavan                         iti matre nyavedayan                               SYNONYMS   ekada--once upon a time; kridamanah--now Krsna, being still more grown up,was playing with other children of the same age; te--they; rama-adyah--Balaramaand others; gopa-darakah--other boys born in the same neighborhood of thecowherd men; krsnah mrdam bhaksitavan--O Mother, Krsna has eaten earth (acomplaint was lodged); iti--thus; matre--unto mother Yasoda; nyavedayan--theysubmitted.                             TRANSLATION   One day while Krsna was playing with His small playmates, including Balaramaand other sons of the gopas, all His friends came together and lodged acomplaint to mother Yasoda. "Mother," they submitted, "Krsna has eaten earth."                               PURPORT   Here is another of Krsna's transcendental activities invented to please thegopis. First a complaint was lodged with mother Yasoda about Krsna's stealing,but mother Yasoda did not chastise Him. Now, in an attempt to awaken motherYasoda's anger so that she would chastise Krsna, another complaint was invented--that Krsna had eaten earth.                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                        sa grhitva kare krsnam                         upalabhya hitaisini                       yasoda bhaya-sambhranta-                        preksanaksam abhasata                               SYNONYMS
   sa--mother Yasoda; grhitva--taking; kare--within the hands (being anxiousabout what Krsna might have eaten); krsnam--Krsna; upalabhya--wanted to chastiseHim; hita-esini--because she was anxious for the welfare of Krsna, she becamevery much agitated, thinking, "How is it that Krsna has eaten earth?"; yasoda--mother Yasoda; bhaya-sambhranta-preksana-aksam--began to look very carefullywithin Krsna's mouth in fear, to see if Krsna had eaten something dangerous;abhasata--began to address Krsna.                             TRANSLATION   Upon hearing this from Krsna's playmates, mother Yasoda, who was always fullof anxiety over Krsna's welfare, picked Krsna up with her hands to look into Hismouth and chastise Him. Her eyes fearful, she spoke to her son as follows.                               TEXT 34                                 TEXT                       kasman mrdam adantatman                       bhavan bhaksitavan rahah                        vadanti tavaka hy ete                      kumaras te 'grajo 'py ayam                               SYNONYMS   kasmat--why; mrdam--dirt; adanta-atman--You restless boy; bhavan--You;bhaksitavan--have eaten; rahah--in a solitary place; vadanti--are lodging thiscomplaint; tavakah--Your friends and playmates; hi--indeed; ete--all of them;kumarah--boys; te--Your; agrajah--older brother; api--also (confirms); ayam--this.                             TRANSLATION   Dear Krsna, why are You so restless that You have eaten dirt in a solitaryplace? This complaint has been lodged against You by all Your playmates,including Your elder brother, Balarama. How is this?                               PURPORT   Mother Yasoda was agitated by Krsna's restless misbehavior. Her house wasfull of sweetmeats. Why then should the restless boy eat dirt in a solitaryplace? Krsna replied, "My dear mother, they have plotted together and lodged acomplaint against Me so that you will punish Me. My elder brother, Balarama, hasjoined them. Actually, I have not done this. Take My words as true. Do not beangry and chastise Me."                               TEXT 35                                 TEXT                        naham bhaksitavan amba                       sarve mithyabhisamsinah                        yadi satya-giras tarhi                       samaksam pasya me mukham                               SYNONYMS
   na--not; aham--I; bhaksitavan--have eaten dirt; amba--My dear mother; sarve--all of them; mithya-abhisamsinah--all liars, simply complaining against Me sothat you may chastise Me; yadi--if it is actually a fact; satya-girah--that theyhave spoken the truth; tarhi--then; samaksam--directly; pasya--see; me--My;mukham--mouth.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Sri Krsna replied: My dear mother, I have never eaten dirt. All Myfriends complaining against Me are liars. If you think they are being truthful,you can directly look into My mouth and examine it.                               PURPORT   Krsna presented Himself as an innocent child to increase the transcendentalecstasy of maternal affection. As described in the sastra, tadana-bhayanmithyoktir vatsalya-rasa-posika. This means that sometimes a small child speakslies. For example, he may have stolen something or eaten something and yet denythat he has done so. We ordinarily see this in the material world, but inrelation to Krsna it is different; such activities are meant to endow thedevotee with transcendental ecstasy. The Supreme Personality of Godhead wasplaying as a liar and accusing all the other devotees of being liars. As statedin Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.12.11), krta-punya-punjah: a devotee may attain such anecstatic position after many, many births of devotional service. Persons whohave amassed the results of a vast amount of pious activities can attain thestage of associating with Krsna and playing with Him like ordinary playmates.One should not consider these transactions of transcendental service to beuntruthful accusations. One should never accuse such devotees of being ordinaryboys speaking lies, for they attained this stage of associating with Krsna bygreat austerities (tapasa brahmacaryena samena ca damena ca).                               TEXT 36                                 TEXT                       yady evam tarhi vyadehi-                      ty uktah sa bhagavan harih                       vyadattavyahataisvaryah                         krida-manuja-balakah                               SYNONYMS   yadi--if; evam--it is so; tarhi--then; vyadehi--open Your mouth wide (I wantto see); iti uktah--in this way ordered by mother Yasoda; sah--He; bhagavan--theSupreme Personality of Godhead; harih--the Supreme Lord; vyadatta--opened Hismouth; avyahata-aisvaryah--without minimizing any potencies of absolute opulence(aisvaryasya samagrasya); krida--pastimes; manuja-balakah--exactly like thechild of a human being.                             TRANSLATION   Mother Yasoda challenged Krsna, "If You have not eaten earth, then open Yourmouth wide." When challenged by His mother in this way, Krsna, the son of NandaMaharaja and Yasoda, to exhibit pastimes like a human child, opened His mouth.Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, who is full of allopulences, did not disturb His mother's parental affection, His opulence wasautomatically displayed, for Krsna's opulence is never lost at any stage, but ismanifest at the proper time.
                               PURPORT   Without disturbing the ecstasy of His mother's affection, Krsna opened Hismouth and displayed His own natural opulences. When a person is given varietiesof food, there may be a hundred and one varieties, but if one likes ordinarysaka, spinach, he prefers to eat that. Similarly, although Krsna was full ofopulences, now, by the order of mother Yasoda, He opened wide His mouth like ahuman child and did not neglect the transcendental humor of maternal affection.                             TEXTS 37-39                                 TEXT                        sa tatra dadrse visvam                     jagat sthasnu ca kham disah                       sadri-dvipabdhi-bhugolam                       sa-vayv-agnindu-tarakam                       jyotis-cakram jalam tejo                        nabhasvan viyad eva ca                         vaikarikanindriyani                       mano matra gunas trayah                    etad vicitram saha-jiva-kala-                   svabhava-karmasaya-linga-bhedam                    sunos tanau viksya vidaritasye                    vrajam sahatmanam avapa sankam                               SYNONYMS   sa--mother Yasoda; tatra--within the wide-open mouth of Krsna; dadrse--saw;visvam--the whole universe; jagat--moving entities; sthasnu--maintenance ofnonmoving entities; ca--and; kham--the sky; disah--the directions; sa-adri--withthe mountains; dvipa--islands; abdhi--and oceans; bhu-golam--the surface of theearth; sa-vayu--with the blowing wind; agni--fire; indu--the moon; tarakam--stars; jyotih-cakram--the planetary systems; jalam--water; tejah--light;nabhasvan--outer space; viyat--the sky; eva--also; ca--and; vaikarikani--creation by transformation of ahankara; indriyani--the senses; manah--mind;matrah--sense perception; gunah trayah--the three material qualities (sattva,rajas and tamas); etat--all these; vicitram--varieties; saha--along with; jiva-kala--the duration of life of all living entities; svabhava--natural instinct;karma-asaya--resultant action and desire for material enjoyment; linga-bhedam--varieties of bodies according to desire; sunoh tanau--in the body of her son;viksya--seeing; vidarita-asye--within the wide-open mouth; vrajam--Vrndavana-dhama, Nanda Maharaja's place; saha-atmanam--along with herself; avapa--wasstruck; sankam--with all doubts and wonder.                             TRANSLATION   When Krsna opened His mouth wide by the order of mother Yasoda, she sawwithin His mouth all moving and nonmoving entities, outer space, and alldirections, along with mountains, islands, oceans, the surface of the earth, theblowing wind, fire, the moon and the stars. She saw the planetary systems,water, light, air, sky, and creation by transformation of ahankara. She also sawthe senses, the mind, sense perception, and the three qualities goodness,passion and ignorance. She saw the time allotted for the living entities, shesaw natural instinct and the reactions of karma, and she saw desires and
different varieties of bodies, moving and nonmoving. Seeing all these aspects ofthe cosmic manifestation, along with herself and Vrndavana-dhama, she becamedoubtful and fearful of her son's nature.                               PURPORT   All the cosmic manifestations that exist on the gross and subtle elements, aswell as the means of their agitation, the three gunas, the living entity,creation, maintenance, annihilation and everything going on in the externalenergy of the Lord--all this comes from the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Govinda. Everything is within the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.This is also confirmed in Bhagavad-gita (9.10). Mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyatesa-caracaram: everything in the material nature (prakrti) works under Hiscontrol. Because all these manifestations come from Govinda, they could all bevisible within the mouth of Govinda. Quite astonishingly, mother Yasoda wasafraid because of intense maternal affection. She could not believe that withinthe mouth of her son such things could appear. Yet she saw them, and thereforeshe was struck with fear and wonder.                               TEXT 40                                 TEXT                     kim svapna etad uta devamaya                   kim va madiyo bata buddhi-mohah                     atho amusyaiva mamarbhakasya                   yah kascanautpattika atma-yogah                               SYNONYMS   kim--whether; svapnah--a dream; etat--all this; uta--or otherwise; deva-maya--an illusory manifestation by the external energy; kim va--or else; madiyah--mypersonal; bata--indeed; buddhi-mohah--illusion of intelligence; atho--otherwise;amusya--of such; eva--indeed; mama arbhakasya--of my child; yah--which; kascana--some; autpattikah--natural; atma-yogah--personal mystic power.                             TRANSLATION   [Mother Yasoda began to argue within herself:] Is this a dream, or is it anillusory creation by the external energy? Has this been manifested by my ownintelligence, or is it some mystic power of my child?                               PURPORT   When mother Yasoda saw this wonderful manifestation within the mouth of herchild, she began to argue within herself about whether it was a dream. Then sheconsidered, "I am not dreaming, because my eyes are open. I am actually seeingwhat is happening. I am not sleeping, nor am I dreaming. Then maybe this is anillusion created by devamaya. But that is also not possible. What business wouldthe demigods have showing such things to me? I am an insignificant woman with noconnection with the demigods. Why should they take the trouble to put me intodevamaya? That also is not possible." Then mother Yasoda considered whether thevision might be due to bewilderment: "I am fit in health; I am not diseased. Whyshould there be any bewilderment? It is not possible that my brain is deranged,since I am ordinarily quite fit to think. Then this vision must be due to somemystic power of my son, as predicted by Gargamuni." Thus she finally concludedthat the vision was due to her son's activities, and nothing else.
                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT                   atho yathavan na vitarka-gocaram                   ceto-manah-karma-vacobhir anjasa                   yad-asrayam yena yatah pratiyate                 sudurvibhavyam pranatasmi tat-padam                               SYNONYMS   atho--therefore she decided to surrender unto the Supreme Lord; yatha-vat--asperfectly as one can perceive; na--not; vitarka-gocaram--beyond all arguments,reason and sense perception; cetah--by consciousness; manah--by mind; karma--byactivities; vacobhih--or by words; anjasa--taking all of them together, wecannot understand them; yat-asrayam--under whose control; yena--by whom; yatah--from whom; pratiyate--can be conceived only that from Him everything emanates;su-durvibhavyam--beyond our sense perception or consciousness; pranata asmi--letme surrender; tat-padam--at His lotus feet.                             TRANSLATION   Therefore let me surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offermy obeisances unto Him, who is beyond the conception of human speculation, themind, activities, words and arguments, who is the original cause of this cosmicmanifestation, by whom the entire cosmos is maintained, and by whom we canconceive of its existence. Let me simply offer my obeisances, for He is beyondmy contemplation, speculation and meditation. He is beyond all of my materialactivities.                               PURPORT   One simply has to realize the greatness of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. One should not try to understand Him by any material means, subtle orgross. Mother Yasoda, being a simple woman, could not find out the real cause ofthe vision; therefore, out of maternal affection, she simply offered obeisancesunto the Supreme Lord to protect her child. She could do nothing but offerobeisances to the Lord. It is said, acintyah khalu ye bhava na tams tarkenayojayet (Mahabharata, Bhisma parva 5.22). One should not try to understand thesupreme cause by argument or reasoning. When we are beset by some problem forwhich we can find no reason, there is no alternative than to surrender to theSupreme Lord and offer Him our respectful obeisances. Then our position will besecure. This was the means adopted in this instance also by mother Yasoda.Whatever happens, the original cause is the Supreme Personality of Godhead(sarva-karana-karanam). When the immediate cause cannot be ascertained, let ussimply offer our obeisances at the lotus feet of the Lord. Mother Yasodaconcluded that the wonderful things she saw within the mouth of her child weredue to Him, although she could not clearly ascertain the cause. Therefore when adevotee cannot ascertain the cause of suffering, he concludes:                    tat te 'nukampam susamiksamano                    bhunjana evatma-krtam vipakam                 hrd-vag-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te                  jiveta yo mukti-pade sa daya-bhak   (Bhag. 10.14.8)
   The devotee accepts that it is due to his own past misdeeds that the SupremePersonality of Godhead has caused him some small amount of suffering. Thus heoffers obeisances to the Lord again and again. Such a devotee is called mukti-pade sa daya-bhak; that is, he is guaranteed his liberation from this materialworld. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (2.14):                      matra-sparsas tu kaunteya                       sitosna-sukha-duhkha-dah                          agamapayino nityas                       tams titiksasva bharata   We should know that material suffering due to the material body will come andgo. Therefore we must tolerate the suffering and proceed with discharging ourduty as ordained by our spiritual master.                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                    aham mamasau patir esa me suto                   vrajesvarasyakhila-vittapa sati                 gopyas ca gopah saha-godhanas ca me                 yan-mayayettham kumatih sa me gatih                               SYNONYMS   aham--my existence ("I am something"); mama--my; asau--Nanda Maharaja; patih--husband; esah--this (Krsna); me sutah--is my son; vraja-isvarasya--of myhusband, Nanda Maharaja; akhila-vitta-pa--I am the possessor of unlimitedopulence and wealth; sati--because I am his wife; gopyah ca--and all the damselsof the cowherd men; gopah--all the cowherd men (are my subordinates); saha-godhanah ca--with the cows and calves; me--my; yat-mayaya--all such thingsaddressed by me are, after all, given by the mercy of the Supreme; ittham--thus;kumatih--I am wrongly thinking they are my possessions; sah me gatih--He istherefore my only shelter (I am simply instrumental).                             TRANSLATION   It is by the influence of the Supreme Lord's maya that I am wrongly thinkingthat Nanda Maharaja is my husband, that Krsna is my son, and that because I amthe queen of Nanda Maharaja, all the wealth of cows and calves are mypossessions and all the cowherd men and their wives are my subjects. Actually, Ialso am eternally subordinate to the Supreme Lord. He is my ultimate shelter.                               PURPORT   Following in the footsteps of mother Yasoda, everyone should follow thismentality of renunciation. Whatever wealth, opulence or whatever else we maypossess belongs not to us but to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is theultimate shelter of everyone and the ultimate owner of everything. As stated bythe Lord Himself in Bhagavad-gita (5.29):                       bhoktaram yajna-tapasam                        sarva-loka-mahesvaram                        suhrdam sarva-bhutanam                      jnatva mam santim rcchati
   "The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices andausterities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the benefactor andwell-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from the pangs of materialmiseries."   We should not be proud of our possessions. As expressed by mother Yasodaherein, "I am not the owner of possessions, the opulent wife of Nanda Maharaja.The estate, the possessions, the cows and calves and the subjects like the gopisand cowherd men are all given to me." One should give up thinking of "mypossessions, my son and my husband" (janasya moho'yam aham mameti). Nothingbelongs to anyone but the Supreme Lord. Only because of illusion do we wronglythink, "I am existing" or "Everything belongs to me." Thus mother Yasodacompletely surrendered unto the Supreme Lord. For the moment, she was ratherdisappointed, thinking, "My endeavors to protect my son by charity and otherauspicious activities are useless. The Supreme Lord has given me many things,but unless He takes charge of everything, there is no assurance of protection. Imust therefore ultimately seek shelter of the Supreme personality of Godhead."As stated by Prahlada Maharaja (Bhag. 7.9.19), balasya neha saranam pitaraunrsimha: a father and mother cannot ultimately take care of their children. Atogrha-ksetra-sutapta-vittair janasya moho 'yam aham mameti (Bhag. 5.5.8). One'sland, home, wealth and all of one's possessions belong to the SupremePersonality of Godhead, although we wrongly think, "I am this" and "These thingsare mine."                               TEXT 43                                 TEXT                       ittham vidita-tattvayam                         gopikayam sa isvarah                       vaisnavim vyatanon mayam                       putra-snehamayim vibhuh                               SYNONYMS   ittham--in this way; vidita-tattvayam--when she understood the truth ofeverything philosophically; gopikayam--unto mother Yasoda; sah--the SupremeLord; isvarah--the supreme controller; vaisnavim--visnumaya, or yogamaya;vyatanot--expanded; mayam--yogamaya; putra-sneha-mayim--very much attachedbecause of maternal affection for her son; vibhuh--the Supreme Lord.                             TRANSLATION   Mother Yasoda, by the grace of the Lord, could understand the real truth. Butthen again, the supreme master, by the influence of the internal potency,yogamaya, inspired her to become absorbed in intense maternal affection for herson.                               PURPORT   Although mother Yasoda understood the whole philosophy of life, at the nextmoment she was overwhelmed by affection for her son by the influence ofyogamaya. Unless she took care of her son Krsna, she thought, how could He beprotected? She could not think otherwise, and thus she forgot all herphilosophical speculations. This forgetfulness is described by Srila VisvanathaCakravarti Thakura as being inspired by the influence of yogamaya (mohana-sadharmyan mayam). Materialistic persons are captivated by mahamaya, whereasdevotees, by the arrangement of the spiritual energy, are captivated byyogamaya.
                               TEXT 44                                 TEXT                       sadyo nasta-smrtir gopi                         saropyaroham atmajam                       pravrddha-sneha-kalila-                         hrdayasid yatha pura                               SYNONYMS   sadyah--after all these philosophical speculations, mother Yasoda fullysurrendered to the Supreme personality of Godhead; nasta-smrtih--having gottenrid of the memory of seeing the universal form within Krsna's mouth; gopi--mother Yasoda; sa--she; aropya--seating; aroham--on the lap; atmajam--her son;pravrddha--increased; sneha--by affection; kalila--affected; hrdaya--the core ofher heart; asit--became situated; yatha pura--as she was formerly.                             TRANSLATION   Immediately forgetting yogamaya's illusion that Krsna had shown the universalform within His mouth, mother Yasoda took her son on her lap as before, feelingincreased affection in her heart for her transcendental child.                               PURPORT   Mother Yasoda regarded the vision of the universal form within Krsna's mouthas an arrangement of yogamaya, like a dream. As one forgets everything after adream, mother Yasoda immediately forgot the entire incident. As her naturalfeeling of affection increased, she decided to herself, "Now let this incidentbe forgotten. I do not mind. Here is my son. Let me kiss Him."                               TEXT 45                                 TEXT                       trayya copanisadbhis ca                     sankhya-yogais ca satvataih                        upagiyamana-mahatmyam                        harim samanyatatmajam                               SYNONYMS   trayya--by studying the three Vedas (Sama, Yajur and Atharva); ca--also;upanisadbhih ca--and by studying the Vedic knowledge of the Upanisads; sankhya-yogaih--by reading the literature of sankhya-yoga; ca--and; satvataih--by thegreat sages and devotees, or by reading Vaisnava-tantra, Pancaratras;upagiyamana-mahatmyam--whose glories are worshiped (by all these Vedicliteratures); harim--unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sa--she; amanyata--considered (ordinary); atmajam--as her own son.                             TRANSLATION   The glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are studied through thethree Vedas, the Upanisads, the literature of Sankhya-yoga, and other Vaisnavaliterature, yet mother Yasoda considered that Supreme Person her ordinary child.
                               PURPORT   As stated in Bhagavad-gita (15.15) by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,Krsna, the purpose of studying the Vedas is to understand Him (vedais ca sarvairaham eva vedyah). Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu explained to Sanatana Gosvami thatthere are three purposes in the Vedas. One is to understand our relationshipwith Krsna (sambandha), another is to act according to that relationship(abhidheya), and the third is to reach the ultimate goal (prayojana). The wordprayojana means "necessities," and the ultimate necessity is explained by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu. prema pum-artho mahan: the greatest necessity for a humanbeing is the achievement of love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here wesee that mother Yasoda is on the highest stage of necessity, for she iscompletely absorbed in love for Krsna.   In the beginning, the Vedic purpose is pursued in three ways (trayi)--bykarma-kanda, jnana-kanda and upasana-kanda. When one reaches the complete,perfect stage of upasana-kanda, one comes to worship Narayana, or Lord Visnu.When Parvati asked Lord Mahadeva, Lord Siva, what is the best method of upasana,or worship, Lord Siva answered, aradhananam sarvesam visnor aradhanam param.Visnupasana, or visnv-aradhana, worship of Lord Visnu, is the highest stage ofperfection, as realized by Devaki. But here mother Yasoda performs no upasana,for she has developed transcendental ecstatic love for Krsna. Therefore herposition is better than that of Devaki. In order to show this, Srila Vyasadevaenunciates this verse, trayya copanisadbhih etc.   When a human being enters into the study of the Vedas to obtain vidya,knowledge, he begins to take part in human civilization. Then he advancesfurther to study the Upanisads and gain brahma jnana, impersonal realization ofthe Absolute Truth, and then he advances still further, to sankhya-yoga, inorder to understand the supreme controller, who is indicated in Bhagavad-gita(param brahma param dhama pavitram paramam bhavan.purusam sasvatam). When oneunderstands that purusa, the supreme controller, to be Paramatma, one is engagedin the method of yoga (dhyanavasthita-tad-gatena manasa pasyanti yam yoginah).But mother Yasoda has surpassed all these stages. She has come to the platformof loving Krsna as her beloved child, and therefore she is accepted to be on thehighest stage of spiritual realization. The Absolute Truth is realized in threefeatures (brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti sabdyate), but she is in suchecstasy that she does not care to understand what is Brahman, what is Paramatmaor what is Bhagavan. Bhagavan has personally descended to become her belovedchild. Therefore there is no comparison to mother Yasoda's good fortune, asdeclared by Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu (ramya kacid upasana vrajavadhu-vargena yakalpita). The Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, may berealized in different stages. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (4.11):                       ye yatha mam prapadyante                      tams tathaiva bhajamy aham                        mama vartmanuvartante                       manusyah partha sarvasah   "As men surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyone follows Mypath in all respects, O son of Prtha." One may be a karmi, a jnani, a yogi andthen a bhakta or prema-bhakta. But the ultimate stage of realization is prema-bhakti, as actually demonstrated by mother Yasoda.                               TEXT 46                                 TEXT                             sri-rajovaca                      nandah kim akarod brahman
                         sreya evam mahodayam                         yasoda ca maha-bhaga                      papau yasyah stanam harih                               SYNONYMS   sri-raja uvaca--Maharaja Pariksit further inquired (from Sukadeva Gosvami);nandah--Maharaja Nanda; kim--what; akarot--performed; brahman--O learnedbrahmana; sreyah--auspicious activities, like performing penances andausterities; evam--as exhibited by him; maha-udayam--from which they achievedthe greatest perfection; yasoda--mother Yasoda; ca--also; maha-bhaga--mostfortunate; papau--drank; yasyah--of whom; stanam--the breast milk; harih--theSupreme Personality of Godhead.                             TRANSLATION   Having heard of the great fortune of mother Yasoda, Pariksit Maharajainquired from Sukadeva Gosvami: O learned brahmana, mother Yasoda's breast milkwas sucked by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What past auspiciousactivities did she and Nanda Maharaja perform to achieve such perfection inecstatic love?                               PURPORT   As stated in Bhagavad-gita (7.16), catur-vidha bhajante mam janah sukrtino'rjuna. Without sukrti, or pious activities, no one can come to the shelter ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Lord is approached by four kinds ofpious men (arto jijnasur artharthi jnani ca), but here we see that NandaMaharaja and Yasoda surpassed all of them. Therefore Pariksit Maharaja naturallyinquired, "What kind of pious activities did they perform in their past lives bywhich they achieved such a stage of perfection?" Of course, Nanda Maharaja andYasoda are accepted as the father and mother of Krsna, yet mother Yasoda wasmore fortunate than Nanda Maharaja, Krsna's father, because Nanda Maharaja wassometimes separated from Krsna whereas Yasoda, Krsna's mother, was not separatedfrom Krsna at any moment. From Krsna's babyhood to His childhood and from Hischildhood to His youth, mother Yasoda was always in association with Krsna. Evenwhen Krsna was grown up, He would go to Vrndavana and sit on the lap of motherYasoda. Therefore there is no comparison to the fortune of mother Yasoda, andPariksit Maharaja naturally inquired, yasoda ca maha-bhaga.                               TEXT 47                                 TEXT                        pitarau nanvavindetam                         krsnodararbhakehitam                        gayanty adyapi kavayo                         yal loka-samalapaham                               SYNONYMS   pitarau--the actual father and mother of Krsna; na--not; anvavindetam--enjoyed; krsna--of Krsna; udara--magnanimous; arbhaka-ihitam--the childhoodpastimes He performed; gayanti--are glorifying; adya api--even today; kavayah--great, great sages and saintly persons; yat--which is; loka-samala-apaham--byhearing of which the contamination of the whole material world is vanquished.                             TRANSLATION
   Although Krsna was so pleased with Vasudeva and Devaki that He descended astheir son, they could not enjoy Krsna's magnanimous childhood pastimes, whichare so great that simply chanting about them vanquishes the contamination of thematerial world. Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda, however, enjoyed these pastimesfully, and therefore their position is always better than that of Vasudeva andDevaki.                               PURPORT   Krsna actually took birth from the womb of Devaki, but just after His birthHe was transferred to the home of mother Yasoda. Devaki could not even haveKrsna suck her breast. Therefore Pariksit Maharaja was astonished. How hadmother Yasoda and Nanda Maharaja become so fortunate that they enjoyed thecomplete childhood pastimes of Krsna, which are still glorified by saintlypersons? What had they done in the past by which they were elevated to such anexalted position?                               TEXT 48                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        drono vasunam pravaro                        dharaya bharyaya saha                          karisyamana adesan                        brahmanas tam uvaca ha                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; dronah--by the name Drona;vasunam--of the eight Vasus (a type of demigod); pravarah--who was the best;dharaya--with Dhara; bharyaya--His wife; saha--with; karisyamanah--just toexecute; adesan--the orders; brahmanah--of Lord Brahma; tam--unto him; uvaca--said; ha--in the past.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: To follow the orders of Lord Brahma, Drona, the bestof the Vasus, along with his wife, Dhara, spoke to Lord Brahma in this way.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.37):                 ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhis                 tabhir ya eva nija-rupataya kalabhih                 goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhuto                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   When Krsna descends anywhere, He is accompanied by His own associates. Theseassociates are not ordinary living beings. Krsna's pastimes are eternal, andwhen He descends, He comes with His associates. Therefore Nanda and motherYasoda are the eternal father and mother of Krsna. This means that wheneverKrsna descends, Nanda and Yasoda, as well as Vasudeva and Devaki, also descendas the Lord's father and mother. Their personalities are expansions of Krsna'spersonal body; they are not ordinary living beings. Maharaja Pariksit knew this,but he was curious to know from Sukadeva Gosvami whether it is possible for an
ordinary human being to come to this stage by sadhana-siddhi. There are twokinds of perfection--nitya-siddhi and sadhana-siddhi. A nitya-siddha is one whois eternally Krsna's associate, an expansion of Krsna's personal body, whereas asadhana-siddha is an ordinary human being who, by executing pious activities andfollowing regulative principles of devotional service, also comes to that stage.Thus the purpose of Maharaja Pariksit's inquiry was to determine whether anordinary human being can attain the position of mother Yasoda and NandaMaharaja. Sukadeva Gosvami answered this question as follows.                               TEXT 49                                 TEXT                         jatayor nau mahadeve                        bhuvi visvesvare harau                       bhaktih syat parama loke                        yayanjo durgatim taret                               SYNONYMS   jatayoh--after we two have taken birth; nau--both husband and wife, Drona andDhara; mahadeve--in the Supreme Person, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;bhuvi--on the earth; visva-isvare--in the master of all the planetary systems;harau--in the Supreme Lord; bhaktih--devotional service; syat--will be spread;parama--the ultimate goal of life; loke--in the world; yaya--by which; anjah--very easily; durgatim--miserable life; taret--one can avoid and be delivered.                             TRANSLATION   Drona and Dhara said: Please permit us to be born on the planet earth so thatafter our appearance, the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, the supremecontroller and master of all planets, will also appear and spread devotionalservice, the ultimate goal of life, so that those born in this material worldmay very easily be delivered from the miserable condition of materialistic lifeby accepting this devotional service.                               PURPORT   This statement by Drona clearly indicates that Drona and Dhara are theeternal father and mother of Krsna. Whenever there is a necessity of Krsna'sappearance, Drona and Dhara appear first, and then Krsna appears. Krsna says inBhagavad-gita that His birth is not ordinary (janma karma ca me divyam).                        ajo 'pi sann avyayatma                       bhutanam isvaro 'pi san                       prakrtim svam adhisthaya                        sambhavamy atma-mayaya   "Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, andalthough I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in everymillennium in My original transcendental form." (Bg. 4.6) Before Krsna'sappearance, Drona and Dhara appear in order to become His father and mother. Itis they who appear as Nanda Maharaja and his wife, Yasoda. In other words, it isnot possible for a sadhana-siddha living being to become the father or mother ofKrsna, for Krsna's father and mother are already designated. But by followingthe principles exhibited by Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda and their associates, theinhabitants of Vrndavana, ordinary living beings may attain such affection asexhibited by Nanda and Yasoda.
   When Drona and Dhara were requested to beget children, they chose to come tothis world to have the Supreme Personality of Godhead as their son, Krsna.Krsna's appearance means paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam--the devoteesare protected, and the miscreants are vanquished. Whenever Krsna comes, Hedistributes the highest goal of life, devotional service. He appears as CaitanyaMahaprabhu for the same purpose because unless one comes to devotional service,one cannot be delivered from the miseries of the material world (duhkhalayamasasvatam), where the living beings struggle for existence. The Lord says inBhagavad-gita (15.7):                         mamaivamso jiva-loke                        jiva-bhutah sanatanah                        manah sasthanindriyani                        prakrti-sthani karsati   "The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, fragmentalparts. Because of conditioned life, they are struggling very hard with the sixsenses, which include the mind." The living entities are struggling to becomehappy, but unless they take to the bhakti cult, their happiness is not possible.Krsna clearly says:                         asraddadhanah purusa                        dharmasyasya parantapa                        aprapya mam nivartante                        mrtyu-samsara-vartmani   "Those who are not faithful on the path of devotional service cannot attainMe, O conqueror of foes, but return to birth and death in this material world."(Bg. 9.3)   Foolish persons do not know how risky life is here if one does not follow theinstructions of Krsna. The Krsna consciousness movement, therefore, has beenstarted so that by practicing Krsna consciousness one can avoid the risky lifeof this material existence. There is no question of accepting or not acceptingKrsna consciousness. It is not optional; it is compulsory. If we do not take toKrsna consciousness, our life is very risky. Everything is explained inBhagavad-gita. Therefore, to learn how to become free from the miserablecondition of material existence, Bhagavad-gita As It Is is the preliminarystudy. Then, if one understands Bhagavad-gita, one can proceed to Srimad-Bhagavatam, and if one advances further, one may study Caitanya-caritamrta. Weare therefore presenting these invaluable books to the whole world so thatpeople may study them and be happy, being delivered from miserable conditionallife.                               TEXT 50                                 TEXT                      astv ity uktah sa bhagavan                        vraje drono maha-yasah                        jajne nanda iti khyato                        yasoda sa dharabhavat                               SYNONYMS   astu--when Brahma agreed, "Yes, it is all right"; iti uktah--thus beingordered by him; sah--he (Drona); bhagavan--eternally the father of Krsna(Bhagavan's father is also Bhagavan); vraje--in Vrajabhumi, Vrndavana; dronah--Drona, the most powerful Vasu; maha-yasah--the very famous transcendentalist;
jajne--appeared; nandah--as Nanda Maharaja; iti--thus; khyatah--is celebrated;yasoda--as mother Yasoda; sa--she; dhara--the same Dhara; abhavat--appeared.                             TRANSLATION   When Brahma said, "Yes, let it be so," the most fortune Drona, who was equalto Bhagavan, appeared in Vrajapura, Vrndavana, as the most famous NandaMaharaja, and his wife, Dhara, appeared as mother Yasoda.                               PURPORT   Because whenever Krsna appears on this earth He superficially needs a fatherand mother, Drona and Dhara, His eternal father and mother, appeared on earthbefore Krsna as Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda. In contrast to Sutapa andPrsnigarbha, they did not undergo severe penances and austerities to become thefather and mother of Krsna. This is the difference between nitya-siddha andsadhana-siddha.                               TEXT 51                                 TEXT                        tato bhaktir bhagavati                        putri-bhute janardane                        dampatyor nitaram asid                         gopa-gopisu bharata                               SYNONYMS   tatah--thereafter; bhaktih bhagavati--the cult of bhakti, devotional serviceunto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; putri-bhute--in the Lord, who hadappeared as the son of mother Yasoda; janardane--in Lord Krsna; dam-patyoh--ofboth husband and wife; nitaram--continuously; asit--there was; gopa-gopisu--allthe inhabitants of Vrndavana, the gopas and the gopis, associating with NandaMaharaja and Yasoda and following in their footsteps; bharata--O MaharajaPariksit.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, O Maharaja Pariksit, best of the Bharatas, when the SupremePersonality of Godhead became the son of Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda, theymaintained continuous, unswerving devotional love in parental affection. And intheir association, all the other inhabitants of Vrndavana, the gopas and gopis,developed the culture of krsna-bhakti.                               PURPORT   Although when the Supreme Personality of Godhead stole the butter, curd andmilk of the neighboring gopas and gopis this teasing superficially seemedtroublesome, in fact it was an exchange of affection in the ecstasy ofdevotional service. The more the gopas and gopis exchanged feelings with theLord, the more their devotional service increased. Sometimes we maysuperficially see that a devotee is in difficulty because of being engaged indevotional service, but the fact is different. When a devotee suffers for Krsna,that suffering is transcendental enjoyment. Unless one becomes a devotee, thiscannot be understood. When Krsna exhibited His childhood pastimes, not only didNanda Maharaja and Yasoda increase their devotional affection, but those intheir association also increased in devotional service. In other words, persons
who follow the activities of Vrndavana will also develop devotional service inthe highest perfection.                               TEXT 52                                 TEXT                        krsno brahmana adesam                      satyam kartum vraje vibhuh                        saha-ramo vasams cakre                       tesam pritim sva-lilaya                               SYNONYMS   krsnah--the Supreme Personality, Krsna; brahmanah--of Lord Brahma; adesam--the order; satyam--truthful; kartum--to make; vraje--in Vrajabhumi, Vrndavana;vibhuh--the supreme powerful; saha-ramah--along with Balarama; vasan--residing;cakre--increased; tesam--of all the inhabitants of Vrndavana; pritim--thepleasure; sva-lilaya--by His transcendental pastimes.                             TRANSLATION   Thus the Supreme Personality, Krsna, along with Balarama, lived inVrajabhumi, Vrndavana, just to substantiate the benediction of Brahma. Byexhibiting different pastimes in His childhood, He increased the transcendentalpleasure of Nanda and the other inhabitants of Vrndavana.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Eighth Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, "Lord Krsna Shows the Universal Form Within HisMouth."                             Chapter Nine                 Mother Yasoda Binds Lord Lord Krsna   While mother Yasoda was allowing Krsna to drink her breast milk, she wasforced to stop because she saw the milk pan boiling over on the oven. Themaidservants being engaged in other business, she stopped allowing Krsna todrink from her breast and immediately attended to the overflowing milk pan.Krsna became very angry because of His mother's behavior and devised a means ofbreaking the pots of yogurt. Because He created this disturbance, mother Yasodadecided to bind Him. These incidents are described in this chapter.   One day, the maidservants being engaged in other work, mother Yasoda waschurning the yogurt into butter herself, and in the meantime Krsna came andrequested her to allow Him to suck her breast milk. Of course, mother Yasodaimmediately allowed Him to do so, but then she saw that the hot milk on the ovenwas boiling over, and therefore she immediately stopped allowing Krsna to drinkthe milk of her breast and went to stop the milk on the oven from overflowing.Krsna, however, having been interrupted in His business of sucking the breast,was very angry. He took a piece of stone, broke the churning pot and entered aroom, where He began to eat the freshly churned butter. When mother Yasoda,after attending to the overflowing milk, returned and saw the pot broken, shecould understand that this was the work of Krsna, and therefore she went tosearch for Him. When she entered the room, she saw Krsna standing on theulukhala, a large mortar for grinding spices. Having turned the mortar upsidedown, He was stealing butter hanging from a swing and was distributing thebutter to the monkeys. As soon as Krsna saw that His mother had come, Heimmediately began to run away, and mother Yasoda began to follow Him. Aftergoing some distance, mother Yasoda was able to catch Krsna, who because of Hisoffense was crying. Mother Yasoda, of course, threatened to punish Krsna if Heacted that way again, and she decided to bind Him with rope. Unfortunately, when
the time came to knot the rope, the rope with which she wanted to bind Him wasshort by a distance equal to the width of two fingers. When she made the ropelonger by adding another rope, she again saw that it was short by two fingers.Again and again she tried, and again and again she found the rope too short bytwo fingers. Thus she became very tired, and Krsna, seeing His affectionatemother so tired, allowed Himself to be bound. Now, being compassionate, He didnot show her His unlimited potency. After mother Yasoda bound Krsna and becameengaged in other household affairs, Krsna observed two yamala-arjuna trees,which were actually Nalakuvara and Manigriva, two sons of Kuvera who had beencondemned by Narada Muni to become trees. Krsna, by His mercy, now began toproceed toward the trees to fulfill the desire of Narada Muni.                              TEXTS 1-2                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                          ekada grha-dasisu                         yasoda nanda-gehini                         karmantara-niyuktasu                       nirmamantha svayam dadhi                          yani yaniha gitani                         tad-bala-caritani ca                        dadhi-nirmanthane kale                        smaranti tany agayata                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; ekada--one day; grha-dasisu--whenall the maidservants of the household were otherwise engaged; yasoda--motherYasoda; nanda-gehini--the queen of Nanda Maharaja; karma-antara--in otherhousehold affairs; niyuktasu--being engaged; nirmamantha--churned; svayam--personally; dadhi--the yogurt; yani--all such; yani--such; iha--in thisconnection; gitani--songs; tat-bala-caritani--in which the activities of her ownchild were enacted; ca--and; dadhi-nirmanthane--while churning the yogurt; kale--at that time; smaranti--remembering; tani--all of them (in the form of songs);agayata--chanted.                             TRANSLATION   Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: One day when mother Yasoda saw that all themaidservants were engaged in other household affairs, she personally began tochurn the yogurt. While churning, she remembered the childish activities ofKrsna, and in her own way she composed songs and enjoyed singing to herselfabout all those activities.                               PURPORT   Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura, quoting from the Vaisnava-tosani ofSrila Sanatana Gosvami, says that the incident of Krsna's breaking the pot ofyogurt and being bound by mother Yasoda took place on the Dipavali Day, or Dipa-malika. Even today in India, this festival is generally celebrated verygorgeously in the month of Kartika by fireworks and lights, especially inBombay. It is to be understood that among all the cows of Nanda Maharaja,several of mother Yasoda's cows ate only grasses so flavorful that the grasseswould automatically flavor the milk. Mother Yasoda wanted to collect the milkfrom these cows, make it into yogurt and churn it into butter personally, since
she thought that this child Krsna was going to the houses of neighborhood gopasand gopis to steal butter because He did not like the milk and yogurt ordinarilyprepared.   While churning the butter, mother Yasoda was singing about the childhoodactivities of Krsna. It was formerly a custom that if one wanted to remembersomething constantly, he would transform it into poetry or have this done by aprofessional poet. It appears that mother Yasoda did not want to forget Krsna'sactivities at any time. Therefore she poeticized all of Krsna's childhoodactivities, such as the killing of Putana, Aghasura, Sakatasura and Trnavarta,and while churning the butter, she sang about these activities in poetical form.This should be the practice of persons eager to remain Krsna conscious twenty-four hours a day. This incident shows how Krsna conscious mother Yasoda was. Tostay in Krsna consciousness, we should follow such persons.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT         ksaumam vasah prthu-kati-tate bibhrati sutra-naddham         putra-sneha-snuta-kuca-yugam jata-kampam ca subhruh          rajjv-akarsa-srama-bhuja-calat-kankanau kundale ca          svinnam vaktram kabara-vigalan-malati nirmamantha                               SYNONYMS   ksaumam--saffron and yellow mixed; vasah--mother Yasoda was wearing such asari; prthu-kati-tate--surrounding her large hips; bibhrati--shaking; sutra-naddham--bound with a belt; putra-sneha-snuta--because of intense love for herchild, became wet with milk; kuca-yugam--the nipples of her breasts; jata-kampamca--as they were very nicely moving and quivering; su-bhruh--who had verybeautiful eyebrows; rajju-akarsa--by pulling on the rope of the churning rod;srama--because of the labor; bhuja--on whose hands; calat-kankanau--the twobangles were moving; kundale--the two earrings; ca--also; svinnam--her hair wasblack like a cloud, so perspiration was dropping like rain; vaktram--throughouther face; kabara-vigalat-malati--and malati flowers were dropping from her hair;nirmamantha--thus mother Yasoda was churning the butter.                             TRANSLATION   Dressed in a saffron-yellow sari, with a belt tied about her full hips,mother Yasoda pulled on the churning rope, laboring considerably, her banglesand earrings moving and vibrating and her whole body shaking. Because of herintense love for her child, her breasts were wet with milk. Her face, with itsvery beautiful eyebrows, was wet with perspiration, and malati flowers werefalling from her hair.                               PURPORT   Anyone who desires to be Krsna conscious in motherly affection or parentalaffection should contemplate the bodily features of mother Yasoda. It is notthat one should desire to become like Yasoda, for this is Mayavada. Either inparental affection or conjugal love, friendship or servitorship--in any way--wemust follow in the footsteps of the inhabitants of Vrndavana, not try to becomelike them. Therefore this description is provided here. Advanced devotees mustcherish this description, always thinking of mother Yasoda's features--how shewas dressed, how she was working and perspiring, how beautifully the flowerswere arranged in her hair, and so on. One should take advantage of the full
description provided here by thinking of mother Yasoda in maternal affection forKrsna.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                        tam stanya-kama asadya                       mathnantim jananim harih                       grhitva dadhi-manthanam                       nyasedhat pritim avahan                               SYNONYMS   tam--unto mother Yasoda; stanya-kamah--Krsna, who was desiring to drink herbreast milk; asadya--appearing before her; mathnantim--while she was churningbutter; jananim--to the mother; harih--Krsna; grhitva--catching; dadhi-manthanam--the churning rod; nyasedhat--forbade; pritim avahan--creating asituation of love and affection.                             TRANSLATION   While mother Yasoda was churning butter, Lord Krsna, desiring to drink themilk of her breast, appeared before her, and in order to increase hertranscendental pleasure, He caught hold of the churning rod and began to preventher from churning.                               PURPORT   Krsna was sleeping within the room, and as soon as He got up, He becamehungry and went to His mother. Wanting to stop her from churning and drink themilk of her breasts, He stopped her from moving the churning rod.                                TEXT 5                                 TEXT                  tam ankam arudham apayayat stanam                 sneha-snutam sa-smitam iksati mukham                   atrptam utsrjya javena sa yayav                   utsicyamane payasi tv adhisrite                               SYNONYMS   tam--unto Krsna; ankam arudham--very affectionately allowing Him to sit downon her lap; apayayat--allowed to drink; stanam--her breast; sneha-snutam--whichwas flowing with milk because of intense affection; sa-smitam iksati mukham--mother Yasoda was smiling and observing the smiling face of Krsna; atrptam--Krsna, who was still not fully satisfied by drinking the milk; utsrjya--puttingHim aside; javena--very hastily; sa--mother Yasoda; yayau--left that place;utsicyamane payasi--because of seeing that the milk was overflowing; tu--but;adhisrite--in the milk pan on the oven.                             TRANSLATION   Mother Yasoda then embraced Krsna, allowed Him to sit down on her lap, andbegan to look upon the face of the Lord with great love and affection. Becauseof her intense affection, milk was flowing from her breast. But when she saw
that the milk pan on the oven was boiling over, she immediately left her son totake care of the overflowing milk, although the child was not yet fullysatisfied with drinking the milk of His mother's breast.                               PURPORT   Everything in the household affairs of mother Yasoda was meant for Krsna.Although Krsna was drinking the breast milk of mother Yasoda, when she saw thatthe milk pan in the kitchen was overflowing, she had to take care of itimmediately, and thus she left her son, who then became very angry, not havingbeen fully satisfied with drinking the milk of her breast. Sometimes one musttake care of more than one item of important business for the same purpose.Therefore mother Yasoda was not unjust when she left her son to take care of theoverflowing milk. On the platform of love and affection, it is the duty of thedevotee to do one thing first and other things later. The proper intuition bywhich to do this is given by Krsna.                        tesam satata-yuktanam                       bhajatam priti-purvakam                       dadami buddhi-yogam tam                         yena mam upayanti te   (Bg. 10.10)   In Krsna consciousness, everything is dynamic. Krsna guides the devotee inwhat to do first and what to do next on the platform of absolute truth.                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                   sanjata-kopah sphuritarunadharam                sandasya dadbhir dadhi-mantha-bhajanam                  bhittva mrsasrur drsad-asmana raho                  jaghasa haiyangavam antaram gatah                               SYNONYMS   sanjata-kopah--in this way, Krsna being very angry; sphurita-aruna-adharam--swollen reddish lips; sandasya--capturing; dadbhih--by His teeth; dadhi-mantha-bhajanam--the pot in which yogurt was being churned; bhittva--breaking; mrsa-asruh--with false tears in the eyes; drsat-asmana--with a piece of stone; rahah--in a solitary place; jaghasa--began to eat; haiyangavam--the freshly churnedbutter; antaram--within the room; gatah--having gone.                             TRANSLATION   Being very angry and biting His reddish lips with His teeth, Krsna, withfalse tears in His eyes, broke the container of yogurt with a piece of stone.Then He entered a room and began to eat the freshly churned butter in a solitaryplace.                               PURPORT   It is natural that when a child becomes angry he can begin crying with falsetears in his eyes. So Krsna did this, and biting His reddish lips with Histeeth, He broke the pot with a stone, entered a room and began to eat thefreshly churned butter.
                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT                   uttarya gopi susrtam payah punah                 pravisya samdrsya ca dadhy-amatrakam                bhagnam vilokya sva-sutasya karma taj                   jahasa tam capi na tatra pasyati                               SYNONYMS   uttarya--putting down from the oven; gopi--mother Yasoda; su-srtam--very hot;payah--the milk; punah--again; pravisya--entered the churning spot; samdrsya--byobserving; ca--also; dadhi-amatrakam--the container of yogurt; bhagnam--broken;vilokya--seeing this; sva-sutasya--of her own child; karma--work; tat--that;jahasa--smiled; tam ca--Krsna also; api--at the same time; na--not; tatra--there; pasyati--finding.                             TRANSLATION   Mother Yasoda, after taking down the hot milk from the oven, returned to thechurning spot, and when she saw that the container of yogurt was broken and thatKrsna was not present, she concluded that the breaking of the pot was the workof Krsna.                               PURPORT   Seeing the pot broken and Krsna not present, Yasoda definitely concluded thatthe breaking of the pot was the work of Krsna. There was no doubt about it.                                TEXT 8                                 TEXT                  ulukhalanghrer upari vyavasthitam                  markaya kamam dadatam sici sthitam                  haiyangavam caurya-visankiteksanam                 niriksya pascat sutam agamac chanaih                               SYNONYMS   ulukhala-anghreh--of the mortar in which spices were ground and which wasbeing kept upside down; upari--on top; vyavasthitam--Krsna was sitting; markaya--unto a monkey; kamam--according to His satisfaction; dadatam--deliveringshares; sici sthitam--situated in the butter pot hanging on the swing;haiyangavam--butter and other milk preparations; caurya-visankita--because ofstealing, were anxiously looking hither and thither; iksanam--whose eyes;niriksya--by seeing these activities; pascat--from behind; sutam--her son;agamat--she reached; sanaih--very slowly, cautiously.                             TRANSLATION   Krsna, at that time, was sitting on an upside-down wooden mortar for grindingspices and was distributing milk preparations such as yogurt and butter to themonkeys as He liked. Because of having stolen, He was looking all around withgreat anxiety, suspecting that He might be chastised by His mother. MotherYasoda, upon seeing Him, very cautiously approached Him from behind.
                               PURPORT   Mother Yasoda was able to trace Krsna by following His butter-smearedfootprints. She saw that Krsna was stealing butter, and thus she smiled.Meanwhile, the crows also entered the room and came out in fear. Thus motherYasoda found Krsna stealing butter and very anxiously looking here and there.                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT                 tam atta-yastim prasamiksya satvaras                    tato 'varuhyapasasara bhitavat                  gopy anvadhavan na yam apa yoginam                  ksamam pravestum tapaseritam manah                               SYNONYMS   tam--unto mother Yasoda; atta-yastim--carrying in her hand a stick;prasamiksya--Krsna, seeing her in that attitude; satvarah--very quickly; tatah--from there; avaruhya--getting down; apasasara--began to flee; bhita-vat--as ifvery much afraid; gopi--mother Yasoda; anvadhavat--began to follow Him; na--not;yam--unto whom; apa--failed to reach; yoginam--of great yogis, mystics; ksamam--who could reach Him; pravestum--trying to enter into the Brahman effulgence orParamatma; tapasa--with great austerities and penances; iritam--trying for thatpurpose; manah--by meditation.                             TRANSLATION   When Lord Sri Krsna saw His mother, stick in hand, He very quickly got downfrom the top of the mortar and began to flee as if very much afraid. Althoughyogis try to capture Him as Paramatma by meditation, desiring to enter into theeffulgence of the Lord with great austerities and penances, they fail to reachHim. But mother Yasoda, thinking that same Personality of Godhead, Krsna, to beher son, began following Krsna to catch Him.                               PURPORT   Yogis, mystics, want to catch Krsna as Paramatma, and with great austeritiesand penances they try to approach Him, yet they cannot. Here we see, however,that Krsna is going to be caught by Yasoda and is running away in fear. Thisillustrates the difference between the bhakta and the yogi. Yogis cannot reachKrsna, but for pure devotees like mother Yasoda, Krsna is already caught. Krsnawas even afraid of mother Yasoda's stick. This was mentioned by Queen Kunti inher prayers: bhaya-bhavanaya sthitasya (Bhag. 1.8.31). Krsna is afraid of motherYasoda, and yogis are afraid of Krsna. Yogis try to reach Krsna by jnana-yogaand other yogas, but fail. Yet although mother Yasoda was a woman, Krsna wasafraid of her, as clearly described in this verse.                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT                   anvancamana janani brhac-calac-                 chroni-bharakranta-gatih sumadhyama                   javena visramsita-kesa-bandhana-                    cyuta-prasunanugatih paramrsat
                               SYNONYMS   anvancamana--following Krsna very swiftly; janani--mother Yasoda; brhat-calat-sroni-bhara-akranta-gatih--being overburdened by the weight of her largebreasts, she became tired and had to reduce her speed; su-madhyama--because ofher thin waist; javena--because of going very fast; visramsita-kesa-bandhana--from her arrangement of hair, which had become loosened; cyuta-prasuna-anugatih--she was followed by the flowers falling after her; paramrsat--finally capturedKrsna without fail.                             TRANSLATION   While following Krsna, mother Yasoda, her thin waist overburdened by herheavy breasts, naturally had to reduce her speed. Because of following Krsnavery swiftly, her hair became loose, and the flowers in her hair were fallingafter her. Yet she did not fail to capture her son Krsna.                               PURPORT   Yogis cannot capture Krsna by severe penances and austerities, but motherYasoda, despite all obstacles, was finally able to catch Krsna withoutdifficulty. This is the difference between a yogi and a bhakta. Yogis cannotenter even the effulgence of Krsna. Yasya prabha prabhavato jagad-anda-koti-kotisu (Brahma-samhita 5.40). In that effulgence there are millions ofuniverses, but yogis and jnanis cannot enter that effulgence even after many,many years of austerities, whereas bhaktas can capture Krsna simply by love andaffection. This is the example shown here by mother Yasoda. Krsna thereforeconfirms that if one wants to capture Him, one must undertake devotionalservice.                        bhaktya mam abhijanati                      yavan yas casmi tattvatah                       tato mam tattvato jnatva                         visate tad-anantaram   (Bg. 18.55)   Bhaktas enter even the planet of Krsna very easily, but the less intelligentyogis and jnanis, by their meditation, remain running after Krsna. Even if theyenter Krsna's effulgence, they fall down.                               TEXT 11                                 TEXT                   krtagasam tam prarudantam aksini                   kasantam anjan-masini sva-panina                   udviksamanam bhaya-vihvaleksanam                  haste grhitva bhisayanty avagurat                               SYNONYMS   krta-agasam--who was an offender; tam--unto Krsna; prarudantam--with a cryingattitude; aksini--His two eyes; kasantam--rubbing; anjat-masini--from whose eyesthe blackish ointment was distributed all over His face with tears; sva-panina--with His own hand; udviksamanam--who was seen in that attitude by mother Yasoda;bhaya-vihvala-iksanam--whose eyes appeared distressed because of such fear of
His mother; haste--by the hand; grhitva--catching; bhisayanti--mother Yasoda wasthreatening Him; avagurat--and thus she very mildly chastised Him.                             TRANSLATION   When caught by mother Yasoda, Krsna became more and more afraid and admittedto being an offender. As she looked upon Him, she saw that He was crying, Histears mixing with the black ointment around His eyes, and as He rubbed His eyeswith His hands, He smeared the ointment all over His face. Mother Yasoda,catching her beautiful son by the hand, mildly began to chastise Him.                               PURPORT   From these dealings between mother Yasoda and Krsna, we can understand theexalted position of a pure devotee in loving service to the Lord. Yogis, jnanis,karmis and Vedantists cannot even approach Krsna; they must remain very, veryfar away from Him and try to enter His bodily effulgence, although this alsothey are unable to do. Great demigods like Lord Brahma and Lord Siva alwaysworship the Lord by meditation and by service. Even the most powerful Yamarajafears Krsna. Therefore, as we find in the history of Ajamila, Yamarajainstructed his followers not even to approach the devotees, what to speak ofcapturing them. In other words, Yamaraja also fears Krsna and Krsna's devotees.Yet this Krsna became so dependent on mother Yasoda that when she simply showedKrsna the stick in her hand, Krsna admitted to being an offender and began tocry like an ordinary child. Mother Yasoda, of course, did not want to chastiseher beloved child very much, and therefore she immediately threw her stick awayand simply rebuked Krsna, saying, "Now I shall bind You so that You cannotcommit any further offensive activities. Nor for the time being can You playwith Your playmates." This shows the position of a pure devotee, in contrastwith others, like jnanis, yogis and the followers of Vedic ritualisticceremonies, in regarding the transcendental nature of the Absolute Truth.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                     tyaktva yastim sutam bhitam                        vijnayarbhaka-vatsala                        iyesa kila tam baddhum                        damnatad-virya-kovida                               SYNONYMS   tyaktva--throwing away; yastim--the stick in her hand; sutam--her son;bhitam--considering her son's great fear; vijnaya--understanding; arbhaka-vatsala--the most affectionate mother of Krsna; iyesa--desired; kila--indeed;tam--Krsna; baddhum--to bind; damna--with a rope; a-tat-virya-kovida--withoutknowledge of the supremely powerful Personality of Godhead (because of intenselove for Krsna).                             TRANSLATION   Mother Yasoda was always overwhelmed by intense love for Krsna, not knowingwho Krsna was or how powerful He was. Because of maternal affection for Krsna,she never even cared to know who He was. Therefore, when she saw that her sonhad become excessively afraid, she threw the stick away and desired to bind Himso that He would not commit any further naughty activities.
                               PURPORT   Mother Yasoda wanted to bind Krsna not in order to chastise Him but becauseshe thought that the child was so restless that He might leave the house infear. That would be another disturbance. Therefore, because of full affection,to stop Krsna from leaving the house, she wanted to bind Him with rope. MotherYasoda wanted to impress upon Krsna that since He was afraid merely to see herstick, He should not perform such disturbing activities as breaking thecontainer of yogurt and butter and distributing its contents to the monkeys.Mother Yasoda did not care to understand who Krsna was and how His power spreadseverywhere. This is an example of pure love for Krsna.“Srimad-Bhagavatam – Canto Ten” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada.Summary: Srimad-Bhagavatam is compared to the ripened fruit of Vedic knowledge.Also known as the Bhagavata Purana, this multi-volume work elaborates on thepastimes of Lord Krishna and His devotees, and includes detailed descriptionsof, among other phenomena, the process of creation and annihilation of theuniverse. His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada considered thetranslation of the Bhagavatam his life’s work.COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of thisbook, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines established byinternational copyright laws. You may use this electronic file to evaluate theprinted version of this book, for your own private use, or for short excerptsused in academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the like.You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more than tenpercent (10%) of this book in any media without the express written permissionfrom the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Srimad-Bhagavatam” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book TrustInternational, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluatedozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,www.Krishna.com.                             TEXTS 13-14                                 TEXT                       na cantar na bahir yasya                        na purvam napi caparam                       purvaparam bahis cantar                        jagato yo jagac ca yah                       tam matvatmajam avyaktam                       martya-lingam adhoksajam                         gopikolukhale damna                       babandha prakrtam yatha                               SYNONYMS
   na--not; ca--also; antah--interior; na--nor; bahih--exterior; yasya--whose;na--neither; purvam--beginning; na--nor; api--indeed; ca--also; aparam--end;purva-aparam--the beginning and the end; bahih ca antah--the external and theinternal; jagatah--of the whole cosmic manifestation; yah--one who is; jagat cayah--and who is everything in creation in total; tam--Him; matva--considering;atmajam--her own son; avyaktam--the unmanifested; martya-lingam--appearing as ahuman being; adhoksajam--beyond sense perception; gopika--mother Yasoda;ulukhale--to the grinding mortar; damna--by a rope; babandha--bound; prakrtamyatha--as done to a common human child.                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no beginning and no end, no exteriorand no interior, no front and no rear. In other words, He is all-pervading.Because He is not under the influence of the element of time, for Him there isno difference between past, present and future; He exists in His owntranscendental form at all times. Being absolute, beyond relativity, He is freefrom distinctions between cause and effect, although He is the cause and effectof everything. That unmanifested person, who is beyond the perception of thesenses, had now appeared as a human child, and mother Yasoda, considering Himher own ordinary child, bound Him to the wooden mortar with a rope.                               PURPORT   In Bhagavad-gita (10.12), Krsna is described as the Supreme Brahman (parambrahma param dhama). The word brahma means "the greatest." Krsna is greater thanthe greatest, being unlimited and all-pervading. How can it be possible for theall-pervading to be measured or bound? Then again, Krsna is the time factor.Therefore, He is all-pervading not only in space but also in time. We havemeasurements of time, but although we are limited by past, present and future,for Krsna these do not exist. Every individual person can be measured, but Krsnahas already shown that although He also is an individual, the entire cosmicmanifestation is within His mouth. All these points considered, Krsna cannot bemeasured. How then did Yasoda want to measure Him and bind Him? We must concludethat this took place simply on the platform of pure transcendental love. Thiswas the only cause.                 advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam                adyam purana-purusam nava-yauvanam ca               vedesu durlabham adurlabham atma-bhaktau                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   (Brahma-samhita 5.33)   Everything is one because Krsna is the supreme cause of everything. Krsnacannot be measured or calculated by Vedic knowledge (vedesu durlabham). He isavailable only to devotees (adurlabham atma-bhaktau). Devotees can handle Himbecause they act on the basis of loving service (bhaktya mam abhijanati yavanyas casmi tattvatah). Thus mother Yasoda wanted to bind Him.                               TEXT 15                                 TEXT                        tad dama badhyamanasya                        svarbhakasya krtagasah                       dvy-angulonam abhut tena
                       sandadhe 'nyac ca gopika                               SYNONYMS   tat dama--that binding rope; badhyamanasya--who was being bound by motherYasoda; sva-arbhakasya--of her own son; krta-agasah--who was an offender; dvi-angula--by a measurement of two fingers; unam--short; abhut--became; tena--withthat rope; sandadhe--joined; anyat ca--another rope; gopika--mother Yasoda.                             TRANSLATION   When mother Yasoda was trying to bind the offending child, she saw that thebinding rope was short by a distance the width of two fingers. Thus she broughtanother rope to join to it.                               PURPORT   Here is the first chapter in Krsna's exhibition of unlimited potency tomother Yasoda when she tried to bind Him: the rope was too short. The Lord hadalready shown His unlimited potency by killing Putana, Sakatasura and Trnavarta.Now Krsna exhibited another vibhuti, or display of potency, to mother Yasoda."Unless I agree," Krsna desired to show, "you cannot bind Me." Thus althoughmother Yasoda, in her attempt to bind Krsna, added one rope after another,ultimately she was a failure. When Krsna agreed, however, she was successful. Inother words, one must be in transcendental love with Krsna, but that does notmean that one can control Krsna. When Krsna is satisfied with one's devotionalservice, He does everything Himself. Sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam eva sphuratyadah. He reveals more and more to the devotee as the devotee advances inservice. Jihvadau: this service begins with the tongue, with chanting and withtaking the prasada of Krsna.                        atah sri-krsna-namadi                     na bhaved grahyam indriyaih                        sevonmukhe hi jihvadau                       svayam eva sphuraty adah   (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.234)                               TEXT 16                                 TEXT                        yadasit tad api nyunam                        tenanyad api sandadhe                      tad api dvy-angulam nyunam                       yad yad adatta bandhanam                               SYNONYMS   yada--when; asit--became; tat api--even the new rope that had been joined;nyunam--still short; tena--then, with the second rope; anyat api--another ropealso; sandadhe--she joined; tat api--that also; dvi-angulam--by a measurement oftwo fingers; nyunam--remained short; yat yat adatta--in this way, one afteranother, whatever ropes she joined; bandhanam--for binding Krsna.                             TRANSLATION
   This new rope also was short by a measurement of two fingers, and whenanother rope was joined to it, it was still two fingers too short. As many ropesas she joined, all of them failed; their shortness could not be overcome.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                         evam sva-geha-damani                        yasoda sandadhaty api                        gopinam susmayantinam                        smayanti vismitabhavat                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this manner; sva-geha-damani--all the ropes available in thehousehold; yasoda--mother Yasoda; sandadhati api--although she was joining oneafter another; gopinam--when all the other elderly gopi friends of motherYasoda; su-smayantinam--were all taking pleasure in this funny affair; smayanti--mother Yasoda was also smiling; vismita abhavat--all of them were struck withwonder.                             TRANSLATION   Thus mother Yasoda joined whatever ropes were available in the household, butstill she failed in her attempt to bind Krsna. Mother Yasoda's friends, theelderly gopis in the neighborhood, were smiling and enjoying the fun. Similarly,mother Yasoda, although laboring in that way, was also smiling. All of them werestruck with wonder.                               PURPORT   Actually this incident was wonderful because Krsna was only a child withsmall hands. To bind Him should have required only a rope not more than two feetlong. All the ropes in the house combined together might have been hundreds offeet long, but still He was impossible to bind, for all the ropes together werestill too short. Naturally mother Yasoda and her gopi friends thought, "How isthis possible?" Seeing this funny affair, all of them were smiling. The firstrope was short by a measurement the width of two fingers, and after the secondrope was added, it was still two fingers too short. If the shortness of all theropes were added together, it must have amounted to the width of hundreds offingers. Certainly this was astonishing. This was another exhibition of Krsna'sinconceivable potency to His mother and His mother's friends.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                       sva-matuh svinna-gatraya                        visrasta-kabara-srajah                       drstva parisramam krsnah                        krpayasit sva-bandhane                               SYNONYMS   sva-matuh--of His own mother (Krsna's mother, Yasodadevi); svinna-gatrayah--when Krsna saw His mother perspiring all over because of unnecessary labor;visrasta--were falling down; kabara--from her hair; srajah--of whom the flowers;
drstva--by seeing the condition of His mother; parisramam--He could understandthat she was now overworked and feeling fatigued; krsnah--the SupremePersonality of Godhead; krpaya--by His causeless mercy upon His devotee andmother; asit--agreed; sva-bandhane--in binding Him.                             TRANSLATION   Because of mother Yasoda's hard labor, her whole body became covered withperspiration, and the flowers and comb were falling from her hair. When childKrsna saw His mother thus fatigued, He became merciful to her and agreed to bebound.                               PURPORT   When mother Yasoda and the other ladies finally saw that Krsna, althoughdecorated with many bangles and other jeweled ornaments, could not be bound withall the ropes available in the house, they decided that Krsna was so fortunatethat He could not be bound by any material condition. Thus they gave up the ideaof binding Him. But in competition between Krsna and His devotee, Krsnasometimes agrees to be defeated. Thus Krsna's internal energy, yogamaya, wasbrought to work, and Krsna agreed to be bound by mother Yasoda.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                       evam sandarsita hy anga                        harina bhrtya-vasyata                         sva-vasenapi krsnena                        yasyedam sesvaram vase                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this manner; sandarsita--was exhibited; hi--indeed; anga--O MaharajaPariksit; harina--by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhrtya-vasyata--Histranscendental quality of becoming subordinate to His servitor or devotee; sva-vasena--who is within the control only of His own self; api--indeed; krsnena--byKrsna; yasya--of whom; idam--the whole universe; sa-isvaram--with the powerfuldemigods like Lord Siva and Lord Brahma; vase--under the control.                             TRANSLATION   O Maharaja Pariksit, this entire universe, with its great, exalted demigodslike Lord Siva, Lord Brahma and Lord Indra, is under the control of the SupremePersonality of Godhead. Yet the Supreme Lord has one transcendental attribute:He comes under the control of His devotees. This was now exhibited by Krsna inthis pastime.                               PURPORT   This pastime of Krsna's is very difficult to understand, but devotees canunderstand it. It is therefore said, darsayams tad-vidam loka atmano bhakta-vasyatam (Bhag. 10.11.9): the Lord displays the transcendental attribute ofcoming under the control of His devotees. As stated in the Brahma-samhita(5.35):               eko 'py asau racayitum jagad-anda-kotim              yac-chaktir asti jagad-anda-caya yad-antah
               andantara-stha-paramanu-cayantara-stham                govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami   By His one plenary portion as Paramatma, the Lord controls innumerableuniverses, with all their demigods; yet He agrees to be controlled by a devotee.In the Upanisads it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead can run withmore speed than the mind, but here we see that although Krsna wanted to avoidbeing arrested by His mother, He was finally defeated, and mother Yasodacaptured Him. Laksmi-sahasra-sata-sambhrama-sevyamanam: Krsna is served byhundreds and thousands of goddesses of fortune. Nonetheless, He steals butterlike one who is poverty-stricken. Yamaraja, the controller of all livingentities, fears the order of Krsna, yet Krsna is afraid of His mother's stick.These contradictions cannot be understood by one who is not a devotee, but adevotee can understand how powerful is unalloyed devotional service to Krsna; itis so powerful that Krsna can be controlled by an unalloyed devotee. Thisbhrtya-vasyata does not mean that He is under the control of the servant;rather, He is under the control of the servant's pure love. In Bhagavad-gita(1.21) it is said that Krsna became the chariot driver of Arjuna. Arjuna orderedHim, senayor ubhayor madhye ratham sthapaya me 'cyuta: "My dear Krsna, You haveagreed to be my charioteer and to execute my orders. Place my chariot betweenthe two armies of soldiers." Krsna immediately executed this order, andtherefore one may argue that Krsna also is not independent. But this is one'sajnana, ignorance. Krsna is always fully independent; when He becomessubordinate to His devotees, this is a display of ananda-cinmaya-rasa, the humorof transcendental qualities that increases His transcendental pleasure. Everyoneworships Krsna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore He sometimesdesires to be controlled by someone else. Such a controller can be no one elsebut a pure devotee.                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                        nemam virinco na bhavo                      na srir apy anga-samsraya                        prasadam lebhire gopi                       yat tat prapa vimuktidat                               SYNONYMS   na--not; imam--this exalted position; virincah--Lord Brahma; na--nor; bhavah--Lord Siva; na--nor; srih--the goddess of fortune; api--indeed; anga-samsraya--although she is always the better half of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;prasadam--mercy; lebhire--obtained; gopi--mother Yasoda; yat tat--as that which;prapa--obtained; vimukti-dat--from Krsna, who gives deliverance from thismaterial world.                             TRANSLATION   Neither Lord Brahma, nor Lord Siva, nor even the goddess of fortune, who isalways the better half of the Supreme Lord, can obtain from the SupremePersonality of Godhead, the deliverer from this material world, such mercy asreceived by mother Yasoda.                               PURPORT   This is a comparative study between mother Yasoda and other devotees of theLord. As stated in Caitanya caritamrta (Adi 5.142), ekale isvara krsna, ara saba
bhrtya: the only supreme master is Krsna, and all others are His servants. Krsnahas the transcendental quality of bhrtya-vasyata, becoming subordinate to Hisbhrtya, or servant. Now, although everyone is bhrtya and although Krsna has thequality of becoming subordinate to His bhrtya, the position of mother Yasoda isthe greatest. Lord Brahma is bhrtya, a servant of Krsna, and he is adi-kavi, theoriginal creator of this universe (tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye). Nonetheless,even he could not obtain such mercy as mother Yasoda. As for Lord Siva, he isthe topmost Vaisnava (vaisnavanam yatha sambhuh). What to speak of Lord Brahmaand Lord Siva, the goddess of fortune, Laksmi, is the Lord's constant companionin service, since she always associates with His body. But even she could notget such mercy. Therefore Maharaja Pariksit was surprised, thinking, "What didmother Yasoda and Nanda Maharaja do in their previous lives by which they gotsuch a great opportunity, the opportunity to be the affectionate father andmother of Krsna?"   In this verse there are three negative pronouncements--na, na, na. Whenanything is uttered three times--"do it, do it, do it"--one should understandthat this is meant to indicate great stress on a fact. In this verse, we find nalebhire, na lebhire, na lebhire. Yet mother Yasoda is in the supermost exaltedposition, and thus Krsna has become completely subordinate to her.   The word vimuktidat is also significant. There are different types ofliberation, such as sayujya, salokya, sarupya, sarsti and samipya, but vimuktimeans "special mukti." When after liberation one is situated on the platform ofprema-bhakti, one is said to have achieved vimukti, "special mukti." Thereforethe word na is mentioned. That exalted platform of prema is described by SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu as prema pum-artho mahan, and mother Yasoda naturally actsin such an exalted position in loving affairs. She is therefore a nitya-siddhadevotee, an expansion of Krsna's hladini potency, His potency to enjoytranscendental bliss through expansions who are special devotees (ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhih). Such devotees are not sadhana-siddha.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                        nayam sukhapo bhagavan                         dehinam gopika-sutah                       jnaninam catma-bhutanam                        yatha bhaktimatam iha                               SYNONYMS   na--not; ayam--this; sukha-apah--very easily obtainable, or an object ofhappiness; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dehinam--of persons inthe bodily concept of life, especially the karmis; gopika-sutah--Krsna, the sonof mother Yasoda (Krsna as the son of Vasudeva is called Vasudeva, and as theson of mother Yasoda He is known as Krsna); jnaninam ca--and of the jnanis, whotry to be free from material contamination; atma-bhutanam--of self-sufficientyogis; yatha--as; bhakti-matam--of the devotees; iha--in this world.                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, the son of mother Yasoda, isaccessible to devotees engaged in spontaneous loving service, but He is not aseasily accessible to mental speculators, to those striving for self-realizationby severe austerities and penances, or to those who consider the body the sameas the self.                               PURPORT
   Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the son of mother Yasoda, isvery easily available to devotees, but not to tapasvis, yogis, jnanis and otherswho have a bodily concept of life. Although they may sometimes be called santa-bhaktas, real bhakti begins with dasya-rasa. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita (4.11):                       ye yatha mam prapadyante                      tams tathaiva bhajamy aham                        mama vartmanuvartante                       manusyah partha sarvasah   "As living entities surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly. Everyonefollows My path in all respects, O son of Prtha." Everyone is seeking Krsna, forHe is the Supersoul of all individual souls. Everyone loves his body and wantsto protect it because he is within the body as the soul, and everyone loves thesoul because the soul is part and parcel of the Supersoul. Therefore, everyoneis actually seeking to achieve happiness by reviving his relationship with theSupersoul. As the Lord says in Bhagavad-gita (15.15), vedais ca sarvair aham evavedyah: "By all the Vedas, it is I who am to be known." Therefore, the karmis,jnanis, yogis and saintly persons are all seeking Krsna. But by following in thefootsteps of devotees who are in a direct relationship with Krsna, especiallythe inhabitants of Vrndavana, one can reach the supreme position of associatingwith Krsna. As it is said, vrndavanam parityajya padam ekam na gacchati: Krsnadoes not leave Vrndavana even for a moment. The vrndavana-vasis--mother Yasoda,Krsna's friends and Krsna's conjugal lovers, the younger gopis with whom Hedances--have very intimate relationships with Krsna, and if one follows in thefootsteps of these devotees, Krsna is available. Although the nitya-siddhaexpansions of Krsna always remain with Krsna, if those engaged in sadhana-siddhifollow in the footsteps of Krsna's nitya-siddha associates, such sadhana-siddhasalso can easily attain Krsna without difficulty. But there are those who areattached to bodily concepts of life. Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, for example,have very prestigious positions, and thus they have the sense of being veryexalted isvaras. In other words, because Lord Brahma and Lord Siva are guna-avataras and have exalted positions, they have some small sense of being likeKrsna. But the pure devotees who inhabit Vrndavana do not possess any bodilyconception. They are fully dedicated to the service of the Lord in sublimeaffection, prema. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has therefore recommended, prema pum-artho mahan: the highest perfection of life is prema, pure love in relationshipwith Krsna. And mother Yasoda appears to be the topmost of devotees who haveattained this perfection.                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT                        krsnas tu grha-krtyesu                       vyagrayam matari prabhuh                       adraksid arjunau purvam                        guhyakau dhanadatmajau                               SYNONYMS   krsnah tu--in the meantime; grha-krtyesu--in engagement in household affairs;vyagrayam--very busy; matari--when His mother; prabhuh--the Lord; adraksit--observed; arjunau--the twin arjuna trees; purvam--before Him; guhyakau--which ina former millennium had been demigods; dhanada-atmajau--the sons of Kuvera, thetreasurer of the demigods.
                             TRANSLATION   While mother Yasoda was very busy with household affairs, the Supreme Lord,Krsna, observed twin trees known as yamala-arjuna, which in a former millenniumhad been the demigod sons of Kuvera.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                          pura narada-sapena                       vrksatam prapitau madat                        nalakuvara-manigrivav                       iti khyatau sriyanvitau                               SYNONYMS   pura--formerly; narada-sapena--being cursed by Narada Muni; vrksatam--theforms of trees; prapitau--obtained; madat--because of madness; nalakuvara--oneof them was Nalakuvara; manigrivau--the other was Manigriva; iti--thus; khyatau--well known; sriya anvitau--very opulent.                             TRANSLATION   In their former birth, these two sons, known as Nalakuvara and Manigriva,were extremely opulent and fortunate. But because of pride and false prestige,they did not care about anyone, and thus Narada Muni cursed them to becometrees.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Ninth Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "Mother Yasoda Binds Lord Krsna."                             Chapter Ten                Deliverance of the Yamala-arjuna Trees   This chapter describes how Krsna broke the twin arjuna trees, from whichNalakuvara and Manigriva, the sons of Kuvera, then came out.   Nalakuvara and Manigriva were great devotees of Lord Siva, but because ofmaterial opulence they became so extravagant and senseless that one day theywere enjoying with naked girls in a lake and shamelessly walking here and there.Suddenly Narada Muni passed by, but they were so maddened by their wealth andfalse prestige that even though they saw Narada Muni present, they remainednaked and were not even ashamed. In other words, because of opulence and falseprestige, they lost their sense of common decency. Of course, it is the natureof the material qualities that when one becomes very much opulent in terms ofwealth and a prestigious position, one loses one's sense of etiquette and doesnot care about anyone, even a sage like Narada Muni. For such bewildered persons(ahankara-vimudhatma), who especially deride devotees, the proper punishment isto be again stricken with poverty. The Vedic rules and regulations prescribe howto control the false sense of prestige by the practice of yama, niyama and so on(tapasa brahmacaryena samena ca damena ca). A poor man can be convinced veryeasily that the prestige of an opulent position in this material world istemporary, but a rich man cannot. Therefore Narada Muni set an example bycursing these two persons, Nalakuvara and Manigriva, to become dull andunconscious like trees. This was a fit punishment. But because Krsna is alwaysmerciful, even though they were punished they were fortunate enough to see theSupreme Personality of Godhead face to face. Therefore the punishment given byVaisnavas is not at all punishment; rather, it is another kind of mercy. By thecurse of the devarsi, Nalakuvara and Manigriva became twin arjuna trees andremained in the courtyard of mother Yasoda and Nanda Maharaja, waiting for the
opportunity to see Krsna directly. Lord Krsna, by the desire of His devotee,uprooted these yamala-arjuna trees, and when Nalakuvara and Manigriva were thusdelivered by Krsna after one hundred years of the devas, their old consciousnessrevived, and they offered Krsna prayers suitable to be offered by demigods.Having thus gotten the opportunity to see Krsna face to face, they understoodhow merciful Narada Muni was, and therefore they expressed their indebtedness tohim and thanked him. Then, after circumambulating the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna, they departed for their respective abodes.                                TEXT 1                                 TEXT                             sri-rajovaca                       kathyatam bhagavann etat                        tayoh sapasya karanam                       yat tad vigarhitam karma                        yena va devarses tamah                               SYNONYMS   sri-raja uvaca--the King further inquired; kathyatam--please describe;bhagavan--O supremely powerful one; etat--this; tayoh--of both of them; sapasya--of cursing; karanam--the cause; yat--which; tat--that; vigarhitam--abominable;karma--act; yena--by which; va--either; devarseh tamah--the great sage Naradabecame so angry.                             TRANSLATION   King Pariksit inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami: O great and powerful saint,what was the cause of Nalakuvara's and Manigriva's having been cursed by NaradaMuni? What did they do that was so abominable that even Narada, the great sage,became angry at them? Kindly describe this to me.                              TEXTS 2-3                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        rudrasyanucarau bhutva                        sudrptau dhanadatmajau                         kailasopavane ramye                        mandakinyam madotkatau                        varunim madiram pitva                         madaghurnita-locanau                       stri-janair anugayadbhis                         ceratuh puspite vane                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami replied; rudrasya--of Lord Siva;anucarau--two great devotees or associates; bhutva--being elevated to that post;su-drptau--being proud of that position and their beautiful bodily features;dhanada-atmajau--the two sons of Kuvera, treasurer of the demigods; kailasa-upavane--in a small garden attached to Kailasa Parvata, the residence of LordSiva; ramye--in a very beautiful place; mandakinyam--on the River Mandakini;mada-utkatau--terribly proud and mad; varunim--a kind of liquor named Varuni;
madiram--intoxication; pitva--drinking; mada-aghurnita-locanau--their eyesrolling with intoxication; stri-janaih--with women; anugayadbhih--vibratingsongs sung by them; ceratuh--wandered; puspite vane--in a nice flower garden.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: O King Pariksit, because the two sons of Kuvera hadbeen elevated to the association of Lord Siva, of which they were very muchproud, they were allowed to wander in a garden attached to Kailasa Hill, on thebank of the Mandakini River. Taking advantage of this, they used to drink a kindof liquor called Varuni. Accompanied by women singing after them, they wouldwander in that garden of flowers, their eyes always rolling in intoxication.                               PURPORT   This verse mentions some of the material advantages afforded to personsassociated with or devoted to Lord Siva. Apart from Lord Siva, if one is adevotee of any other demigod, one receives some material advantages. Foolishpeople, therefore, become devotees of demigods. This has been pointed out andcriticized by Lord Krsna in Bhagavad-gita (7.20): kamais tais tair hrta jnanahprapadyante 'nya-devatah. Those who are not devotees of Krsna have a taste forwomen, wine and so forth, and therefore they have been described as hrta jnana,bereft of sense. The Krsna consciousness movement can very easily point out suchfoolish persons, for they have been indicated in Bhagavad-gita (7.15), whereLord Krsna says:                       na mam duskrtino mudhah                        prapadyante naradhamah                          mayayapahrta-jnana                        asuram bhavam asritah   "Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind, whoseknowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the atheistic nature ofdemons, do not surrender unto Me." Anyone who is not a devotee of Krsna and doesnot surrender to Krsna must be considered naradhama, the lowest of men, andduskrti, one who always commits sinful activities. Thus there is no difficultyin finding out who is a third-class or fourth-class man, for one's position canbe understood simply by this crucial test: is he or is he not a devotee ofKrsna?   Why are devotees of the demigods greater in number than the Vaisnavas? Theanswer is given herein. Vaisnavas are not interested in such fourth-classpleasures as wine and women, nor does Krsna allow them such facilities.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                       antah pravisya gangayam                         ambhoja-vana-rajini                        cikridatur yuvatibhir                         gajav iva karenubhih                               SYNONYMS   antah--within; pravisya--entering; gangayam--the Ganges, known as Mandakini;ambhoja--of lotus flowers; vana-rajini--where there was a congested forest;cikridatuh--the two of them used to enjoy; yuvatibhih--in the company of younggirls; gajau--two elephants; iva--just like; karenubhih--with female elephants.
                             TRANSLATION   Within the waters of the Mandakini Ganges, which were crowded with gardens oflotus flowers, the two sons of Kuvera would enjoy young girls, just like twomale elephants enjoying in the water with female elephants.                               PURPORT   People generally go to the Ganges to be purified of the effects of sinfullife, but here is an example of how foolish persons enter the Ganges to becomeinvolved in sinful life. It is not that everyone becomes purified by enteringthe Ganges. Everything, spiritual and material, depends on one's mentalcondition.                                TEXT 5                                 TEXT                        yadrcchaya ca devarsir                       bhagavams tatra kaurava                         apasyan narado devau                        ksibanau samabudhyata                               SYNONYMS   yadrcchaya--by chance, while wandering all over the universe; ca--and; deva-rsih--the supreme saintly person among the demigods; bhagavan--the mostpowerful; tatra--there (where the two sons of Kuvera were enjoying life);kaurava--O Maharaja Pariksit; apasyat--when he saw; naradah--the great saint;devau--the two boys of the demigods; ksibanau--with eyes maddened byintoxication; samabudhyata--he could understand (their position).                             TRANSLATION   O Maharaja Pariksit, by some auspicious opportunity for the two boys, thegreat saint Devarsi Narada once appeared there by chance. Seeing themintoxicated, with rolling eyes, he could understand their situation.                               PURPORT   It is said:          'sadhu-sanga,' 'sadhu-sanga'----sarva-sastre kaya               lava-matra sadhu-sange sarva-siddhi haya   (Cc. Madhya 22.54)   Wherever Narada Muni goes, any moment at which he appears is understood to beextremely auspicious. It is also said:                brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva               guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija   "According to their karma, all living entities are wandering throughout theentire universe. Some of them are being elevated to the upper planetary systems,and some are going down into the lower planetary systems. Out of many millionsof wandering living entities, one who is very fortunate gets an opportunity to
associate with a bona fide spiritual master by the grace of Krsna. By the mercyof both Krsna and the spiritual master, such a person receives the seed of thecreeper of devotional service." (Cc. Madhya 19.151) Narada appeared in thegarden to give the two sons of Kuvera the seed of devotional service, eventhough they were intoxicated. Saintly persons know how to bestow mercy upon thefallen souls.                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                       tam drstva vridita devyo                       vivastrah sapa-sankitah                      vasamsi paryadhuh sighram                       vivastrau naiva guhyakau                               SYNONYMS   tam--Narada Muni; drstva--seeing; vriditah--being ashamed; devyah--the younggirls of the demigods; vivastrah--although they were naked; sapa-sankitah--beingafraid of being cursed; vasamsi--garments; paryadhuh--covered the body; sighram--very swiftly; vivastrau--who were also naked; na--not; eva--indeed; guhyakau--the two sons of Kuvera.                             TRANSLATION   Upon seeing Narada, the naked young girls of the demigods were very muchashamed. Afraid of being cursed, they covered their bodies with their garments.But the two sons of Kuvera did not do so; instead, not caring about Narada, theyremained naked.                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT                       tau drstva madira-mattau                       sri-madandhau suratmajau                         tayor anugraharthaya                       sapam dasyann idam jagau                               SYNONYMS   tau--the two boys of the demigods; drstva--seeing; madira-mattau--veryintoxicated because of drinking liquor; sri-mada-andhau--being blind with falseprestige and opulence; sura-atmajau--the two sons of the demigods; tayoh--untothem; anugraha-arthaya--for the purpose of giving special mercy; sapam--a curse;dasyan--desiring to offer them; idam--this; jagau--uttered.                             TRANSLATION   Seeing the two sons of the demigods naked and intoxicated by opulence andfalse prestige, Devarsi Narada, in order to show them special mercy, desired togive them a special curse. Thus he spoke as follows.                               PURPORT   Although in the beginning Narada Muni appeared very angry and cursed them, atthe end the two demigods Nalakuvara and Manigriva were able to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Krsna, face to face. Thus the curse was ultimatelyauspicious and brilliant. One has to judge what kind of curse Narada placed uponthem. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura gives herein a good example. When afather finds his child deeply asleep but the child has to take some medicine tocure some disease, the father pinches the child so that the child will get upand take the medicine. In a similar way, Narada Muni cursed Nalakuvara andManigriva in order to cure their disease of material blindness.                                TEXT 8                                 TEXT                           sri-narada uvaca                       na hy anyo jusato josyan                      buddhi-bhramso rajo-gunah                        sri-madad abhijatyadir                       yatra stri dyutam asavah                               SYNONYMS   sri-naradah uvaca--Narada Muni said; na--there is not; hi--indeed; anyah--another material enjoyment; jusatah--of one who is enjoying; josyan--things veryattractive in the material world (different varieties of eating, sleeping,mating and defense); buddhi-bhramsah--such enjoyments attract the intelligence;rajah-gunah--being controlled by the mode of passion; sri-madat--than riches;abhijatya-adih--among the four material principles (attractive personal bodilyfeatures, birth in an aristocratic family, being very learned, and being veryrich); yatra--wherein; stri--women; dyutam--gambling; asavah--wine (wine, womenand gambling are very prominent).                             TRANSLATION   Narada Muni said: Among all the attractions of material enjoyment, theattraction of riches bewilders one's intelligence more than having beautifulbodily features, taking birth in an aristocratic family, and being learned. Whenone is uneducated but falsely puffed up by wealth, the result is that oneengages his wealth in enjoying wine, women and gambling.                               PURPORT   Among the three modes of material nature--goodness, passion and ignorance--people are certainly conducted by the lower qualities, namely passion andignorance, and especially by passion. Conducted by the mode of passion, onebecomes more and more involved in material existence. Therefore human life ismeant for subduing the modes of passion and ignorance and advancing in the modeof goodness.                        tada rajas-tamo-bhavah                        kama-lobhadayas ca ye                        ceta etair anaviddham                       sthitam sattve prasidati   (Bhag. 1.2.19)   This is culture: one must subdue the modes of passion and ignorance. In themode of passion, when one is falsely proud of wealth, one engages his wealthonly for three things, namely wine, women and gambling. We can actually see,especially in this age, that those who have unnecessary riches simply try to
enjoy these three things. In Western civilization, these three things are veryprominent because of an unnecessary increase of wealth. Narada Muni consideredall this in the case of Manigriva and Nalakuvara because he found in them somuch pride in the wealth of their father, Kuvera.                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT                        hanyante pasavo yatra                        nirdayair ajitatmabhih                        manyamanair imam deham                         ajaramrtyu nasvaram                               SYNONYMS   hanyante--are killed in many ways (especially by slaughterhouses); pasavah--four-legged animals (horses, sheep, cows, hogs, etc.); yatra--wherein;nirdayaih--by those merciless persons who are conducted by the mode of passion;ajita-atmabhih--rascals who are unable to control the senses; manyamanaih--arethinking; imam--this; deham--body; ajara--will never become old or diseased;amrtyu--death will never come; nasvaram--although the body is destined to beannihilated.                             TRANSLATION   Unable to control their senses, rascals who are falsely proud of their richesor their birth in aristocratic families are so cruel that to maintain theirperishable bodies, which they think will never grow old or die, they kill pooranimals without mercy. Sometimes they kill animals merely to enjoy an excursion.                               PURPORT   When the modes of passion and ignorance increase in human society, givingrise to unnecessary economic development, the result is that people becomeinvolved with wine, women and gambling. Then, being mad, they maintain bigslaughterhouses or occasionally go on pleasure excursions to kill animals.Forgetting that however one may try to maintain the body, the body is subject tobirth, death, old age and disease, such foolish rascals engage in sinfulactivities, one after another. Being duskrtis, they completely forget theexistence of the supreme controller, who is sitting within the core ofeveryone's heart (isvarah sarva-bhutanam hrd-dese 'rjuna tisthati). That supremecontroller is observing every bit of one's activity, and He rewards or punisheseveryone by giving one a suitable body made by material nature (bhramayan sarva-bhutani yantrarudhani mayaya). In this way, sinful persons automatically receivepunishment in different types of bodies. The root cause of this punishment isthat when one unnecessarily accumulates wealth, one becomes more and moredegraded, not knowing that his wealth will be finished with his next birth.                   na sadhu manye yata atmano 'yam                     asann api klesada asa dehah   (Bhag. 5.5.4)   Animal killing is prohibited. Every living being, of course, has to eatsomething (jivo jivasya jivanam). But one should be taught what kind of food oneshould take. Therefore the Isopanisad instructs, tena tyaktena bhunjithah: one
should eat whatever is allotted for human beings. Krsna says in Bhagavad-gita(9.26):                      patram puspam phalam toyam                      yo me bhaktya prayacchati                       tad aham bhakty-upahrtam                         asnami prayatatmanah   "If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or water, Iwill accept it." A devotee, therefore, does not eat anything that would requireslaughterhouses for poor animals. Rather, devotees take prasada of Krsna (tenatyaktena bhunjithah). Krsna recommends that one give Him patram puspam phalamtoyam--a leaf, a Mower, fruit or water. Animal food is never recommended forhuman beings; instead, a human being is recommended to take prasada, remnants offood left by Krsna. Yajna-sistasinah santo mucyante sarva-kilbisaih (Bg. 3.13).If one practices eating prasada, even if there is some little sinful activityinvolved, one becomes free from the results of sinful acts.                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT                       deva-samjnitam apy ante                      krmi-vid-bhasma-samjnitam                    bhuta-dhruk tat-krte svartham                        kim veda nirayo yatah                               SYNONYMS   deva-samjnitam--the body now known as a very exalted person, like president,minister or even demigod; api--even if the body is so exalted; ante--afterdeath; krmi--turns into worms; vit--or into stool; bhasma-samjnitam--or intoashes; bhuta-dhruk--a person who does not accept the sastric injunctions and isunnecessarily envious of other living entities; tat-krte--by acting in that way;sva-artham--self-interest; kim--who is there; veda--who knows; nirayah yatah--because from such sinful activities one must suffer hellish conditions.                             TRANSLATION   While living one may be proud of one's body, thinking oneself a very big man,minister, president or even demigod, but whatever one may be, after death thisbody will turn either into worms, into stool or into ashes. If one kills pooranimals to satisfy the temporary whims of this body, one does not know that hewill suffer in his next birth, for such a sinful miscreant must go to hell andsuffer the results of his actions.                               PURPORT   In this verse the three words krmi-vid-bhasma are significant. After death,the body may become krmi, which means "worms," for if the body is disposed ofwithout cremation, it may be eaten by worms; or else it may be eaten by animalslike hogs and vultures and be turned into stool. Those who are more civilizedburn the dead body, and thus it becomes ashes (bhasma-samjnitam). Yet althoughthe body will be turned into worms, stool or ashes, foolish persons, just tomaintain it, commit many sinful activities. This is certainly regrettable. Thehuman form of body is actually meant for jivasya tattva jijnasa, enlightenmentin knowledge of spiritual values. Therefore, one must seek shelter of a bonafide spiritual master. Tasmad gurum prapadyeta: one must approach a guru. Who is
a guru? Sabde pare ca nisnatam (Bhag. 11.3.21): a guru is one who has fulltranscendental knowledge. Unless one approaches a spiritual master, one remainsin ignorance. Acaryavan puruso veda (Chandogya Upanisad 6.14.2): one has fullknowledge about life when one is acaryavan, controlled by the acarya. But whenone is conducted by rajo-guna and tamo-guna, one does not care about anything;instead, one acts like an ordinary foolish animal, risking his life (mrtyu-samsara-vartmani) and therefore continuing to go through suffering aftersuffering. Na te viduh svartha-gatim hi visnum (Bhag. 7.5.31). Such a foolishperson does not know how to elevate himself in this body. Instead, he indulgesin sinful activities and goes deeper and deeper into hellish life.                               TEXT 11                                 TEXT                      dehah kim anna-datuh svam                        nisektur matur eva ca                        matuh pitur va balinah                       kretur agneh suno 'pi va                               SYNONYMS   dehah--this body; kim anna-datuh--does it belong to the employer who gives methe money to maintain it; svam--or does it belong to me personally; nisektuh--(or does it belong) to the person who discharged the semen; matuh eva--(or doesit belong) to the mother who maintained this body within her womb; ca--and;matuh pituh va--or (does it belong) to the father of the mother (becausesometimes the father of the mother takes a grandson as an adopted son); balinah--(or does it belong) to the person who takes this body away by force; kretuh--orto the person who purchases the body as a slave; agneh--or to the fire (becauseultimately the body is burned); sunah--or to the dogs and vultures thatultimately eat it; api--even; va--or.                             TRANSLATION   While alive, does this body belong to its employer, to the self, to thefather, the mother, or the mother's father? Does it belong to the person whotakes it away by force, to the slave master who purchases it, or to the sons whoburn it in the fire? Or, if the body is not burned, does it belong to the dogsthat eat it? Among the many possible claimants, who is the rightful claimant?Not to ascertain this but instead to maintain the body by sinful activities isnot good.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                        evam sadharanam deham                        avyakta-prabhavapyayam                       ko vidvan atmasat krtva                       hanti jantun rte 'satah                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this way; sadharanam--common property; deham--the body; avyakta--from unmanifested nature; prabhava--manifested in that way; apyayam--and againmerged with the unmanifested ("for dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thoureturn"); kah--who is that person; vidvan--one who is actually in knowledge;
atmasat krtva--claiming as his own; hanti--kills; jantun--poor animals; rte--except; asatah--rascals who have no knowledge, no clear understanding.                             TRANSLATION   This body, after all, is produced by the unmanifested nature and againannihilated and merged in the natural elements. Therefore, it is the commonproperty of everyone. Under the circumstances, who but a rascal claims thisproperty as his own and while maintaining it commits such sinful activities askilling animals just to satisfy his whims? Unless one is a rascal, one cannotcommit such sinful activities.                               PURPORT   Atheists do not believe in the existence of the soul. Nonetheless, unless oneis very cruel, why should one kill animals unnecessarily? The body is amanifestation of a combination of matter. In the beginning it was nothing, butby a combination of matter it has come into existence. Then again, when thecombination is dismantled, the body will no longer exist. In the beginning itwas nothing, and in the end it will be nothing. Why then should one commitsinful activities when it is manifested? It is not possible for anyone to dothis unless he is rascal number one.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT                        asatah sri-madandhasya                       daridryam param anjanam                         atmaupamyena bhutani                        daridrah param iksate                               SYNONYMS   asatah--of such a foolish rascal; sri-mada-andhasya--who is blinded bytemporarily possessing riches and opulence; daridryam--poverty; param anjanam--the best ointment for the eyes, by which to see things as they are; atma-aupamyena--with comparison to himself; bhutani--living beings; daridrah--apoverty-stricken man; param--perfectly; iksate--can see things as they are.                             TRANSLATION   Atheistic fools and rascals who are very much proud of wealth fail to seethings as they are. Therefore, returning them to poverty is the proper ointmentfor their eyes so they may see things as they are. At least a poverty-strickenman can realize how painful poverty is, and therefore he will not want others tobe in a painful condition like his own.                               PURPORT   Even today, if a man who was formerly poverty-stricken gets money, he isinclined to utilize his money to perform many philanthropic activities, likeopening schools for uneducated men and hospitals for the diseased. In thisconnection there is an instructive story called punar musiko bhava, "AgainBecome a Mouse." A mouse was very much harassed by a cat, and therefore themouse approached a saintly person to request to become a cat. When the mousebecame a cat, he was harassed by a dog, and then when he became a dog, he washarassed by a tiger. But when he became a tiger, he stared at the saintly
person, and when the saintly person asked him, "What do you want?" the tigersaid, "I want to eat you." Then the saintly person cursed him, saying, "May youagain become a mouse." A similar thing is going on all over the universe. One isgoing up and down, sometimes becoming a mouse, sometimes a tiger, and so on. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu said:                brahmanda bhramite kona bhagyavan jiva               guru-krsna-prasade paya bhakti-lata-bija   (Cc. Madhya 19.151)   The living entities are promoted and degraded by the laws of nature, but ifone is very, very fortunate, by association with saintly persons he gets theseed of devotional service, and his life becomes successful. Narada Muni wantedto bring Nalakuvara and Manigriva to the platform of devotional service throughpoverty, and thus he cursed them. Such is the mercy of a Vaisnava. Unless one isbrought to the Vaisnava platform, one cannot be a good man. Harav abhaktasyakuto mahad-gunah (Bhag. 5.18.12). An avaisnava never becomes a good man, howeverseverely he is punished.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                       yatha kantaka-viddhango                     jantor necchati tam vyatham                       jiva-samyam gato lingair                       na tathaviddha-kantakah                               SYNONYMS   yatha--just as; kantaka-viddha-angah--a person whose body has beenpinpricked; jantoh--of such an animal; na--not; icchati--desires; tam--aparticular; vyatham--pain; jiva-samyam gatah--when he understands that theposition is the same for everyone; lingaih--by possessing a particular type ofbody; na--not; tatha--so; aviddha-kantakah--a person who has not beenpinpricked.                             TRANSLATION   By seeing their faces, one whose body has been pricked by pins can understandthe pain of others who are pinpricked. Realizing that this pain is the same foreveryone, he does not want others to suffer in this way. But one who has neverbeen pricked by pins cannot understand this pain.                               PURPORT   There is a saying, "The happiness of wealth is enjoyable by a person who hastasted the distress of poverty." There is also another common saying, vandhya kibujhibe prasava-vedana: "A woman who has not given birth to a child cannotunderstand the pain of childbirth." Unless one comes to the platform of actualexperience, one cannot realize what is pain and what is happiness in thismaterial world. The laws of nature act accordingly. If one has killed an animal,one must himself be killed by that same animal. This is called mamsa. Mam means"me," and sa means "he." As I am eating an animal, that animal will have theopportunity to eat me. In every state, therefore, it is ordinarily the customthat if a person commits murder he is hanged.
                               TEXT 15                                 TEXT                       daridro niraham-stambho                       muktah sarva-madair iha                       krcchram yadrcchayapnoti                      tad dhi tasya param tapah                               SYNONYMS   daridrah--a poverty-stricken person; nir-aham-stambhah--is automaticallyfreed from all false prestige; muktah--liberated; sarva--all; madaih--from falseego; iha--in this world; krcchram--with great difficulty; yadrcchaya apnoti--what he gains by chance from providence; tat--that; hi--indeed; tasya--his;param--perfect; tapah--austerity.                             TRANSLATION   A poverty-stricken man must automatically undergo austerities and penancesbecause he does not have the wealth to possess anything. Thus his false prestigeis vanquished. Always in need of food, shelter and clothing, he must besatisfied with what is obtained by the mercy of providence. Undergoing suchcompulsory austerities is good for him because this purifies him and completelyfrees him from false ego.                               PURPORT   A saintly person voluntarily accepts a state of poverty just to become freefrom material false prestige. Many great kings left their princely standard ofliving and went to the forest to practice austerity according to Vedic culture,just to become purified. But if one who cannot voluntarily accept such austerityis put into a situation of poverty, he automatically must practice austerity.Austerity is good for everyone because it frees one from material conditions.Therefore, if one is very much proud of his material position, putting him intopoverty is the best way to rectify his foolishness. Daridrya-doso guna-rasi-nasi: when a person is poverty-stricken, naturally his false pride inaristocracy, wealth, education and beauty is smashed. Thus corrected, he is inthe right position for liberation.                               TEXT 16                                 TEXT                      nityam ksut-ksama-dehasya                       daridrasyanna-kanksinah                        indriyany anususyanti                         himsapi vinivartate                               SYNONYMS   nityam--always; ksut--with hunger; ksama--weak, without necessary strength;dehasya--of the body of a poor man; daridrasya--poverty-stricken; anna-kanksinah--always desiring to get sufficient food; indriyani--the senses, whichare compared to snakes; anususyanti--gradually become weaker and weaker, withless potency; himsa api--the tendency to be envious of others; vinivartate--reduces.
                             TRANSLATION   Always hungry, longing for sufficient food, a poverty-stricken man graduallybecomes weaker and weaker. Having no extra potency, his senses are automaticallypacified. A poverty-stricken man, therefore, is unable to perform harmful,envious activities. In other words, such a man automatically gains the resultsof the austerities and penances adopted voluntarily by saintly persons.                               PURPORT   According to the opinion of experienced medical practitioners, diabetes is aresult of voracious eating, and tuberculosis is a disease of undereating. Weshould desire neither to be diabetic nor to be tubercular. Yavad artha-prayojanam. We should eat frugally and keep the body fit for advancing in Krsnaconsciousness. As recommended elsewhere in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.10):                       kamasya nendriya-pritir                         labho jiveta yavata                        jivasya tattva-jijnasa                      nartho yas ceha karmabhih   The real business of human life is to keep oneself fit for advancement inspiritual realization. Human life is not meant for making the sensesunnecessarily strong so that one suffers from disease and one increases in anenvious, fighting spirit. In this age of Kali, however, human civilization is somisled that people are unnecessarily increasing in economic development, and asa result they are opening more and more slaughterhouses, liquor shops andbrothels. In this way, the whole civilization is being spoiled.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                        daridrasyaiva yujyante                        sadhavah sama-darsinah                      sadbhih ksinoti tam tarsam                        tata arad visuddhyati                               SYNONYMS   daridrasya--of a person who is poverty-stricken; eva--indeed; yujyante--mayeasily associate; sadhavah--saintly persons; sama-darsinah--although sadhus areequal to everyone, to the poor and the rich, the poor man can take advantage oftheir association; sadbhih--by the association of such saintly persons; ksinoti--reduces; tam--the original cause of material suffering; tarsam--the desire formaterial enjoyment; tatah--thereafter; arat--very soon; visuddhyati--hismaterial contamination is cleansed off.                             TRANSLATION   Saintly persons may freely associate with those who are poverty-stricken, butnot with those who are rich. A poverty-stricken man, by association with saintlypersons, very soon becomes uninterested in material desires, and the dirtythings within the core of his heart are cleansed away.                               PURPORT
   It is said, mahad-vicalanam nrnam grhinam dina-cetasam (Bhag. 10.8.4). Theonly business of a saintly person or sannyasi, a person in the renounced order,is to preach Krsna consciousness. Sadhus, saintly persons, want to preach toboth the poor and the rich, but the poor take more advantage of the sadhus'preaching than the rich do. A poor man receives sadhus very quickly, offers themobeisances, and tries to take advantage of their presence, whereas a rich mankeeps a big greyhound dog at his door so that no one can enter his house. Heposts a sign saying "Beware of Dog" and avoids the association of saintlypersons, whereas a poor man keeps his door open for them and thus benefits bytheir association more than a rich man does. Because Narada Muni, in hisprevious life, was the poverty-stricken son of a maidservant, he got theassociation of saintly persons and later became the exalted Narada Muni. Thiswas his actual experience. Therefore, he is now comparing the position of a poorman with that of a rich man.                  satam prasangan mama virya-samvido                 bhavanti hrt-karna-rasayanah kathah                  taj-josanad asv apavarga-vartmani                 sraddha ratir bhaktir anukramisyati   (Bhag. 3.25.25)   If one gets the advantage of association with saintly persons, by theirinstructions one becomes more and more purified of material desires.               krsna-bahirmukha haiya bhoga-vancha kare                 nikata-stha maya tare japatiya dhare   (Prema-vivarta)   Material life means that one forgets Krsna and that one increases in one'sdesires for sense gratification. But if one receives the advantage ofinstructions from saintly persons and forgets the importance of materialdesires, one is automatically purified. Ceto-darpana-marjanam bhava-maha-davagni-nirvapanam (Siksastaka 1). Unless the core of a materialistic person'sheart is purified, he cannot get rid of the pangs of bhava-maha-davagni, theblazing fire of material existence.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                        sadhunam sama-cittanam                         mukunda-caranaisinam                    upeksyaih kim dhana-stambhair                        asadbhir asad-asrayaih                               SYNONYMS   sadhunam--of saintly persons; sama-cittanam--of those who are equal toeveryone; mukunda-carana-esinam--whose only business is to serve Mukunda, theSupreme Personality of Godhead, and who always aspire for that service;upeksyaih--neglecting the association; kim--what; dhana-stambhaih--rich andproud; asadbhih--with the association of undesirable persons; asat-asrayaih--taking shelter of those who are asat, or nondevotees.                             TRANSLATION
   Saintly persons [sadhus] think of Krsna twenty-four hours a day. They have noother interest. Why should people neglect the association of such exaltedspiritual personalities and try to associate with materialists, taking shelterof nondevotees, most of whom are proud and rich?                               PURPORT   A sadhu is one who is engaged in devotional service to the Lord withoutdeviation (bhajate mam ananya-bhak).                         titiksavah karunikah                        suhrdah sarva-dehinam                        ajata-satravah santah                       sadhavah sadhu-bhusanah   "The symptoms of a sadhu are that he is tolerant, merciful and friendly toall living entities. He has no enemies, he is peaceful, he abides by thescriptures, and all his characteristics are sublime." (Bhag. 3.25.21) A sadhu issuhrdah sarva-dehinam, the friend of everyone. Why then should the rich, insteadof associating with sadhus, waste their valuable time in association with otherrich men who are averse to spiritual life? Both the poor man and the rich mancan take advantage of the Krsna consciousness movement, and here it is advisedthat everyone do so. There is no profit in avoiding the association of themembers of the Krsna consciousness movement. Narottama dasa Thakura has said:                 sat-sanga chadi' kainu asate vilasa               te-karane lagila ye karma-bandha-phansa   If we give up the association of sadhus, saintly persons engaged in Krsnaconsciousness, and associate with persons seeking sense gratification andaccumulating wealth for this purpose, our life is spoiled. The word asat refersto an avaisnava, one who is not a devotee of Krsna, and sat refers to aVaisnava, Krsna's devotee. One should always seek the association of Vaisnavasand not spoil one's life by mixing with avaisnavas. In Bhagavad-gita (7.15), thedistinction between Vaisnava and avaisnava is enunciated:                       na mam duskrtino mudhah                        prapadyante naradhamah                          mayayapahrta-jnana                        asuram bhavam asritah   Anyone who is not surrendered to Krsna is a most sinful person (duskrti), arascal (mudha), and the lowest of men (naradhama). Therefore one should notavoid the association of Vaisnavas, which is now available all over the world inthe form of the Krsna consciousness movement.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                      tad aham mattayor madhvya                       varunya sri-madandhayoh                         tamo-madam harisyami                        strainayor ajitatmanoh                               SYNONYMS
   tat--therefore; aham--I; mattayoh--of these two drunken persons; madhvya--bydrinking liquor; varunya--named Varuni; sri-mada-andhayoh--who are blinded bycelestial opulence; tamah-madam--this false prestige due to the mode ofignorance; harisyami--I shall take away; strainayoh--because they have become soattached to women; ajita-atmanoh--being unable to control the senses.                             TRANSLATION   Therefore, since these two persons, drunk with the liquor named Varuni, orMadhvi, and unable to control their senses, have been blinded by the pride ofcelestial opulence and have become attached to women, I shall relieve them oftheir false prestige.                               PURPORT   When a sadhu chastises or punishes someone, he does not do so for revenge.Maharaja Pariksit had inquired why Narada Muni was subject to such a spirit ofrevenge (tamah). But this was not tamah, for Narada Muni, in full knowledge ofwhat was for the good of the two brothers, wisely thought of how to cure them.Vaisnavas are good physicians. They know how to protect a person from materialdisease. Thus they are never in tamo-guna. Sa gunan samatityaitan brahma-bhuyayakalpate (Bg. 14.26). Vaisnavas are always situated on the transcendentalplatform, the Brahman platform. They cannot be subject to mistakes or theinfluence of the modes of material nature. Whatever they do, after fullconsideration, is meant just to lead everyone back home, back to Godhead.                             TEXTS 20-22                                 TEXT                        yad imau loka-palasya                      putrau bhutva tamah-plutau                         na vivasasam atmanam                         vijanitah sudurmadau                       ato 'rhatah sthavaratam                      syatam naivam yatha punah                      smrtih syan mat-prasadena                        tatrapi mad-anugrahat                        vasudevasya sannidhyam                      labdhva divya-sarac-chate                       vrtte svarlokatam bhuyo                      labdha-bhakti bhavisyatah                               SYNONYMS   yat--because; imau--these two young demigods; loka-palasya--of the greatdemigod Kuvera; putrau--born as sons; bhutva--being so (they should not havebecome like that); tamah-plutau--so absorbed in the mode of darkness; na--not;vivasasam--without any dress, completely naked; atmanam--their personal bodies;vijanitah--could understand that they were naked; su-durmadau--because they werevery much fallen due to false pride; atah--therefore; arhatah--they deserve;sthavaratam--immobility like that of a tree; syatam--they may become; na--not;evam--in this way; yatha--as; punah--again; smrtih--remembrance; syat--maycontinue; mat-prasadena--by my mercy; tatra api--over and above that; mat-anugrahat--by my special favor; vasudevasya--of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead; sannidhyam--the personal association, face to face; labdhva--obtaining;
divya-sarat-sate vrtte--after the expiry of one hundred years by the measurementof the demigods; svarlokatam--the desire to live in the celestial world; bhuyah--again; labdha-bhakti--having revived their natural condition of devotionalservice; bhavisyatah--will become.                             TRANSLATION   These two young men, Nalakuvara and Manigriva, are by fortune the sons of thegreat demigod Kuvera, but because of false prestige and madness after drinkingliquor, they are so fallen that they are naked but cannot understand that theyare. Therefore, because they are living like trees (for trees are naked but arenot conscious), these two young men should receive the bodies of trees. Thiswill be proper punishment. Nonetheless, after they become trees and until theyare released, by my mercy they will have remembrance of their past sinfulactivities. Moreover, by my special favor, after the expiry of one hundred yearsby the measurement of the demigods, they will be able to see the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Vasudeva, face to face, and thus revive their realposition as devotees.                               PURPORT   A tree has no consciousness: when cut, it feels no pain. But Narada Muniwanted the consciousness of Nalakuvara and Manigriva to continue, so that evenafter being released from the life of trees, they would not forget thecircumstances under which they had been punished. Therefore, to bestow upon themspecial favor, Narada Muni arranged things in such a way that after beingreleased, they would be able to see Krsna in Vrndavana and thus revive theirdormant bhakti.   Each day of the demigods in the upper planetary system equals six months ofour measurement. Although the demigods in the upper planetary system areattached to material enjoyment, they are all devotees, and therefore they arecalled demigods. There are two kinds of persons, namely the devas and theasuras. Asuras forget their relationship with Krsna (asuram bhavam asritah),whereas the devas do not forget.                     dvau bhuta-sargau loke 'smin                          daiva asura eva ca                      visnu-bhaktah smrto daiva                        asuras tad-viparyayah   (Padma Purana)   The distinction between a pure devotee and a karma-misra devotee is this: apure devotee does not desire anything for material enjoyment, whereas a mixeddevotee becomes a devotee to become a first-class enjoyer of this materialworld. One who is in direct touch with the Supreme Personality of Godhead indevotional service remains pure, uncontaminated by material desires(anyabhilasita-sunyam jnana-karmady-anavrtam).   By karma-misra-bhakti one is elevated to the celestial kingdom, by jnana-misra-bhakti one is able to merge in the Brahman effulgence, and by yoga-misra-bhakti one is able to realize the omnipotency of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead. But pure bhakti does not depend on karma, jnana or yoga, for it simplyconsists of loving affairs. The liberation of the bhakta, therefore, which iscalled not just mukti but vimukti, surpasses the five other kinds of liberation--sayujya, sarupya, salokya, sarsti and samipya. A pure devotee always engages inpure service (anukulyena krsnanusilanam bhaktir uttama). Taking birth in theupper planetary system as a demigod is a chance to become a further purified
devotee and go back home, back to Godhead. Narada Muni indirectly gave Manigrivaand Nalakuvara the greatest opportunity by his so-called curse.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        evam uktva sa devarsir                         gato narayanasramam                        nalakuvara-manigrivav                         asatur yamalarjunau                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak; evam uktva--thusuttering; sah--he; devarsih--the greatest saintly person, Narada; gatah--leftthat place; narayana-asramam--for his own asrama, known as Narayana-asrama;nalakuvara--Nalakuvara; manigrivau--and Manigriva; asatuh--remained there tobecome; yamala-arjunau--twin arjuna trees.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Having thus spoken, the great saint DevarsiNarada returned to his asrama, known as Narayana-asrama, and Nalakuvara andManigriva became twin arjuna trees.                               PURPORT   Arjuna trees are still found in many forests, and their skin is used bycardiologists to prepare medicine for heart trouble. This means that even thoughthey are trees, they are disturbed when skinned for medical science.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                       rser bhagavata-mukhyasya                       satyam kartum vaco harih                        jagama sanakais tatra                        yatrastam yamalarjunau                               SYNONYMS   rseh--of the great sage and saintly person Narada; bhagavata-mukhyasya--ofthe topmost of all devotees; satyam--truthful; kartum--to prove; vacah--hiswords; harih--the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; jagama--went there;sanakaih--very slowly; tatra--there; yatra--to the spot where; astam--therewere; yamala-arjunau--the twin arjuna trees.                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, to fulfill the truthfulness ofthe words of the greatest devotee, Narada, slowly went to that spot where thetwin arjuna trees were standing.                               TEXT 25
                                 TEXT                        devarsir me priyatamo                        yad imau dhanadatmajau                        tat tatha sadhayisyami                       yad gitam tan mahatmana                               SYNONYMS   devarsih--the great saint Devarsi Narada; me--My; priya-tamah--most beloveddevotee; yat--although; imau--these two persons (Nalakuvara and Manigriva);dhanada-atmajau--born of a rich father and being nondevotees; tat--the words ofDevarsi; tatha--just so; sadhayisyami--I shall execute (because he wanted Me tocome face to face with the yamala-arjuna, I shall do so); yat gitam--as alreadystated; tat--that; mahatmana--by Narada Muni.                             TRANSLATION   "Although these two young men are the sons of the very rich Kuvera and I havenothing to do with them, Devarsi Narada is My very dear and affectionatedevotee, and therefore because he wanted Me to come face to face with them, Imust do so for their deliverance."                               PURPORT   Nalakuvara and Manigriva actually had nothing to do with devotional serviceor seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face, for this is not anordinary opportunity. It is not that because one is very rich or learned or wasborn in an aristocratic family one will be able to see the Supreme Personalityof Godhead face to face. This is impossible. But in this case, because NaradaMuni desired that Nalakuvara and Manigriva see Vasudeva face to face, theSupreme Personality of Godhead wanted to fulfill the words of His very deardevotee Narada Muni. If one seeks the favor of a devotee instead of directlyasking favors from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is very easilysuccessful. Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has therefore recommended: vaisnavathakura tomara kukkura bhuliya janaha more, krsna se tomara krsna dite para. Oneshould desire to become like a dog in strictly following a devotee. Krsna is inthe hand of a devotee. Adurlabham atma-bhaktau. Thus without the favor of adevotee, one cannot directly approach Krsna, what to speak of engaging in Hisservice. Narottama dasa Thakura therefore sings, chadiya vaisnava-seva nistarapayeche keba: unless one becomes a servant of a pure devotee, one cannot bedelivered from the material condition of life. In our Gaudiya Vaisnava society,following in the footsteps of Rupa Gosvami, our first business is to seekshelter of a bona fide spiritual master (adau gurv-asrayah).                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                         ity antarenarjunayoh                       krsnas tu yamayor yayau                         atma-nirvesa-matrena                        tiryag-gatam ulukhalam                               SYNONYMS   iti--thus deciding; antarena--between; arjunayoh--the two arjuna trees;krsnah tu--Lord Krsna; yamayoh yayau--entered between the two trees; atma-
nirvesa-matrena--as soon as He entered (between the two trees); tiryak--crossways; gatam--so became; ulukhalam--the big mortar for grinding spices.                             TRANSLATION   Having thus spoken, Krsna soon entered between the two arjuna trees, and thusthe big mortar to which He was bound turned crosswise and stuck between them.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                balena niskarsayatanvag ulukhalam tad                damodarena tarasotkalitanghri-bandhau                  nispetatuh parama-vikramitativepa-              skandha-pravala-vitapau krta-canda-sabdau                               SYNONYMS   balena--by the boy Krsna; niskarsayata--who was dragging; anvak--followingthe dragging of Krsna; ulukhalam--the wooden mortar; tat--that; dama-udarena--byKrsna, who was tied by the belly; tarasa--with great force; utkalita--uprooted;anghri-bandhau--the roots of the two trees; nispetatuh--fell down; parama-vikramita--by the supreme power; ati-vepa--trembling severely; skandha--trunk;pravala--bunches of leaves; vitapau--those two trees, along with their branches;krta--having made; canda-sabdau--a fierce sound.                             TRANSLATION   By dragging behind Him with great force the wooden mortar tied to His belly,the boy Krsna uprooted the two trees. By the great strength of the SupremePerson, the two trees, with their trunks, leaves and branches, trembled severelyand fell to the ground with a great crash.                               PURPORT   This is the pastime of Krsna known as damodara-lila. Therefore another ofKrsna's names is Damodara. As stated in the Hari-vamsa:                        sa ca tenaiva namna tu                       krsno vai dama-bandhanat                         gosthe damodara iti                         gopibhih parigiyate                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT               tatra sriya paramaya kakubhah sphurantau                siddhav upetya kujayor iva jata-vedah               krsnam pranamya sirasakhila-loka-natham                baddhanjali virajasav idam ucatuh sma                               SYNONYMS   tatra--there, on the very spot where the two arjunas fell; sriya--withbeautification; paramaya--superexcellent; kakubhah--all directions; sphurantau--illuminating by effulgence; siddhau--two perfect persons; upetya--then coming
out; kujayoh--from between the two trees; iva--like; jata-vedah--firepersonified; krsnam--unto Lord Krsna; pranamya--offering obeisances; sirasa--with the head; akhila-loka-natham--to the Supreme Person, the controller ofeverything; baddha-anjali--with folded hands; virajasau--fully cleansed of themode of ignorance; idam--the following words; ucatuh sma--uttered.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, in that very place where the two arjuna trees had fallen, twogreat, perfect personalities, who appeared like fire personified, came out ofthe two trees. The effulgence of their beauty illuminating all directions, withbowed heads they offered obeisances to Krsna, and with hands folded they spokethe following words.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                       krsna krsna maha-yogims                       tvam adyah purusah parah                      vyaktavyaktam idam visvam                       rupam te brahmana viduh                               SYNONYMS   krsna krsna--O Lord Krsna, O Lord Krsna; maha-yogin--O master of mysticism;tvam--You, the exalted personality; adyah--the root cause of everything;purusah--the Supreme Person; parah--beyond this material creation; vyakta-avyaktam--this material cosmic manifestation, consisting of cause and effect, orgross and subtle forms; idam--this; visvam--whole world; rupam--form; te--Your;brahmanah--learned brahmanas; viduh--know.                             TRANSLATION   O Lord Krsna, Lord Krsna, Your opulent mysticism is inconceivable. You arethe supreme, original person, the cause of all causes, immediate and remote, andYou are beyond this material creation. Learned brahmanas know [on the basis ofthe Vedic statement sarvam khalv idam brahma] that You are everything and thatthis cosmic manifestation, in its gross and subtle aspects, is Your form.                               PURPORT   The two demigods Nalakuvara and Manigriva, because of their continuingmemory, could understand the supremacy of Krsna by the grace of Narada. Now theyadmitted, "That we should be delivered by the blessings of Narada Muni was allYour plan. Therefore You are the supreme mystic. Everything--past, present andfuture--is known to You. Your plan was made so nicely that although we stayedhere as twin arjuna trees, You have appeared as a small boy to deliver us. Thiswas all Your inconceivable arrangement. Because You are the Supreme Person, Youcan do everything."                             TEXTS 30-31                                 TEXT                       tvam ekah sarva-bhutanam                       dehasv-atmendriyesvarah                        tvam eva kalo bhagavan
                        visnur avyaya isvarah                      tvam mahan prakrtih suksma                        rajah-sattva-tamomayi                      tvam eva puruso 'dhyaksah                       sarva-ksetra-vikara-vit                               SYNONYMS   tvam--Your Lordship; ekah--one; sarva-bhutanam--of all living entities; deha--of the body; asu--of the life force; atma--of the soul; indriya--of the senses;isvarah--the Supersoul, the controller; tvam--Your Lordship; eva--indeed; kalah--the time factor; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; visnuh--all-pervading; avyayah--imperishable; isvarah--controller; tvam--Your Lordship;mahan--the greatest; prakrtih--the cosmic manifestation; suksma--subtle; rajah-sattva-tamah-mayi--consisting of three modes of nature (passion, goodness andignorance); tvam eva--Your Lordship is indeed; purusah--the Supreme Person;adhyaksah--the proprietor; sarva-ksetra--in all living entities; vikara-vit--knowing the restless mind.                             TRANSLATION   You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the controller of everything. Thebody, life, ego and senses of every living entity are Your own self. You are theSupreme Person, Visnu, the imperishable controller. You are the time factor, theimmediate cause, and You are material nature, consisting of the three modespassion, goodness and ignorance. You are the original cause of this materialmanifestation. You are the Supersoul, and therefore You know everything withinthe core of the heart of every living entity.                               PURPORT   Sripada Madhvacarya has quoted from the Vamana purana as follows:                       rupyatvat tu jagad rupam                      visnoh saksat sukhatmakam                       nitya-purnam samuddistam                        svarupam paramatmanah                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                       grhyamanais tvam agrahyo                      vikaraih prakrtair gunaih                       ko nv iharhati vijnatum                      prak siddham guna-samvrtah                               SYNONYMS   grhyamanaih--accepting the body made of material nature as existing at thepresent moment because of being visible; tvam--You; agrahyah--not confined in abody made of material nature; vikaraih--agitated by the mind; prakrtaih gunaih--by the material modes of nature (sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna); kah--whois there; nu--after that; iha--in this material world; arhati--who deserves;vijnatum--to know; prak siddham--that which existed before the creation; guna-samvrtah--because of being covered by the material qualities.
                             TRANSLATION   O Lord, You exist before the creation. Therefore, who, trapped by a body ofmaterial qualities in this material world, can understand You?                               PURPORT   As it is said:                        atah sri-krsna-namadi                     na bhaved grahyam indriyaih                        sevonmukhe hi jihvadau                       svayam eva sphuraty adah   (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.234)   Krsna's name, attributes and form are Absolute Truth, existing before thecreation. Therefore, how can those who are created--that is, those entrapped inbodies created of material elements--understand Krsna perfectly? This is notpossible. But, sevonmukhe hi jihvadau svayam eva sphuraty adah: Krsna revealsHimself to those engaged in devotional service. This is also confirmed inBhagavad-gita (18.15) by the Lord Himself: bhaktya mam abhijanati. Even thedescriptions of Krsna in Srimad-Bhagavatam are sometimes misunderstood by lessintelligent men with a poor fund of knowledge. Therefore, the best course bywhich to know Him is to engage oneself in pure devotional activities. The moreone advances in devotional activities, the more one can understand Him as He is.If from the material platform one could understand Krsna, then, since Krsna iseverything (sarvam khalv idam brahma), one could understand Krsna by seeinganything within this material world. But that is not possible.                        maya tatam idam sarvam                        jagad avyakta-murtina                       mat-sthani sarva-bhutani                       na caham tesv avasthitah   (Bg. 9.4)   Everything is resting on Krsna, and everything is Krsna, but this is not tobe realized by persons on the material platform.                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                       tasmai tubhyam bhagavate                          vasudevaya vedhase                      atma-dyota-gunais channa-                        mahimne brahmane namah                               SYNONYMS   tasmai--(because You are not to be understood from the material platform, wesimply offer obeisances) unto Him; tubhyam--unto You; bhagavate--unto theSupreme Personality of Godhead; vasudevaya--unto Vasudeva, the origin ofSankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha; vedhase--unto the origin of creation; atma-dyota-gunaih channa-mahimne--unto You whose glories are covered by Your personalenergy; brahmane--unto the Supreme Brahman; namah--our respectful obeisances.
                             TRANSLATION   O Lord, whose glories are covered by Your own energy, You are the SupremePersonality of Godhead. You are Sankarsana, the origin of creation, and You areVasudeva, the origin of the caturvyuha. Because You are everything and aretherefore the Supreme Brahman, we simply offer our respectful obeisances untoYou.                               PURPORT   Instead of trying to understand Krsna in detail, it is better to offer ourrespectful obeisances unto Him, for He is the origin of everything and He iseverything. Because we are covered by the material modes of nature, He is verydifficult for us to understand unless He reveals Himself to us. Therefore it isbetter for us to acknowledge that He is everything and offer obeisances unto Hislotus feet.                             TEXTS 34-35                                 TEXT                         yasyavatara jnayante                         sariresv asaririnah                       tais tair atulyatisayair                      viryair dehisv asangataih                       sa bhavan sarva-lokasya                         bhavaya vibhavaya ca                        avatirno 'msa-bhagena                        sampratam patir asisam                               SYNONYMS   yasya--of whom; avatarah--the different incarnations, like Matsya, Kurma andVaraha; jnayante--are speculated; sariresu--in different bodies, differentlyvisible; asaririnah--they are not ordinary material bodies, but are alltranscendental; taih taih--by such bodily activities; atulya--incomparable; ati-sayaih--unlimited; viryaih--by strength and power; dehisu--by those who actuallyhave material bodies; asangataih--which activities, enacted in differentincarnations, are impossible to be performed; sah--the same Supreme; bhavan--Your Lordship; sarva-lokasya--of everyone; bhavaya--for the elevation;vibhavaya--for the liberation; ca--and; avatirnah--have now appeared; amsa-bhagena--in full potency, with different parts and parcels; sampratam--at thepresent moment; patih asisam--You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, themaster of all auspiciousness.                             TRANSLATION   Appearing in bodies like those of an ordinary fish, tortoise and hog, Youexhibit activities impossible for such creatures to perform--extraordinary,incomparable, transcendental activities of unlimited power and strength. Thesebodies of Yours, therefore, are not made of material elements, but areincarnations of Your Supreme Personality. You are the same Supreme Personalityof Godhead, who have now appeared, with full potency, for the benefit of allliving entities within this material world.                               PURPORT
   As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.7-8):                        yada yada hi dharmasya                        glanir bhavati bharata                       abhyutthanam adharmasya                        tadatmanam srjamy aham                         paritranaya sadhunam                         vinasaya ca duskrtam                       dharma-samsthapanarthaya                         sambhavami yuge yuge   Krsna appears as an incarnation when real spiritual life declines and whenrogues and thieves increase to disturb the situation of the world. Unfortunate,less intelligent persons, bereft of devotional service, cannot understand theLord's activities, and therefore such persons describe these activities askalpana--mythology or imagination--because they are rascals and the lowest ofmen (na mam duskrtino mudhah prapadyante naradhamah). Such men cannot understandthat the events described by Vyasadeva in the puranas and other sastras are notfictitious or imaginary, but factual.   Krsna, in His full, unlimited potency, here shows that He is the SupremePersonality of Godhead, for although the two trees were so large and sturdy thateven many elephants could not move them, Krsna, as a child, exhibited suchextraordinary strength that they fell down with a great sound. From the verybeginning, by killing Putana, Sakatasura and Trnavartasura, by causing the treesto fall, and by showing the entire universe within His mouth, Krsna proved thatHe is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The lowest of men (mudhas), because ofsinful activities, cannot understand this, but devotees can accept it without adoubt. Thus the position of a devotee is different from that of a nondevotee.                               TEXT 36                                 TEXT                         namah parama-kalyana                         namah parama-mangala                          vasudevaya santaya                         yadunam pataye namah                               SYNONYMS   namah--we therefore offer our respectful obeisances; parama-kalyana--You arethe supreme auspiciousness; namah--our respectful obeisances unto You; parama-mangala--whatever You do is good; vasudevaya--unto the original Personality ofGodhead, Vasudeva; santaya--unto the most peaceful; yadunam--of the Yadudynasty; pataye--unto the controller; namah--our respectful obeisances unto You.                             TRANSLATION   O supremely auspicious, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You, who arethe supreme good. O most famous descendant and controller of the Yadu dynasty, Oson of Vasudeva, O most peaceful, let us offer our obeisances unto Your lotusfeet.                               PURPORT   The word parama-kalyana is significant because Krsna, in any of Hisincarnations, appears in order to protect the sadhus (paritranaya sadhunam). The
sadhus, saintly persons or devotees, are always harassed by nondevotees, andKrsna appears in His incarnations to give them relief. This is His firstconcern. If we study the history of Krsna's life, we shall find that for most ofHis life He predominantly engaged in killing demons one after another.                               TEXT 37                                 TEXT                        anujanihi nau bhumams                         tavanucara-kinkarau                        darsanam nau bhagavata                         rser asid anugrahat                               SYNONYMS   anujanihi--may we have permission; nau--we; bhuman--O greatest universalform; tava anucara-kinkarau--because of being servants of Your most confidentialdevotee Narada Muni; darsanam--to see personally; nau--of us; bhagavatah--ofYou, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rseh--of the great saint Narada; asit--there was (in the form of a curse); anugrahat--from the mercy.                             TRANSLATION   O supreme form, we are always servants of Your servants, especially of NaradaMuni. Now give us permission to leave for our home. It is by the grace and mercyof Narada Muni that we have been able to see You face to face.                               PURPORT   Unless delivered or blessed by a devotee, one cannot realize that Krsna isthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. Manusyanam sahasresu kascid yatati siddhaye.According to this verse of Bhagavad-gita (7.3), there are so many siddhas oryogis who cannot understand Krsna; instead, they misunderstand Him. But if onetakes shelter of a devotee descending from the parampara system of Narada(svayambhur naradah sambhuh), one can then understand who is an incarnation ofthe Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this age, many pseudo incarnations areadvertised simply for having exhibited some magical performances, but except forpersons who are servants of Narada and other servants of Krsna, no one canunderstand who is God and who is not. This is confirmed by Narottama dasaThakura. Chadiya vaisnava-seva nistara payeche keba: no one is delivered fromthe material conception of life unless favored by a Vaisnava. Others can neverunderstand, neither by speculation nor by any other bodily or mental gymnastics.                               TEXT 38                                 TEXT                 vani gunanukathane sravanau kathayam               hastau ca karmasu manas tava padayor nah               smrtyam siras tava nivasa-jagat-praname               drstih satam darsane 'stu bhavat-tanunam                               SYNONYMS   vani--words, the power of speech; guna-anukathane--always engaged in talkingabout Your pastimes; sravanau--the ear, or aural reception; kathayam--in talksabout You and Your pastimes; hastau--hands and legs and other senses; ca--also;
karmasu--engaging them in executing Your mission; manah--the mind; tava--Your;padayoh--of Your lotus feet; nah--our; smrtyam--in remembrance always engaged inmeditation; sirah--the head; tava--Your; nivasa-jagat-praname--because You areall-pervading, You are everything, and our heads should bow down, not lookingfor enjoyment; drstih--the power of sight; satam--of the Vaisnavas; darsane--inseeing; astu--let all of them be engaged in this way; bhavat-tanunam--who arenondifferent from You.                             TRANSLATION   Henceforward, may all our words describe Your pastimes, may our ears engagein aural reception of Your glories, may our hands, legs and other senses engagein actions pleasing to You, and may our minds always think of Your lotus feet.May our heads offer our obeisances to everything within this world, because allthings are also Your different forms, and may our eyes see the forms ofVaisnavas, who are nondifferent from You.                               PURPORT   Here the process of understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead isgiven. This process is bhakti.                       sravanam kirtanam visnoh                        smaranam pada-sevanam                       arcanam vandanam dasyam                        sakhyam atma-nivedanam   (Bhag. 7.5.23)   Everything should be engaged in the service of the Lord. Hrsikena hrsikesa-sevanam bhaktir ucyate (Narada-pancaratra). Everything--the mind, the body andall the sense organs--should be engaged in Krsna's service. This is to belearned from expert devotees like Narada, Svayambhu and Sambhu. This is theprocess. We cannot manufacture our own way of understanding the SupremePersonality of Godhead, for it is not that everything one manufactures orconcocts will lead to understanding God. Such a proposition--yata mata, tatapatha--is foolish. Krsna says, bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah: "Only by executing theactivities of bhakti can one understand Me." (Bhag. 11.14.21) This is calledanukulyena krsnanusilanam, remaining engaged favorably in the service of theLord.                               TEXT 39                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                      ittham sankirtitas tabhyam                        bhagavan gokulesvarah                       damna colukhale baddhah                        prahasann aha guhyakau                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued to speak; ittham--in thisway, as aforesaid; sankirtitah--being glorified and praised; tabhyam--by the twoyoung demigods; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gokula-isvarah--the master of Gokula (because He is sarva-loka-mahesvara); damna--by the rope;
ca--also; ulukhale--on the wooden mortar; baddhah--bound; prahasan--smiling;aha--said; guhyakau--unto the two young demigods.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: The two young demigods thus offered prayers tothe Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although Sri Krsna, the Supreme Godhead, isthe master of all and was certainly Gokulesvara, the master of Gokula, He wasbound to the wooden mortar by the ropes of the gopis, and therefore, smilingwidely, He spoke to the sons of Kuvera the following words.                               PURPORT   Krsna was smiling because He was thinking to Himself, "These two youngdemigods fell from the higher planetary system to this planet, and I havedelivered them from the bondage of standing for a long time as trees, but as forMe, I am bound by the ropes of the gopis and am subject to their chastisements."In other words, Krsna submits to being chastised and bound by the gopis becauseof pure love and affection worthy of being praised by a devotee in so many ways.                               TEXT 40                                 TEXT                          sri-bhagavan uvaca                       jnatam mama puraivaitad                          rsina karunatmana                     yac chri-madandhayor vagbhir                      vibhramso 'nugrahah krtah                               SYNONYMS   sri-bhagavan uvaca--the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; jnatam--everything is known; mama--to Me; pura--in the past; eva--indeed; etat--thisincident; rsina--by the great sage Narada; karuna-atmana--because he was very,very kind to you; yat--which; sri-mada-andhayoh--who had become mad aftermaterial opulence and had thus become blind; vagbhih--by words or by cursing;vibhramsah--falling down from the heavenly planet to become arjuna trees here;anugrahah krtah--this was a great favor done by him to you.                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The great saint Narada Muni is verymerciful. By his curse, he showed the greatest favor to both of you, who weremad after material opulence and who had thus become blind. Although you fellfrom the higher planet Svargaloka and became trees, you were most favored byhim. I knew of all these incidents from the very beginning.                               PURPORT   It is now confirmed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the curse of adevotee is also to be regarded as mercy. As Krsna, God, is all-good, a Vaisnavais also all-good. Whatever he does is good for everyone. This is explained inthe following verse.                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT
                        sadhunam sama-cittanam                        sutaram mat-krtatmanam                      darsanan no bhaved bandhah                      pumso 'ksnoh savitur yatha                               SYNONYMS   sadhunam--of devotees; sama-cittanam--who are equally disposed towardeveryone; sutaram--excessively, completely; mat-krta-atmanam--of persons who arefully surrendered, determined to render service unto Me; darsanat--simply by theaudience; no bhavet bandhah--freedom from all material bondage; pumsah--of aperson; aksnoh--of the eyes; savituh yatha--as by being face to face with thesun.                             TRANSLATION   When one is face to face with the sun, there is no longer darkness for one'seyes. Similarly, when one is face to face with a sadhu, a devotee, who is fullydetermined and surrendered to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one will nolonger be subject to material bondage.                               PURPORT   As stated by Caitanya Mahaprabhu (Cc. Madhya 22.54):          'sadhu-sanga,' 'sadhu-sanga'----sarva-sastre kaya               lava-matra sadhu-sange sarva-siddhi haya   If by chance one meets a sadhu, a devotee, one's life is immediatelysuccessful, and one is freed from material bondage. It may be argued thatwhereas someone may receive a sadhu with great respect, someone else may notreceive a sadhu with such respect. A sadhu, however, is always equipoised towardeveryone. Because of being a pure devotee, a sadhu is always ready to deliverKrsna consciousness without discrimination. As soon as one sees a sadhu, onenaturally becomes free. Nonetheless, persons who are too much offensive, whocommit vaisnava-aparadhas, or offenses to a sadhu, will have to take some timebefore being rectified. This is also indicated herein.                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                      tad gacchatam mat-paramau                          nalakuvara sadanam                        sanjato mayi bhavo vam                        ipsitah paramo 'bhavah                               SYNONYMS   tat gacchatam--now both of you may return; mat-paramau--accepting Me as thesupreme destination of life; nalakuvara--O Nalakuvara and Manigriva; sadanam--toyour home; sanjatah--being saturated with; mayi--unto Me; bhavah--devotionalservice; vam--by you; ipsitah--which was desired; paramah--supreme, highest,always engaged with all senses; abhavah--from which there is no falldown intomaterial existence.                             TRANSLATION
   O Nalakuvara and Manigriva, now you may both return home. Since you desire tobe always absorbed in My devotional service, your desire to develop love andaffection for Me will be fulfilled, and now you will never fall from thatplatform.                               PURPORT   The highest perfection of life is to come to the platform of devotionalservice and always engage in devotional activities. Understanding this,Nalakuvara and Manigriva desired to attain that platform, and the SupremePersonality of Godhead blessed them with the fulfillment of their transcendentaldesire.                               TEXT 43                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                       ity uktau tau parikramya                       pranamya ca punah punah                       baddholukhalam amantrya                        jagmatur disam uttaram                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; iti uktau--having been ordered bythe Supreme Personality of Godhead in this way; tau--Nalakuvara and Manigriva;parikramya--circumambulating; pranamya--offering obeisances; ca--also; punahpunah--again and again; baddha-ulukhalam amantrya--taking the permission of theSupreme Personality of Godhead, who was bound to the wooden mortar; jagmatuh--departed; disam uttaram--to their respective destinations.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead having spoken tothe two demigods in this way, they circumambulated the Lord, who was bound tothe wooden mortar, and offered obeisances to Him. After taking the permission ofLord Krsna, they returned to their respective homes.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Tenth Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "Deliverance of the  Yamala-arjuna Trees."                            Chapter Eleven                   The Childhood Pastimes of Krsna   This chapter describes how the inhabitants of Gokula left Gokula and went toVrndavana and how Krsna killed Vatsasura and Bakasura.   When the yamala-arjuna trees fell, they made a tremendous sound, like that offalling thunderbolts. Being surprised, Krsna's father, Nanda, and the otherelderly inhabitants of Gokula went to the spot, where they saw the fallen treesand Krsna standing between them, bound to the ulukhala, the wooden mortar. Theycould find no cause for the trees' having fallen and Krsna's being there. Theythought this might be the work of some other asura who had met Krsna on thisspot, and they inquired from the playmates of Krsna about how the whole incidenthad taken place. The children properly described how everything had happened,but the elderly persons could not believe the story. Some of them, however,thought that it might be true, since they had already seen many wonderfulincidents in connection with Krsna. Anyway, Nanda Maharaja immediately releasedKrsna from the ropes.
   In this way, Krsna, at every day and every moment, displayed wonderfulincidents to increase the parental affection of Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda, whothus felt both surprise and joy. The breaking of the yamala-arjunas was one ofthese wonderful pastimes.   One day a fruit vendor approached Nanda Maharaja's house, and Krsna gatheredsome food grains with His little palms and went to the vendor to exchange thegrains for fruit. On the way, almost all the grains fell from His palms, onlyone or two grains remaining, but the fruit vendor, out of full affection,accepted these grains in exchange for as much fruit as Krsna could take. As soonas she did this, her basket became filled with gold and jewels.   Thereafter, all the elderly gopas decided to leave Gokula because they sawthat in Gokula there was always some disturbance. They decided to go toVrndavana, Vraja-dhama, and the next day they all departed. In Vrndavana, bothKrsna and Balarama, after finishing Their childhood pastimes, began to takecharge of the calves and send them to the pasturing grounds (go-carana). Duringthis time, a demon named Vatsasura entered among the calves and was killed, andanother asura, in the shape of a big duck, was also killed. The playmates ofKrsna narrated all these stories to their mothers. The mothers could not believetheir children, Krsna's playmates, but because of full affection they enjoyedthese narrations of Krsna's activities.                                TEXT 1                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        gopa nandadayah srutva                        drumayoh patato ravam                       tatrajagmuh kuru-srestha                       nirghata-bhaya-sankitah                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; gopah--all the cowherd men;nanda-adayah--headed by Nanda Maharaja; srutva--hearing; drumayoh--of the twotrees; patatoh--falling down; ravam--the high sound, as terrible as athunderbolt; tatra--there, on the spot; ajagmuh--went; kuru-srestha--O MaharajaPariksit; nirghata-bhaya-sankitah--who were afraid of falling thunderbolts.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: O Maharaja Pariksit, when the yamala-arjuna treesfell, all the cowherd men in the neighborhood, hearing the fierce sound andfearing thunderbolts, went to the spot.                                TEXT 2                                 TEXT                       bhumyam nipatitau tatra                         dadrsur yamalarjunau                        babhramus tad avijnaya                        laksyam patana-karanam                               SYNONYMS   bhumyam--on the ground; nipatitau--which had fallen; tatra--there; dadrsuh--all of them saw; yamala-arjunau--the twin arjuna trees; babhramuh--they became
bewildered; tat--that; avijnaya--but they could not trace out; laksyam--althoughthey could directly perceive that the trees had fallen; patana-karanam--thecause of their falling (how could it have happened all of a sudden?).                             TRANSLATION   There they saw the fallen yamala-arjuna trees on the ground, but they werebewildered because even though they could directly perceive that the trees hadfallen, they could not trace out the cause for their having done so.                               PURPORT   Considering all the circumstances, had this been done by Krsna? He wasstanding on the spot, and His playmates described that this had been done byHim. Had Krsna actually done this, or were these merely stories? This was acause of bewilderment.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT                        ulukhalam vikarsantam                       damna baddham ca balakam                        kasyedam kuta ascaryam                          utpata iti katarah                               SYNONYMS   ulukhalam--the wooden mortar; vikarsantam--dragging; damna--with the rope;baddham ca--and bound by the belly; balakam--Krsna; kasya--of whom; idam--this;kutah--wherefrom; ascaryam--these wonderful happenings; utpatah--disturbance;iti--thus; katarah--they were very much agitated.                             TRANSLATION   Krsna was bound by the rope to the ulukhala, the mortar, which He wasdragging. But how could He have pulled down the trees? Who had actually done it?Where was the source for this incident? Considering all these astounding things,the cowherd men were doubtful and bewildered.                               PURPORT   The cowherd men were very much agitated because the child Krsna, after all,had been standing between the two trees, and if by chance the trees had fallenupon Him, He would have been smashed. But He was standing as He was, and stillthe things had happened, so who had done all this? How could these events havehappened in such a wonderful way? These considerations were some of the reasonsthey were agitated and bewildered. They thought, however, that by chance Krsnahad been saved by God so that nothing had happened to Him.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                          bala ucur aneneti                        tiryag-gatam ulukhalam                        vikarsata madhya-gena                        purusav apy acaksmahi
                               SYNONYMS   balah--all the other boys; ucuh--said; anena--by Him (Krsna); iti--thus;tiryak--crosswise; gatam--which had become; ulukhalam--the wooden mortar;vikarsata--by Krsna, who was dragging; madhya-gena--going between the two trees;purusau--two beautiful persons; api--also; acaksmahi--we have seen with our owneyes.                             TRANSLATION   Then all the cowherd boys said: It is Krsna who has done this. When He was inbetween the two trees, the mortar fell crosswise. Krsna dragged the mortar, andthe two trees fell down. After that, two beautiful men came out of the trees. Wehave seen this with our own eyes.                               PURPORT   Krsna's playmates wanted to inform Krsna's father of the exact situation byexplaining that not only did the trees break, but out of the broken trees cametwo beautiful men. "All these things happened," they said. "We have seen themwith our own eyes."                                TEXT 5                                 TEXT                       na te tad-uktam jagrhur                        na ghateteti tasya tat                        balasyotpatanam tarvoh                       kecit sandigdha-cetasah                               SYNONYMS   na--not; te--all the gopas; tat-uktam--being spoken by the boys; jagrhuh--would accept; na ghateta--it cannot be; iti--thus; tasya--of Krsna; tat--theactivity; balasya--of a small boy like Krsna; utpatanam--the uprooting; tarvoh--of the two trees; kecit--some of them; sandigdha-cetasah--became doubtful aboutwhat could be done (because Gargamuni had predicted that this child would beequal to Narayana).                             TRANSLATION   Because of intense paternal affection, the cowherd men, headed by Nanda,could not believe that Krsna could have uprooted the trees in such a wonderfulway. Therefore they could not put their faith in the words of the boys. Some ofthe men, however, were in doubt. "Since Krsna was predicted to equal Narayana,"they thought, "it might be that He could have done it."                               PURPORT   One view was that it was impossible for a small boy like this to have donesuch a thing as pulling down the trees. But there were doubts because Krsna hadbeen predicted to equal Narayana. Therefore the cowherd men were in a dilemma.                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT
                        ulukhalam vikarsantam                      damna baddham svam atmajam                       vilokya nandah prahasad-                          vadano vimumoca ha                               SYNONYMS   ulukhalam--the wooden mortar; vikarsantam--dragging; damna--by the rope;baddham--bound; svam atmajam--his own son Krsna; vilokya--by seeing; nandah--Maharaja Nanda; prahasat-vadanah--whose face began to smile when he saw thewonderful child; vimumoca ha--released Him from the bonds.                             TRANSLATION   When Nanda Maharaja saw his own son bound with ropes to the wooden mortar anddragging it, he smiled and released Krsna from His bonds.                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja was surprised that Yasoda, Krsna's mother, could have boundher beloved child in such a way. Krsna was exchanging love with her. How thencould she have been so cruel as to bind Him to the wooden mortar? Nanda Maharajaunderstood this exchange of love, and therefore he smiled and released Krsna. Inother words, as Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, binds a living entityin fruitive activities, He binds mother Yasoda and Nanda Maharaja in parentalaffection. This is His pastime.                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT                      gopibhih stobhito 'nrtyad                       bhagavan balavat kvacit                       udgayati kvacin mugdhas                       tad-vaso daru-yantravat                               SYNONYMS   gopibhih--by the gopis (by flattery and offers of prizes); stobhitah--encouraged, induced; anrtyat--the small Krsna danced; bhagavan--although He wasthe Supreme Personality of Godhead; bala-vat--exactly like a human child;kvacit--sometimes; udgayati--He would sing very loudly; kvacit--sometimes;mugdhah--being amazed; tat-vasah--under their control; daru-yantra-vat--like awooden doll.                             TRANSLATION   The gopis would say, "If You dance, my dear Krsna, then I shall give You halfa sweetmeat." By saying these words or by clapping their hands, all the gopisencouraged Krsna in different ways. At such times, although He was the supremelypowerful Personality of Godhead, He would smile and dance according to theirdesire, as if He were a wooden doll in their hands. Sometimes He would sing veryloudly, at their bidding. In this way, Krsna came completely under the controlof the gopis.                                TEXT 8
                                 TEXT                       bibharti kvacid ajnaptah                         pithakonmana-padukam                        bahu-ksepam ca kurute                       svanam ca pritim avahan                               SYNONYMS   bibharti--Krsna would simply stand and touch articles as if unable to raisethem; kvacit--sometimes; ajnaptah--being ordered; pithaka-unmana--the woodenseat and wooden measuring pot; padukam--bringing the wooden shoes; bahu-ksepamca--striking the arms on the body; kurute--does; svanam ca--of His ownrelatives, the gopis and other intimate friends; pritim--the pleasure; avahan--inviting.                             TRANSLATION   Sometimes mother Yasoda and her gopi friends would tell Krsna, "Bring thisarticle" or "Bring that article." Sometimes they would order Him to bring awooden plank, wooden shoes or a wooden measuring pot, and Krsna, when thusordered by the mothers, would try to bring them. Sometimes, however, as ifunable to raise these things, He would touch them and stand there. Just toinvite the pleasure of His relatives, He would strike His body with His arms toshow that He had sufficient strength.                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT                       darsayams tad-vidam loka                        atmano bhrtya-vasyatam                       vrajasyovaha vai harsam                       bhagavan bala-cestitaih                               SYNONYMS   darsayan--exhibiting; tat-vidam--unto persons who can understand Krsna'sactivities; loke--throughout the whole world; atmanah--of Himself; bhrtya-vasyatam--how He is agreeable to carrying out the orders of His servants, Hisdevotees; vrajasya--of Vrajabhumi; uvaha--executed; vai--indeed; harsam--pleasure; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bala-cestitaih--by Hisactivities like those of a child trying to do so many things.                             TRANSLATION   To pure devotees throughout the world who could understand His activities,the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, exhibited how much He can be subduedby His devotees, His servants. In this way He increased the pleasure of theVrajavasis by His childhood activities.                               PURPORT   That Krsna performed childhood activities to increase the pleasure of Hisdevotees was another transcendental humor. He exhibited these activities notonly to the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi, but also to others, who were captivatedby His external potency and opulence. Both the internal devotees, who weresimply absorbed in love of Krsna, and the external devotees, who were captivated
by His unlimited potency, were informed of Krsna's desire to be submissive toHis servants.                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT                        krinihi bhoh phalaniti                       srutva satvaram acyutah                       phalarthi dhanyam adaya                       yayau sarva-phala-pradah                               SYNONYMS   krinihi--please come and purchase; bhoh--O neighborhood residents; phalani--ripe fruits; iti--thus; srutva--hearing; satvaram--very soon; acyutah--Krsna;phala-arthi--as if He wanted some fruits; dhanyam adaya--capturing some grainsof paddy; yayau--went to the fruit vendor; sarva-phala-pradah--the SupremePersonality of Godhead, who can give all kinds of fruit to everyone, had nowbecome in need of fruits.                             TRANSLATION   Once a woman selling fruit was calling, "O inhabitants of Vrajabhumi, if youwant to purchase some fruits, come here!" Upon hearing this, Krsna immediatelytook some grains and went to barter as if He needed some fruits.                               PURPORT   Aborigines generally go to the villagers to sell fruits. How much theaborigines were attached to Krsna is here described. Krsna, to show His favor tothe aborigines, would immediately go purchase fruits, bartering with paddy inHis hand as He had seen others do.                               TEXT 11                                 TEXT                        phala-vikrayini tasya                       cyuta-dhanya-kara-dvayam                       phalair apurayad ratnaih                        phala-bhandam apuri ca                               SYNONYMS   phala-vikrayini--the aborigine fruit vendor, who was an elderly woman; tasya--of Krsna; cyuta-dhanya--the paddy He brought to barter having mostly fallen;kara-dvayam--palms of the hands; phalaih apurayat--the fruit vendor filled Hissmall palms with fruits; ratnaih--in exchange for jewels and gold; phala-bhandam--the basket of fruit; apuri ca--filled.                             TRANSLATION   While Krsna was going to the fruit vendor very hastily, most of the grains Hewas holding fell. Nonetheless, the fruit vendor filled Krsna's hands withfruits, and her fruit basket was immediately filled with jewels and gold.                               PURPORT
   In Bhagavad-gita (9.26) Krsna says:                      patram puspam phalam toyam                      yo me bhaktya prayacchati                       tad aham bhakty-upahrtam                         asnami prayatatmanah   Krsna is so kind that if anyone offers Him a leaf, a fruit, a flower or somewater, He will immediately accept it. The only condition is that these thingsshould be offered with bhakti (yo me bhaktya prayacchati). Otherwise, if one ispuffed up with false prestige, thinking, "I have so much opulence, and I amgiving something to Krsna," one's offering will not be accepted by Krsna. Thefruit vendor, although a woman belonging to the poor aborigine class, dealt withKrsna with great affection, saying, "Krsna, You have come to me to take somefruit in exchange for grains. All the grains have fallen, but still You may takewhatever You like." Thus she filled Krsna's palms with whatever fruits He couldcarry. In exchange, Krsna filled her whole basket with jewels and gold.   From this incident one should learn that for anything offered to Krsna withlove and affection, Krsna can reciprocate many millions of times over, bothmaterially and spiritually. The basic principle involved is an exchange of love.Therefore Krsna teaches in Bhagavad-gita (9.27):                        yat karosi yad asnasi                        yaj juhosi dadasi yat                        yat tapasyasi kaunteya                       tat kurusva mad-arpanam   "O son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you offer andgive away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should be done as anoffering unto Me." With love and affection, one should try to give something toKrsna from one's source of income. Then one's life will be successful. Krsna isfull in all opulences; He does not need anything from anyone. But if one isprepared to give something to Krsna, that is for one's own benefit. The examplegiven in this connection is that when one's real face is decorated, thereflection of one's face is automatically decorated. Similarly, if we try toserve Krsna with all our opulences, we, as parts and parcels or reflections ofKrsna, will become happy in exchange. Krsna is always happy, for He is atmarama,fully satisfied with His own opulence.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                       sarit-tira-gatam krsnam                       bhagnarjunam athahvayat                         ramam ca rohini devi                      kridantam balakair bhrsam                               SYNONYMS   sarit-tira--to the riverside; gatam--who had gone; krsnam--unto Krsna;bhagna-arjunam--after the pastime of breaking the yamala-arjuna trees; atha--then; ahvayat--called; ramam ca--as well as Balarama; rohini--the mother ofBalarama; devi--the goddess of fortune; kridantam--who were engaged in playing;balakaih--with many other boys; bhrsam--with deep attention.                             TRANSLATION
   Once, after the uprooting of the yamala-arjuna trees, Rohinidevi went to callRama and Krsna, who had both gone to the riverside and were playing with theother boys with deep attention.                               PURPORT   Mother Yasoda was more attached to Krsna and Balarama than Rohinidevi was,although Rohinidevi was the mother of Balarama. Mother Yasoda sent Rohinidevi tocall Rama and Krsna from Their play, since it was the right time for lunch.Therefore Rohinidevi went to call Them, breaking Their engagement in play.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT                         nopeyatam yadahutau                        krida-sangena putrakau                         yasodam presayam asa                        rohini putra-vatsalam                               SYNONYMS   na upeyatam--would not return home; yada--when; ahutau--They were called backfrom playing; krida-sangena--because of so much attachment to playing with otherboys; putrakau--the two sons (Krsna and Balarama); yasodam presayam asa--sentmother Yasoda to call Them; rohini--mother Rohini; putra-vatsalam--becausemother Yasoda was a more affectionate mother to Krsna and Balarama.                             TRANSLATION   Because of being too attached to playing with the other boys, Krsna andBalarama did not return upon being called by Rohini. Therefore Rohini sentmother Yasoda to call Them back, because mother Yasoda was more affectionate toKrsna and Balarama.                               PURPORT   Yasodam presayam asa. These very words show that since Krsna and Balarama didnot care to return in response to the order of Rohini, Rohini thought that ifYasoda called They would have to return, for Yasoda was more affectionate toKrsna and Balarama.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                      kridantam sa sutam balair                         ativelam sahagrajam                         yasodajohavit krsnam                       putra-sneha-snuta-stani                               SYNONYMS   kridantam--engaged in playing; sa--mother Yasoda; sutam--her son; balaih--with the other boys; ati-velam--although it was too late; saha-agrajam--who wasplaying with His elder brother, Balarama; yasoda--mother Yasoda; ajohavit--called ("Krsna and Balarama, come here!"); krsnam--unto Krsna; putra-sneha-
snuta-stani--while she was calling Them, milk flowed from her breast because ofher ecstatic love and affection.                             TRANSLATION   Krsna and Balarama, being attached to Their play, were playing with the otherboys although it was very late. Therefore mother Yasoda called Them back forlunch. Because of her ecstatic love and affection for Krsna and Balarama, milkflowed from her breasts.                               PURPORT   The word ajohavit means "calling them again and again." "Krsna and Balarama,"she called, "please come back. You are late for Your lunch. You have playedsufficiently. Come back."                               TEXT 15                                 TEXT                        krsna krsnaravindaksa                         tata ehi stanam piba                      alam viharaih ksut-ksantah                       krida-sranto 'si putraka                               SYNONYMS   krsna krsna aravinda-aksa--O Krsna, my son, lotus-eyed Krsna; tata--Odarling; ehi--come here; stanam--the milk of my breast; piba--drink; alamviharaih--after this there is no necessity of playing; ksut-ksantah--tiredbecause of hunger; krida-srantah--fatigued from playing; asi--You must be;putraka--O my son.                             TRANSLATION   Mother Yasoda said: My dear son Krsna, lotus-eyed Krsna, come here and drinkthe milk of my breast. My dear darling, You must be very tired because of hungerand the fatigue of playing so long. There is no need to play any more.                               TEXT 16                                 TEXT                         he ramagaccha tatasu                         sanujah kula-nandana                         pratar eva krtaharas                      tad bhavan bhoktum arhati                               SYNONYMS   he rama--my dear son Balarama; agaccha--please come here; tata--my deardarling; asu--immediately; sa-anujah--with Your younger brother; kula-nandana--the great hope of our family; pratah eva--certainly in the morning; krta-aharah--have taken Your breakfast; tat--therefore; bhavan--You; bhoktum--to eatsomething more; arhati--deserve.                             TRANSLATION
   My dear Baladeva, best of our family, please come immediately with Youryounger brother, Krsna. You both ate in the morning, and now You ought to eatsomething more.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                       pratiksate tvam dasarha                       bhoksyamano vrajadhipah                       ehy avayoh priyam dhehi                        sva-grhan yata balakah                               SYNONYMS   pratiksate--is waiting; tvam--for both of You (Krsna and Balarama); dasarha--O Balarama; bhoksyamanah--desiring to eat; vraja-adhipah--the King of Vraja,Nanda Maharaja; ehi--come here; avayoh--our; priyam--pleasure; dhehi--justconsider; sva-grhan--to their respective homes; yata--let them go; balakah--theother boys.                             TRANSLATION   Nanda Maharaja, the King of Vraja, is now waiting to eat. O my dear sonBalarama, he is waiting for You. Therefore, come back to please us. All the boysplaying with You and Krsna should now go to their homes.                               PURPORT   It appears that Nanda Maharaja regularly took his food with his two sons,Krsna and Balarama. Yasoda told the other boys, "Now you should go to yourhomes." Father and son generally sit together, so mother Yasoda requested Krsnaand Balarama to return, and she advised the other boys to go home so that theirparents would not have to wait for them.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                       dhuli-dhusaritangas tvam                         putra majjanam avaha                      janmarksam te 'dya bhavati                       viprebhyo dehi gah sucih                               SYNONYMS   dhuli-dhusarita-angah tvam--You have become covered with dust and sand allover Your body; putra--my dear son; majjanam avaha--now come here, take Yourbath and cleanse Yourself; janma-rksam--the auspicious star of Your birth; te--of You; adya--today; bhavati--it is; viprebhyah--unto the pure brahmanas; dehi--give in charity; gah--cows; sucih--being purified.                             TRANSLATION   Mother Yasoda further told Krsna: My dear son, because of playing all day,Your body has become covered with dust and sand. Therefore, come back, take Yourbath and cleanse Yourself. Today the moon is conjoined with the auspicious starof Your birth. Therefore, be pure and give cows in charity to the brahmanas.
                               PURPORT   It is a custom of Vedic culture that whenever there is any auspiciousceremony, one should give valuable cows in charity to the brahmanas. Thereforemother Yasoda requested Krsna, "Instead of being enthusiastic in playing, nowplease come and be enthusiastic in charity." Yajna-dana-tapah-karma na tyajyamkaryam eva tat. As advised in Bhagavad-gita (18.5), sacrifice, charity andausterity should never be given up. Yajno danam tapas caiva pavanani manisinam:even if one is very much advanced in spiritual life, one should not give upthese three duties. To observe one's birthday ceremony, one should do somethingin terms of one of these three items (yajna, dana or tapah), or all of themtogether.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                       pasya pasya vayasyams te                       matr-mrstan svalankrtan                       tvam ca snatah krtaharo                        viharasva svalankrtah                               SYNONYMS   pasya pasya--just see, just see; vayasyan--boys of Your age; te--Your; matr-mrstan--cleansed by their mothers; su-alankrtan--decorated with nice ornaments;tvam ca--You also; snatah--after taking a bath; krta-aharah--and eating Yourlunch; viharasva--enjoy with them; su-alankrtah--fully decorated like them.                             TRANSLATION   Just see how all Your playmates of Your own age have been cleansed anddecorated with beautiful ornaments by their mothers. You should come here, andafter You have taken Your bath, eaten Your lunch and been decorated withornaments, You may play with Your friends again.                               PURPORT   Generally young boys are competitive. If one friend has done something,another friend also wants to do something. Therefore mother Yasoda pointed outhow Krsna's playmates were decorated, so that Krsna might be induced to decorateHimself like them.                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                   ittham yasoda tam asesa-sekharam                 matva sutam sneha-nibaddha-dhir nrpa                   haste grhitva saha-ramam acyutam                  nitva sva-vatam krtavaty athodayam                               SYNONYMS   ittham--in this way; yasoda--mother Yasoda; tam asesa-sekharam--unto Krsna,who was on the peak of everything auspicious, with no question of dirtiness oruncleanliness; matva--considering; sutam--as her son; sneha-nibaddha-dhih--
because of an intense spirit of love; nrpa--O King (Maharaja Pariksit); haste--in the hand; grhitva--taking; saha-ramam--with Balarama; acyutam--Krsna, theinfallible; nitva--bringing; sva-vatam--at home; krtavati--performed; atha--now;udayam--brilliancy by bathing Him, dressing Him and decorating Him withornaments.                             TRANSLATION   My dear Maharaja Pariksit, because of intense love and affection, motherYasoda, Krsna's mother, considered Krsna, who was at the peak of all opulences,to be her own son. Thus she took Krsna by the hand, along with Balarama, andbrought Them home, where she performed her duties by fully bathing Them,dressing Them and feeding Them.                               PURPORT   Krsna is always neat, clean and opulent and does not need to be washed,bathed or dressed, yet mother Yasoda, because of affection, considered Him herordinary child and did her duties to keep her son brilliant.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                        gopa-vrddha mahotpatan                          anubhuya brhadvane                         nandadayah samagamya                       vraja-karyam amantrayan                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; gopa-vrddhah--the elderly personsamong the cowherd men; maha-utpatan--very great disturbances; anubhuya--afterexperiencing; brhadvane--in the place known as Brhadvana; nanda-adayah--thecowherd men, headed by Nanda Maharaja; samagamya--assembled, came together;vraja-karyam--the business of Vrajabhumi; amantrayan--deliberated on how to stopthe continuous disturbances in Mahavana.                             TRANSLATION   Sri Sukadeva Gosvami continued: Then one time, having seen the greatdisturbances in Brhadvana, all the elderly persons among the cowherd men, headedby Nanda Maharaja, assembled and began to consider what to do to stop thecontinuous disturbing situations in Vraja.                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT                         tatropananda-namaha                       gopo jnana-vayo-'dhikah                      desa-kalartha-tattva-jnah                       priya-krd rama-krsnayoh                               SYNONYMS
   tatra--in the assembly; upananda-nama--by the name Upananda (the elderbrother of Nanda Maharaja); aha--said; gopah--the cowherd man; jnana-vayah-adhikah--who by knowledge and by age was the eldest of all; desa-kala-artha-tattva-jnah--very experienced according to time, place and circumstances; priya-krt--just for the benefit; rama-krsnayoh--of Balarama and Krsna, the SupremePersonalities of Godhead.                             TRANSLATION   At this meeting of all the inhabitants of Gokula, a cowherd man namedUpananda, who was the most mature in age and knowledge and was very experiencedaccording to time, circumstances and country, made this suggestion for thebenefit of Rama and Krsna.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                       utthatavyam ito 'smabhir                        gokulasya hitaisibhih                        ayanty atra mahotpata                         balanam nasa-hetavah                               SYNONYMS   utthatavyam--now this place should be left; itah--from here, from Gokula;asmabhih--by all of us; gokulasya--of this place, Gokula; hita-esibhih--bypersons who desire good for this place; ayanti--are happening; atra--here; maha-utpatah--many great disturbances; balanam--for the boys like Rama and Krsna;nasa-hetavah--having the definite purpose of killing Them.                             TRANSLATION   He said: My dear friends the cowherd men, in order to do good to this place,Gokula, we should leave it, because so many disturbances are always occurringhere, just for the purpose of killing Rama and Krsna.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                      muktah kathancid raksasya                      bala-ghnya balako hy asau                        harer anugrahan nunam                         anas copari napatat                               SYNONYMS   muktah--was delivered; kathancit--somehow or other; raksasyah--from the handsof the Raksasi Putana; bala-ghnyah--who was determined to kill small children;balakah--especially the child Krsna; hi--because; asau--He; hareh anugrahat--bythe mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nunam--indeed; anah ca--and thehandcart; upari--on top of the child; na--not; apatat--did fall down.                             TRANSLATION   The child Krsna, simply by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,was somehow or other rescued from the hands of the Raksasi Putana, who was
determined to kill Him. Then, again by the mercy of the Supreme Godhead, thehandcart missed falling upon the child.                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT                        cakra-vatena nito 'yam                        daityena vipadam viyat                        silayam patitas tatra                        paritratah suresvaraih                               SYNONYMS   cakra-vatena--by the demon in the shape of a whirlwind (Trnavarta); nitahayam--Krsna was taken away; daityena--by the demon; vipadam--dangerous; viyat--to the sky; silayam--on a slab of stone; patitah--fallen; tatra--there;paritratah--was saved; sura-isvaraih--by the mercy of Lord Visnu or Hisassociates.                             TRANSLATION   Then again, the demon Trnavarta, in the form of a whirlwind, took the childaway into the dangerous sky to kill Him, but the demon fell down onto a slab ofstone. In that case also, by the mercy of Lord Visnu or His associates, thechild was saved.                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                       yan na mriyeta drumayor                        antaram prapya balakah                          asav anyatamo vapi                       tad apy acyuta-raksanam                               SYNONYMS   yat--then again; na mriyeta--did not die; drumayoh antaram--between the twotrees; prapya--although He was between; balakah asau--that child, Krsna;anyatamah--another child; va api--or; tat api acyuta-raksanam--in that casealso, He was saved by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.                             TRANSLATION   Even the other day, neither Krsna nor any of His playmates died from thefalling of the two trees, although the children were near the trees or evenbetween them. This also is to be considered the mercy of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                        yavad autpatiko 'risto                       vrajam nabhibhaved itah                         tavad balan upadaya                       yasyamo 'nyatra sanugah
                               SYNONYMS   yavat--so long; autpatikah--disturbing; aristah--the demon; vrajam--thisGokula Vrajabhumi; na--not; abhibhavet itah--go away from this place; tavat--solong; balan upadaya--for the benefit of the boys; yasyamah--we shall go;anyatra--somewhere else; sa-anugah--with our followers.                             TRANSLATION   All these incidents are being caused by some unknown demon. Before he comeshere to create another disturbance, it is our duty to go somewhere else with theboys until there are no more disturbances.                               PURPORT   Upananda suggested, "By the mercy of Lord Visnu, Krsna has always been savedfrom so many dangerous incidents. Now let us leave this place and go someplacewhere we may worship Lord Visnu undisturbed, before there is another cause ofdeath from some demon who may attack us." A devotee desires only that he mayexecute devotional service undisturbed. Actually we see, however, that evenduring the presence of Krsna, when Nanda Maharaja and the other cowherd men hadthe Supreme Personality of Godhead in their presence, there were disturbances.Of course, in every case, Krsna came out victorious. The instruction we mayderive from this is that we should not be disturbed by so-called disturbances.There have been so many disturbances to our Krsna consciousness movement, but wecannot give up our forward march. On the contrary, people are receiving thismovement very enthusiastically all over the world, and they are purchasingliterature about Krsna consciousness with redoubled energy. Thus there are bothencouragements and disturbances. This was so even in Krsna's time.                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                        vanam vrndavanam nama                        pasavyam nava-kananam                        gopa-gopi-gavam sevyam                        punyadri-trna-virudham                               SYNONYMS   vanam--another forest; vrndavanam nama--named Vrndavana; pasavyam--a verysuitable place for maintenance of the cows and other animals; nava-kananam--there are many new gardenlike places; gopa-gopi-gavam--for all the cowherd men,the members of their families, and the cows; sevyam--a very happy, very suitableplace; punya-adri--there are nice mountains; trna--plants; virudham--andcreepers.                             TRANSLATION   Between Nandesvara and Mahavana is a place named Vrndavana. This place isvery suitable because it is lush with grass, plants and creepers for the cowsand other animals. It has nice gardens and tall mountains and is full offacilities for the happiness of all the gopas and gopis and our animals.                               PURPORT
   Vrndavana is situated between Nandesvara and Mahavana. Formerly the cowherdmen had shifted to Mahavana, but still there were disturbances. Therefore thecowherd men selected Vrndavana, which was between the two villages, and decidedto go there.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                       tat tatradyaiva yasyamah                       sakatan yunkta ma ciram                        godhanany agrato yantu                         bhavatam yadi rocate                               SYNONYMS   tat--therefore; tatra--there; adya eva--just today; yasyamah--let us go;sakatan--all the carts; yunkta--make ready; ma ciram--without delay; go-dhanani--all the cows; agratah--in front; yantu--let them go; bhavatam--of all of you;yadi--if; rocate--it is pleasing to accept it.                             TRANSLATION   Therefore, let us immediately go today. There is no need to wait any further.If you agree to my proposal, let us prepare all the bullock carts and put thecows in front of us, and let us go there.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                      tac chrutvaika-dhiyo gopah                       sadhu sadhv iti vadinah                      vrajan svan svan samayujya                        yayu rudha-paricchadah                               SYNONYMS   tat srutva--hearing this advice of Upananda's; eka-dhiyah--votingunanimously; gopah--all the cowherd men; sadhu sadhu--very nice, very nice; iti--thus; vadinah--speaking, declaring; vrajan--cows; svan svan--own respective;samayujya--assembling; yayuh--started; rudha-paricchadah--all the dresses andparaphernalia having been kept on the carts.                             TRANSLATION   Upon hearing this advice from Upananda, the cowherd men unanimously agreed."Very nice," they said. "Very nice." Thus they sorted out their householdaffairs, placed their clothing and other paraphernalia on the carts, andimmediately started for Vrndavana.                             TEXTS 31-32                                 TEXT                      vrddhan balan striyo rajan                          sarvopakaranani ca                         anahsv aropya gopala
                         yatta atta-sarasanah                         godhanani puraskrtya                       srngany apurya sarvatah                         turya-ghosena mahata                         yayuh saha-purohitah                               SYNONYMS   vrddhan--first all the old men; balan--children; striyah--women; rajan--OKing Pariksit; sarva-upakaranani ca--then all sorts of necessities and whateverbelongings they had; anahsu--on the bullock carts; aropya--keeping; gopalah--allthe cowherd men; yattah--with great care; atta-sara-asanah--fully equipped witharrows and bows; go-dhanani--all the cows; puraskrtya--keeping in front;srngani--bugles or horns; apurya--vibrating; sarvatah--all around; turya-ghosena--with the resounding of the bugles; mahata--loud; yayuh--started; saha-purohitah--with the priests.                             TRANSLATION   Keeping all the old men, women, children and household paraphernalia on thebullock carts and keeping all the cows in front, the cowherd men picked up theirbows and arrows with great care and sounded bugles made of horn. O KingPariksit, in this way, with bugles vibrating all around, the cowherd men,accompanied by their priests, began their journey.                               PURPORT   In this connection it is to be noted that although the inhabitants of Gokulawere mostly cowherd men and cultivators, they knew how to defend themselves fromdanger and how to give protection to the women, the old men, the cows and thechildren, as well as to the brahminical purohitas.                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                       gopyo rudha-ratha nutna-                        kuca-kunkuma-kantayah                       krsna-lila jaguh pritya                       niska-kanthyah suvasasah                               SYNONYMS   gopyah--all the cowherd women; rudha-rathah--while riding on the bullockcarts; nutna-kuca-kunkuma-kantayah--their bodies, especially their breasts, weredecorated with fresh kunkuma; krsna-lilah--the pastimes of Krsna; jaguh--theychanted; pritya--with great pleasure; niska-kanthyah--decorated with lockets ontheir necks; su-vasasah--very well dressed.                             TRANSLATION   The cowherd women, riding on the bullock carts, were dressed very nicely withexcellent garments, and their bodies, especially their breasts, were decoratedwith fresh kunkuma powder. As they rode, they began to chant with great pleasurethe pastimes of Krsna.                               TEXT 34
                                 TEXT                        tatha yasoda-rohinyav                         ekam sakatam asthite                       rejatuh krsna-ramabhyam                        tat-katha-sravanotsuke                               SYNONYMS   tatha--as well as; yasoda-rohinyau--both mother Yasoda and mother Rohini;ekam sakatam--on one bullock cart; asthite--seated; rejatuh--very beautiful;krsna-ramabhyam--Krsna and Balarama, along with Their mothers; tat-katha--of thepastimes of Krsna and Balarama; sravana-utsuke--being situated in hearing withgreat transcendental pleasure.                             TRANSLATION   Thus hearing about the pastimes of Krsna and Balarama with great pleasure,mother Yasoda and Rohinidevi, so as not to be separated from Krsna and Balaramafor even a moment, got up with Them on one bullock cart. In this situation, theyall looked very beautiful.                               PURPORT   It appears that mother Yasoda and Rohini could not be separated from Krsnaand Balarama even for a moment. They used to pass their time either by takingcare of Krsna and Balarama or by chanting about Their pastimes. Thus motherYasoda and Rohini looked very beautiful.                               TEXT 35                                 TEXT                        vrndavanam sampravisya                        sarva-kala-sukhavaham                       tatra cakrur vrajavasam                       sakatair ardha-candravat                               SYNONYMS   vrndavanam--the sacred place by the name Vrndavana; sampravisya--afterentering; sarva-kala-sukha-avaham--where in all seasons it is pleasing to live;tatra--there; cakruh--they made; vraja-avasam--inhabitation of Vraja; sakataih--by the bullock carts; ardha-candravat--making a semicircle like a half moon.                             TRANSLATION   In this way they entered Vrndavana, where it is always pleasing to live inall seasons. They made a temporary place to inhabit by placing their bullockcarts around them in the shape of a half moon.                               PURPORT   As stated in the Visnu Purana:                        sakati-vata-paryantas                      candrardha-kara-samsthite
   And as stated in the Hari-vamsa:                      kantakibhih pravrddhabhis                      tatha kantakibhir drumaih                       nikhatocchrita-sakhabhir                        abhiguptam samantatah   There was no need to make fences all around. One side was already defended bythorn trees, and thus the thorn trees, the bullock carts and the animalsencircled the inhabitants in their temporary residence.                               TEXT 36                                 TEXT                        vrndavanam govardhanam                          yamuna-pulinani ca                        viksyasid uttama priti                         rama-madhavayor nrpa                               SYNONYMS   vrndavanam--the place known as Vrndavana; govardhanam--along with GovardhanaHill; yamuna-pulinani ca--and the banks of the River Yamuna; viksya--seeing thissituation; asit--remained or was enjoyed; uttama priti--first-class pleasure;rama-madhavayoh--of Krsna and Balarama; nrpa--O King Pariksit.                             TRANSLATION   O King Pariksit, when Rama and Krsna saw Vrndavana, Govardhana and the banksof the River Yamuna, They both enjoyed great pleasure.                               TEXT 37                                 TEXT                       evam vrajaukasam pritim                      yacchantau bala-cestitaih                       kala-vakyaih sva-kalena                        vatsa-palau babhuvatuh                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this way; vraja-okasam--to all the inhabitants of Vraja; pritim--pleasure; yacchantau--giving; bala-cestitaih--by the activities and pastimes ofchildhood; kala-vakyaih--and by very sweet broken language; sva-kalena--in duecourse of time; vatsa-palau--to take care of the calves; babhuvatuh--were grownup.                             TRANSLATION   In this way, Krsna and Balarama, acting like small boys and talking in half-broken language, gave transcendental pleasure to all the inhabitants of Vraja.In due course of time, They became old enough to take care of the calves.                               PURPORT
   As soon as Krsna and Balarama were a little grown up, They were meant fortaking care of the calves. Although born of a very well-to-do family, They stillhad to take care of the calves. This was the system of education. Those who werenot born in brahmana families were not meant for academic education. Thebrahmanas were trained in a literary, academic education, the ksatriyas weretrained to take care of the state, and the vaisyas learned how to cultivate theland and take care of the cows and calves. There was no need to waste time goingto school to be falsely educated and later increase the numbers of theunemployed. Krsna and Balarama taught us by Their personal behavior. Krsna tookcare of the cows and played His flute, and Balarama took care of agriculturalactivities with a plow in His hand.                               TEXT 38                                 TEXT                         avidure vraja-bhuvah                         saha gopala-darakaih                        carayam asatur vatsan                        nana-krida-paricchadau                               SYNONYMS   avidure--not very far from the residential quarters of the Vrajavasis; vraja-bhuvah--from the land known as Vraja; saha gopala-darakaih--with other boys ofthe same profession (cowherd boys); carayam asatuh--tended; vatsan--the smallcalves; nana--various; krida--sporting; paricchadau--dressed very nicely indifferent ways and equipped with implements.                             TRANSLATION   Not far away from Their residential quarters, both Krsna and Balarama,equipped with all kinds of playthings, played with other cowherd boys and beganto tend the small calves.                             TEXTS 39-40                                 TEXT                        kvacid vadayato venum                      ksepanaih ksipatah kvacit                      kvacit padaih kinkinibhih                       kvacit krtrima-go-vrsaih                        vrsayamanau nardantau                         yuyudhate parasparam                       anukrtya rutair jantums                        ceratuh prakrtau yatha                               SYNONYMS   kvacit--sometimes; vadayatah--blowing; venum--on the flute; ksepanaih--with adevice of rope for throwing; ksipatah--throwing stones to get fruit; kvacit--sometimes; kvacit padaih--sometimes with the legs; kinkinibhih--with the soundof ankle bells; kvacit--sometimes; krtrima-go-vrsaih--by becoming artificialcows and bulls; vrsayamanau--imitating the animals; nardantau--roaring loudly;yuyudhate--They both used to fight; parasparam--with one another; anukrtya--
imitating; rutaih--by resounding; jantun--all the animals; ceratuh--They used towander; prakrtau--two ordinary human children; yatha--like.                             TRANSLATION   Sometimes Krsna and Balarama would play on Their flutes, sometimes They wouldthrow ropes and stones devised for getting fruits from the trees, sometimes Theywould throw only stones, and sometimes, Their ankle bells tinkling, They wouldplay football with fruits like bael and amalaki. Sometimes They would coverThemselves with blankets and imitate cows and bulls and fight with one another,roaring loudly, and sometimes They would imitate the voices of the animals. Inthis way They enjoyed sporting, exactly like two ordinary human children.                               PURPORT   Vrndavana is full of peacocks. Kujat-kokila-hamsa-sarasa-ganakirnemayurakule. The Vrndavana forest is always full of cuckoos, ducks, swans,peacocks, cranes and also monkeys, bulls and cows. So Krsna and Balarama used toimitate the sounds of these animals and enjoy sporting.                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT                         kadacid yamuna-tire                      vatsams carayatoh svakaih                       vayasyaih krsna-balayor                       jighamsur daitya agamat                               SYNONYMS   kadacit--sometimes; yamuna-tire--on the bank of the Yamuna; vatsan--thecalves; carayatoh--when They were tending; svakaih--Their own; vayasyaih--withother playmates; krsna-balayoh--both Krsna and Balarama; jighamsuh--desiring tokill Them; daityah--another demon; agamat--reached there.                             TRANSLATION   One day while Rama and Krsna, along with Their playmates, were tending thecalves on the bank of the River Yamuna, another demon arrived there, desiring tokill Them.                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                       tam vatsa-rupinam viksya                       vatsa-yutha-gatam harih                         darsayan baladevaya                        sanair mugdha ivasadat                               SYNONYMS   tam--unto the demon; vatsa-rupinam--assuming the form of a calf; viksya--seeing; vatsa-yutha-gatam--when the demon entered the group of all the othercalves; harih--the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; darsayan--indicating;baladevaya--unto Baladeva; sanaih--very slowly; mugdhah iva--as if He did notunderstand anything; asadat--came near the demon.
                             TRANSLATION   When the Supreme Personality of Godhead saw that the demon had assumed theform of a calf and entered among the groups of other calves, He pointed out toBaladeva, "Here is another demon." Then He very slowly approached the demon, asif He did not understand the demon's intentions.                               PURPORT   The import of the words mugdha iva is that although Krsna knows everything,here He pretended that He did not understand why the demon had entered among thecalves, and He informed Baladeva by a sign.                               TEXT 43                                 TEXT                        grhitvapara-padabhyam                        saha-langulam acyutah                       bhramayitva kapitthagre                        prahinod gata-jivitam                       sa kapitthair maha-kayah                        patyamanaih papata ha                               SYNONYMS   grhitva--capturing; apara-padabhyam--with the hind legs; saha--along with;langulam--the tail; acyutah--Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead;bhramayitva--twirling around very severely; kapittha-agre--on the top of akapittha tree; prahinot--threw him; gata-jivitam--lifeless body; sah--thatdemon; kapitthaih--with the kapittha trees; maha-kayah--assumed a great body;patyamanaih--and while the tree fell down; papata ha--he fell dead on theground.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, Sri Krsna caught the demon by the hind legs and tail, twirled thedemon's whole body very strongly until the demon was dead, and threw him intothe top of a kapittha tree, which then fell down, along with the body of thedemon, who had assumed a great form.                               PURPORT   Krsna killed the demon in such a way as to get the kapittha fruits to fall sothat He and Balarama and the other boys could take advantage of the opportunityto eat them. The kapittha is sometimes called ksatbelphala. The pulp of thisfruit is very palatable. It is sweet and sour, and everyone likes it.                               TEXT 44                                 TEXT                       tam viksya vismita balah                       sasamsuh sadhu sadhv iti                        devas ca parisantusta                       babhuvuh puspa-varsinah
                               SYNONYMS   tam--this incident; viksya--observing; vismitah--very much astonished; balah--all the other boys; sasamsuh--praised highly; sadhu sadhu iti--exclaiming,"Very good, very good"; devah ca--and all the demigods from the heavenlyplanets; parisantustah--being very much satisfied; babhuvuh--became; puspa-varsinah--showered flowers on Krsna.                             TRANSLATION   Upon seeing the dead body of the demon, all the cowherd boys exclaimed, "Welldone, Krsna! Very good, very good! Thank You." In the upper planetary system,all the demigods were pleased, and therefore they showered flowers on theSupreme Personality of Godhead.                               TEXT 45                                 TEXT                       tau vatsa-palakau bhutva                        sarva-lokaika-palakau                       sapratar-asau go-vatsams                         carayantau viceratuh                               SYNONYMS   tau--Krsna and Balarama; vatsa-palakau--as if taking care of the calves;bhutva--so becoming; sarva-loka-eka-palakau--although They are the maintainersof all living beings throughout the whole universe; sa-pratah-asau--finishingbreakfast in the morning; go-vatsan--all the calves; carayantau--tending;viceratuh--wandered here and there.                             TRANSLATION   After the killing of the demon, Krsna and Balarama finished Their breakfastin the morning, and while continuing to take care of the calves, They wanderedhere and there. Krsna and Balarama, the Supreme Personalities of Godhead, whomaintain the entire creation, now took charge of the calves as if cowherd boys.                               PURPORT   Paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam. Krsna's daily business here inthis material world was to kill the duskrtis. This did not hamper His dailyaffairs, for it was routine work. While He tended the calves on the bank of theRiver Yamuna, two or three incidents took place every day, and although thesewere serious, killing the demons one after another appeared to be His dailyroutine work.                               TEXT 46                                 TEXT                     svam svam vatsa-kulam sarve                          payayisyanta ekada                        gatva jalasayabhyasam                        payayitva papur jalam                               SYNONYMS
   svam svam--own respective; vatsa-kulam--the group of calves; sarve--all theboys and Krsna and Balarama; payayisyantah--desiring to have them drink water;ekada--one day; gatva--going; jala-asaya-abhyasam--near the water tank;payayitva--after allowing the animals to drink water; papuh jalam--they alsodrank water.                             TRANSLATION   One day all the boys, including Krsna and Balarama, each boy taking his owngroup of calves, brought the calves to a reservoir of water, desiring to allowthem to drink. After the animals drank water, the boys drank water there also.                               TEXT 47                                 TEXT                        te tatra dadrsur bala                       maha-sattvam avasthitam                      tatrasur vajra-nirbhinnam                       gireh srngam iva cyutam                               SYNONYMS   te--they; tatra--there; dadrsuh--observed; balah--all the boys; maha-sattvam--a gigantic body; avasthitam--situated; tatrasuh--became afraid; vajra-nirbhinnam--broken by a thunderbolt; gireh srngam--the peak of a mountain; iva--like; cyutam--fallen there.                             TRANSLATION   Right by the reservoir, the boys saw a gigantic body resembling a mountainpeak broken and struck down by a thunderbolt. They were afraid even to see sucha huge living being.                               TEXT 48                                 TEXT                        sa vai bako nama mahan                         asuro baka-rupa-dhrk                         agatya sahasa krsnam                      tiksna-tundo 'grasad bali                               SYNONYMS   sah--that creature; vai--indeed; bakah nama--by the name Bakasura; mahanasurah--a great, gigantic demon; baka-rupa-dhrk--assumed the bodily shape of abig duck; agatya--coming there; sahasa--all of a sudden; krsnam--Krsna; tiksna-tundah--sharp beak; agrasat--swallowed; bali--very powerful.                             TRANSLATION   That great-bodied demon was named Bakasura. He had assumed the body of a duckwith a very sharp beak. Having come there, he immediately swallowed Krsna.                               TEXT 49
                                 TEXT                       krsnam maha-baka-grastam                       drstva ramadayo 'rbhakah                         babhuvur indriyaniva                        vina pranam vicetasah                               SYNONYMS   krsnam--unto Krsna; maha-baka-grastam--swallowed by the great duck; drstva--seeing this incident; rama-adayah arbhakah--all the other boys, headed byBalarama; babhuvuh--became overwhelmed; indriyani--senses; iva--like; vina--without; pranam--life; vicetasah--very much bewildered, almost unconscious.                             TRANSLATION   When Balarama and the other boys saw that Krsna had been devoured by thegigantic duck, they became almost unconscious, like senses without life.                               PURPORT   Although Balarama can do everything, because of intense affection for Hisbrother He was momentarily bewildered. A similar thing is stated to havehappened in connection with rukmini-harana, the kidnapping of Rukmini. WhenKrsna, after kidnapping Rukmini, was attacked by all the kings, Rukmini wasmomentarily bewildered, until the Lord took the proper steps.                               TEXT 50                                 TEXT                  tam talu-mulam pradahantam agnivad                   gopala-sunum pitaram jagad-guroh                 caccharda sadyo 'tirusaksatam bakas                  tundena hantum punar abhyapadyata                               SYNONYMS   tam--Krsna; talu-mulam--the root of the throat; pradahantam--burning; agni-vat--like fire; gopala-sunum--Krsna, the son of a cowherd man; pitaram--thefather; jagat-guroh--of Lord Brahma; caccharda--got out of his mouth; sadyah--immediately; ati-rusa--with great anger; aksatam--without being hurt; bakah--Bakasura; tundena--with his sharp beak; hantum--to kill; punah--again;abhyapadyata--endeavored.                             TRANSLATION   Krsna, who was the father of Lord Brahma but who was acting as the son of acowherd man, became like fire, burning the root of the demon's throat, and thedemon Bakasura immediately disgorged Him. When the demon saw that Krsna,although having been swallowed, was unharmed, he immediately attacked Krsnaagain with his sharp beak.                               PURPORT   Although Krsna is always as soft as a lotus, within the throat of Bakasura Hecreated a burning sensation of being hotter than fire. Although Krsna's wholebody is sweeter than sugar candy, Bakasura tasted bitterness and therefore
immediately vomited Krsna up. As stated in Bhagavad-gita (4.11), ye yatha mamprapadyante tams tathaiva bhajamy aham. When Krsna is accepted as an enemy, Hebecomes the most intolerable object for the nondevotee, who cannot tolerateKrsna within or without. Here this is shown by the example of Bakasura.                               TEXT 51                                 TEXT                  tam apatantam sa nigrhya tundayor               dorbhyam bakam kamsa-sakham satam patih                    pasyatsu balesu dadara lilaya                    mudavaho viranavad divaukasam                               SYNONYMS   tam--unto Bakasura; apatantam--again endeavoring to attack Him; sah--LordKrsna; nigrhya--capturing; tundayoh--by the beak; dorbhyam--with His arms;bakam--Bakasura; kamsa-sakham--who was the friend and associate of Kamsa; satampatih--Lord Krsna, the master of the Vaisnavas; pasyatsu--while observing;balesu--all the cowherd boys; dadara--bifurcated; lilaya--very easily; muda-avahah--this action was very much pleasing; virana-vat--like the grass calledvirana (as it is bifurcated); divaukasam--to all the denizens of heaven.                             TRANSLATION   When Krsna, the leader of the Vaisnavas, saw that the demon Bakasura, thefriend of Kamsa, was endeavoring to attack Him, with His arms He captured thedemon by the two halves of the beak, and in the presence of all the cowherd boysKrsna very easily bifurcated Him, as a child splits a blade of virana grass. Bythus killing the demon, Krsna very much pleased the denizens of heaven.                               TEXT 52                                 TEXT                    tada bakarim sura-loka-vasinah                   samakiran nandana-mallikadibhih                  samidire canaka-sankha-samstavais                   tad viksya gopala-suta visismire                               SYNONYMS   tada--at that time; baka-arim--unto the enemy of Bakasura; sura-loka-vasinah--the celestial denizens of the higher planets; samakiran--showered flowers;nandana-mallika-adibhih--with such flowers as mallika, which are grown inNandana-kanana; samidire--also congratulated Him; ca--and; anaka-sankha-samstavaih--by celestial kettledrums and conchshells, accompanied with prayers;tat viksya--by seeing this; gopala-sutah--the cowherd boys; visismire--werestruck with wonder.                             TRANSLATION   At that time, the celestial denizens of the higher planetary system showeredmallika-puspa, flowers grown in Nandana-kanana, upon Krsna, the enemy ofBakasura. They also congratulated Him by sounding celestial kettledrums andconchshells and by offering prayers. Seeing this, the cowherd boys were struckwith wonder.
                               TEXT 53                                 TEXT                   muktam bakasyad upalabhya balaka                   ramadayah pranam ivendriyo ganah                 sthanagatam tam parirabhya nirvrtah                 praniya vatsan vrajam etya taj jaguh                               SYNONYMS   muktam--thus released; baka-asyat--from the mouth of Bakasura; upalabhya--getting back; balakah--all the boys, the playmates; rama-adayah--headed byBalarama; pranam--life; iva--like; indriyah--senses; ganah--all of them; sthana-agatam--going to their own place; tam--unto Krsna; parirabhya--embracing;nirvrtah--being freed from the danger; praniya--after collecting; vatsan--allthe calves; vrajam etya--returning to Vrajabhumi; tat jaguh--loudly declared theincident.                             TRANSLATION   Just as the senses are pacified when consciousness and life return, so whenKrsna was freed from this danger, all the boys, including Balarama, thought thattheir life had been restored. They embraced Krsna in good consciousness, andthen they collected their own calves and returned to Vrajabhumi, where theydeclared the incident loudly.                               PURPORT   It was the practice of the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi to compose poetry aboutthe incidents that occurred in the forest when Krsna performed His differentactivities of killing the asuras. They would compose all the stories in poetryor have this done by professional poets, and then they would sing about theseincidents. Thus it is written here that the boys sang very loudly.                               TEXT 54                                 TEXT                       srutva tad vismita gopa                        gopyas catipriyadrtah                        pretyagatam ivotsukyad                        aiksanta trsiteksanah                               SYNONYMS   srutva--after hearing; tat--these incidents; vismitah--being struck withwonder; gopah--the cowherd men; gopyah ca--and their respective wives; ati-priya-adrtah--received the news with great transcendental pleasure; pretyaagatam iva--thought that it was as if the boys had returned from death;utsukyat--with great eagerness; aiksanta--began to look upon the boys; trsita-iksanah--with full satisfaction, they did not want to turn their eyes from Krsnaand the boys.                             TRANSLATION
   When the cowherd men and women heard about the killing of Bakasura in theforest, they were very much astonished. Upon seeing Krsna and hearing the story,they received Krsna very eagerly, thinking that Krsna and the other boys hadreturned from the mouth of death. Thus they looked upon Krsna and the boys withsilent eyes, not wanting to turn their eyes aside now that the boys were safe.                               PURPORT   Because of intense love for Krsna, the cowherd men and women simply remainedsilent, thinking of how Krsna and the boys had been saved. The cowherd men andwomen looked upon Krsna and the boys and did not desire to turn their eyesaside.                               TEXT 55                                 TEXT                         aho batasya balasya                        bahavo mrtyavo 'bhavan                       apy asid vipriyam tesam                       krtam purvam yato bhayam                               SYNONYMS   aho bata--it is very astonishing; asya--of this; balasya--Krsna; bahavah--many, many; mrtyavah--causes of death; abhavan--appeared; api--still; asit--there was; vipriyam--the cause of death; tesam--of them; krtam--done; purvam--formerly; yatah--from which; bhayam--there was fear of death.                             TRANSLATION   The cowherd men, headed by Nanda Maharaja, began to contemplate: It is veryastonishing that although this boy Krsna has many times faced many varied causesof death, by the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead it was these causesof fear that were killed, instead of Him.                               PURPORT   The cowherd men innocently thought, "Because our Krsna is innocent, thecauses of death that appeared before Him were themselves killed instead ofKrsna. This is the greatest grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead."                               TEXT 56                                 TEXT                       athapy abhibhavanty enam                       naiva te ghora-darsanah                        jighamsayainam asadya                      nasyanty agnau patangavat                               SYNONYMS   atha api--although they come to attack; abhibhavanti--they are able to kill;enam--this boy; na--not; eva--certainly; te--all of them; ghora-darsanah--veryfierce looking; jighamsaya--because of envy; enam--unto Krsna; asadya--approaching; nasyanti--are vanquished (death occurs to the aggressor); agnau--infire; patanga-vat--like flies.
                             TRANSLATION   Although the causes of death, the daityas, were very fierce, they could notkill this boy Krsna. Rather, because they came to kill innocent boys, as soon asthey approached they themselves were killed, exactly like flies attacking afire.                               PURPORT   Nanda Maharaja innocently thought, "Perhaps this boy Krsna formerly killedall these demons, and therefore in this life they are envious and are attackingHim. But Krsna is a fire, and they are flies, and in a fight between fire andflies, the fire is always victorious." Fighting is always taking place betweenthe demons and the power of the Supreme Personality. Paritranaya sadhunamvinasaya ca duskrtam (Bg. 4.8). Anyone who is against the control of the SupremePersonality of Godhead must be killed, life after life. Ordinary living beingsare subject to karma, but the Supreme Personality of Godhead is alwaysvictorious over the demons.                               TEXT 57                                 TEXT                        aho brahma-vidam vaco                       nasatyah santi karhicit                        gargo yad aha bhagavan                        anvabhavi tathaiva tat                               SYNONYMS   aho--how wonderful it is; brahma-vidam--of persons who have full knowledge ofBrahman, transcendence; vacah--the words; na--never; asatyah--untruth; santi--become; karhicit--at any time; gargah--Gargamuni; yat--whatever; aha--predicted;bhagavan--Gargamuni, the most powerful; anvabhavi--is exactly happening; tathaeva--as; tat--that.                             TRANSLATION   The words of persons in full knowledge of Brahman never become untrue. It isvery wonderful that whatever Gargamuni predicted we are now actuallyexperiencing in all detail.                               PURPORT   The purpose of human life is indicated in the Brahma-sutra: athato brahmajijnasa. To make one's life perfect--in the past, present and future--one mustlearn about Brahman. Because of intense affection, Nanda Maharaja could notunderstand Krsna as He is. Gargamuni was able to know everything, past, presentand future, by studying the Vedas, but Nanda Maharaja could not understand Krsnadirectly. Because of his intense love for Krsna, he forgot who Krsna was andcould not understand Krsna's potency. Although Krsna is Narayana Himself,Gargamuni did not disclose this. Thus Nanda Maharaja appreciated the words ofGargamuni, but because of his deep affection he could not understand who Krsnawas, although Gargamuni had said that Krsna's qualities would be exactly likethose of Narayana.                               TEXT 58
                                 TEXT                         iti nandadayo gopah                        krsna-rama-katham muda                        kurvanto ramamanas ca                        navindan bhava-vedanam                               SYNONYMS   iti--in this way; nanda-adayah--all the cowherd men, headed by NandaMaharaja; gopah--cowherd men; krsna-rama-katham--narration of incidents inconnection with Bhagavan Krsna and Rama; muda--in great transcendental pleasure;kurvantah--doing that; ramamanah ca--enjoyed life and increased their affectionfor Krsna; na--not; avindan--perceived; bhava-vedanam--the tribulations ofmaterial existence.                             TRANSLATION   In this way all the cowherd men, headed by Nanda Maharaja, enjoyed topicsabout the pastimes of Krsna and Balarama with great transcendental pleasure, andthey could not even perceive material tribulations.                               PURPORT   Here is an instruction about the result of studying or discussing the krsna-lilas that appear in Srimad-Bhagavatam. Sadyo hrdy avarudhyate 'tra krtibhihsusrusubhis tat-ksanat (Bhag. 1.1.2). Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda in Vrndavanaappeared like ordinary persons of this material world, but they never felt thetribulations of this world, although they sometimes met many dangeroussituations created by the demons. This is a practical example. If we follow inthe footsteps of Nanda Maharaja and the gopas, we can all be happy simply bydiscussing the activities of Krsna.                        anarthopasamam saksad                        bhakti-yogam adhoksaje                        lokasyajanato vidvams                        cakre satvata-samhitam   (Bhag. 1.7.6)   Vyasadeva has given this literature so that everyone may understand one'stranscendental position simply by discussing bhagavata-katha. Even at thepresent moment, everyone everywhere can be happy and free from materialtribulations by following Srimad-Bhagavatam. There is no need of austerities andpenances, which in this age are very difficult to perform. Sri CaitanyaMahaprabhu has therefore declared, sarvatma-snapanam param vijayate sri-krsna-sankirtanam. By our Krsna consciousness movement, we are trying to distributeSrimad-Bhagavatam so that anyone in any part of the world can be absorbed in theKrsna consciousness movement by chanting and hearing about the activities ofKrsna and be free from all material tribulations.                               TEXT 59                                 TEXT                       evam viharaih kaumaraih                        kaumaram jahatur vraje
                       nilayanaih setu-bandhair                        markatotplavanadibhih                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this way; viharaih--by different pastimes; kaumaraih--childish;kaumaram--the age of childhood; jahatuh--(Krsna and Balarama) passed; vraje--inVrajabhumi; nilayanaih--by playing hide-and-seek; setu-bandhaih--by constructingan artificial bridge on the ocean; markata--like the monkeys; utplavana-adibhih--by jumping here and there, etc.                             TRANSLATION   In this way Krsna and Balarama passed Their childhood age in Vrajabhumi byengaging in activities of childish play, such as playing hide-and-seek,constructing a make-believe bridge on the ocean, and jumping here and there likemonkeys.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Eleventh Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "The Childhood Pastimes of Krsna."                            Chapter Twelve                  The Killing of the Demon Aghasura   This chapter describes in detail Krsna's pastime of killing Aghasura.   One day Krsna wanted to enjoy a picnic lunch within the forest, and thereforeHe went out early into the forest with the other cowherd boys, accompanied bytheir respective groups of calves. While they were enjoying their picnic,Aghasura, the younger brother of Putana and Bakasura, appeared there, desiringto kill Krsna and His companions. The demon, who had been sent by Kamsa, assumedthe form of a python, expanding himself to a length of eight miles and theheight of a mountain, his mouth seeming to extend from the surface of the earthto the heavenly planets. Having assumed this feature, Aghasura lay on the road.Krsna's friends, the cowherd boys, thought that the demon's form was one of thebeautiful spots of Vrndavana. Thus they wanted to enter within the mouth of thisgigantic python. The gigantic figure of the python became a subject for theirsporting pleasure, and they began to laugh, confident that even if this figurewere dangerous, Krsna was there to protect them. In this way, they proceededtoward the mouth of the gigantic figure.   Krsna knew everything about Aghasura, and therefore He wanted to forbid Hisfriends to enter the demon's mouth, but in the meantime all the cowherd boys,along with their groups of calves, entered the mouth of that gigantic figure.Krsna was waiting outside, and Aghasura was waiting for Krsna, thinking that assoon as Krsna entered he would close his mouth so that everyone would die. Whilewaiting for Krsna, he refrained from swallowing the boys. In the meantime, Krsnawas thinking of how to save the boys and kill Aghasura. Thus He entered themouth of the gigantic asura, and when He was within the demon's mouth along withHis friends, He expanded His body to such an extent that the asura suffocatedand died. After this, Krsna, by casting His nectarean glance upon His friends,brought them back to life, and with pleasure they all came out unhurt. ThusKrsna encouraged all the demigods, and they expressed their pleasure andhappiness. For a crooked, sinful person there is no scope for sayujya-mukti, orbecoming one with the effulgence of Krsna, but because the Supreme Personalityof Godhead entered the body of Aghasura, by His touch this demon got theopportunity to merge into the existence of the Brahman effulgence and thusattain sayujya-mukti.   When this pastime was performed, Krsna was only five years old. One yearlater, when He was six years old and He stepped into the pauganda age, thispastime was disclosed to the inhabitants of Vraja. Pariksit Maharaja inquired,"Why is it that this pastime was disclosed only after one year and yet the
inhabitants of Vraja thought that it had been performed that very day?" Withthis question, the Twelfth Chapter ends.                                TEXT 1                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                  kvacid vanasaya mano dadhad vrajat                  pratah samutthaya vayasya-vatsapan                   prabodhayan chrnga-ravena caruna                   vinirgato vatsa-purahsaro harih                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sri Sukadeva Gosvami said; kvacit--one day; vana-asaya--justto enjoy a picnic in the forest; manah--mind; dadhat--gave attention; vrajat--and went out of Vrajabhumi; pratah--early in the morning; samutthaya--waking up;vayasya-vatsa-pan--the cowherd boys and the calves; prabodhayan--to get everyoneto rise, waking up and informing them; srnga-ravena--by sounding the bugle madeof horn; caruna--very beautiful; vinirgatah--came out of Vrajabhumi; vatsa-purahsarah--keeping the respective groups of calves in front; harih--the SupremePersonality of Godhead.                             TRANSLATION   Sukadeva Gosvami continued: O King, one day Krsna decided to take Hisbreakfast as a picnic in the forest. Having risen early in the morning, He blewHis bugle made of horn and woke all the cowherd boys and calves with itsbeautiful sound. Then Krsna and the boys, keeping their respective groups ofcalves before them, proceeded from Vrajabhumi to the forest.                                TEXT 2                                 TEXT                  tenaiva sakam prthukah sahasrasah                 snigdhah susig-vetra-visana-venavah                svan svan sahasropari-sankhyayanvitan                  vatsan puraskrtya viniryayur muda                               SYNONYMS   tena--Him; eva--indeed; sakam--accompanied by; prthukah--the boys;sahasrasah--by the thousands; snigdhah--very attractive; su--beautiful; sik--lunch bags; vetra--sticks for controlling the calves; visana--horn bugles;venavah--flutes; svan svan--their own respective; sahasra-upari-sankhyayaanvitan--numbering over a thousand; vatsan--the calves; purah-krtya--keeping infront; viniryayuh--they came out; muda--with great pleasure.                             TRANSLATION   At that time, hundreds and thousands of cowherd boys came out of theirrespective homes in Vrajabhumi and joined Krsna, keeping before them theirhundreds and thousands of groups of calves. The boys were very beautiful, andthey were equipped with lunch bags, bugles, flutes, and sticks for controllingthe calves.
                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT                      krsna-vatsair asankhyatair                       yuthi-krtya sva-vatsakan                       carayanto 'rbha-lilabhir                       vijahrus tatra tatra ha                               SYNONYMS   krsna--of Lord Krsna; vatsaih--along with the calves; asankhyataih--unlimited; yuthi-krtya--assembled them; sva-vatsakan--personal calves;carayantah--executing; arbha-lilabhih--by boyhood pastimes; vijahruh--enjoyed;tatra tatra--here and there; ha--indeed.                             TRANSLATION   Along with the cowherd boys and their own groups of calves, Krsna came outwith an unlimited number of calves assembled. Then all the boys began to sportin the forest in a greatly playful spirit.                               PURPORT   In this verse the words krsna-vatsair asankhyataih are significant. The wordasankhyata means "unlimited." Krsna's calves were unlimited. We may speak ofhundreds, thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, millions,billions, trillions, tens of trillions, and so on, but when we go further tospeak of numbers impossible for us to count, we are speaking of unlimitednumbers. Such unlimited numbers are indicated here by the word asankhyataih.Krsna is unlimited, His potency is unlimited, His cows and calves are unlimited,and His space is unlimited. Therefore He is described in Bhagavad-gita asParabrahman. The word brahman means "unlimited," and Krsna is the SupremeUnlimited, Parabrahman. Therefore, we should not consider the statements of thisverse to be mythological. They are factual, but inconceivable. Krsna canaccommodate an unlimited number of calves and an unlimited measurement of space.This is neither mythological nor false, but if we study Krsna's potency with ourlimited knowledge, that potency will never be possible to understand. Atah sri-krsna-namadi na bhaved grahyam indriyaih (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.109). Oursenses cannot perceive how He could keep an unlimited number of calves and cowsand have unlimited space in which to do so. But this is answered in the Brhad-bhagavatamrta:                       evam prabhoh priyanam ca                       dhamnas ca samayasya ca                        avicintya-prabhavatvad                       atra kincin na durghatam   Sri Sanatana Gosvami, in the Brhad-bhagavatamrta, states that sinceeverything about Krsna is unlimited, nothing is impossible for Him. It is inthis sense that we have to understand this verse.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                        phala-prabala-stavaka-                       sumanah-piccha-dhatubhih
                       kaca-gunja-mani-svarna-                        bhusita apy abhusayan                               SYNONYMS   phala--fruits from the forest; prabala--green leaves; stavaka--bunches;sumanah--beautiful flowers; piccha--peacock feathers; dhatubhih--very soft andcolorful minerals; kaca--a kind of gem; gunja--small conchshells; mani--pearls;svarna--gold; bhusitah--although decorated; api abhusayan--in spite of beingdecorated by their mothers, the boys decorated themselves still more with theabove-mentioned articles.                             TRANSLATION   Although all these boys were already decorated by their mothers withornaments of kaca, gunja, pearls and gold, when they went into the forest theyfurther decorated themselves with fruits, green leaves, bunches of flowers,peacock feathers and soft minerals.                                TEXT 5                                 TEXT                      musnanto 'nyonya-sikyadin                       jnatan arac ca ciksipuh                       tatratyas ca punar durad                       dhasantas ca punar daduh                               SYNONYMS   musnantah--stealing; anyonya--from one another; sikya-adin--lunch bags andother belongings; jnatan--having been understood by the proprietor of the bag;arat ca--to a distant place; ciksipuh--threw away; tatratyah ca--those who werein that place also; punah durat--then again threw farther away; hasantah capunah daduh--when they saw the proprietor, they threw it farther away andenjoyed laughing, and when the owner sometimes cried, his bag was given to himagain.                             TRANSLATION   All the cowherd boys used to steal one another's lunch bags. When a boy cameto understand that his bag had been taken away, the other boys would throw itfarther away, to a more distant place, and those standing there would throw itstill farther. When the proprietor of the bag became disappointed, the otherboys would laugh, the proprietor would cry, and then the bag would be returned.                               PURPORT   This kind of playing and stealing among boys still exists even in thematerial world because this kind of sporting pleasure is present in thespiritual world, from which this idea of enjoyment emanates. Janmady asya yatah(Vedanta-sutra 1.1.2). This same enjoyment is displayed by Krsna and Hisassociates in the spiritual world, but there the enjoyment is eternal, whereashere, on the material platform, it is temporary; there the enjoyment is brahman,whereas here the enjoyment is jada. The Krsna consciousness movement is meant totrain one how to transfer oneself from the jada to the Brahman, because humanlife is meant for this purpose. Athato brahma jijnasa (Vedanta-sutra 1.1.1).Krsna comes down to teach us how we can enjoy with Him on the spiritual
platform, in the spiritual world. Not only does He come, but He personallydisplays His pastimes in Vrndavana and attracts people to spiritual enjoyment.                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                        yadi duram gatah krsno                        vana-sobheksanaya tam                       aham purvam aham purvam                         iti samsprsya remire                               SYNONYMS   yadi--if; duram--to a distant place; gatah--went; krsnah--the SupremePersonality of Godhead; vana-sobha--the beauty of the forest; iksanaya--forvisiting and enjoying; tam--unto Krsna; aham--I; purvam--first; aham--I; purvam--first; iti--in this way; samsprsya--by touching Him; remire--they enjoyed life.                             TRANSLATION   Sometimes Krsna would go to a somewhat distant place to see the beauty of theforest. Then all the other boys would run to accompany Him, each one saying, "Ishall be the first to run and touch Krsna! I shall touch Krsna first!" In thisway they enjoyed life by repeatedly touching Krsna.                              TEXTS 7-11                                 TEXT                        kecid venun vadayanto                       dhmantah srngani kecana                      kecid bhrngaih pragayantah                        kujantah kokilaih pare                       vicchayabhih pradhavanto                      gacchantah sadhu-hamsakaih                        bakair upavisantas ca                       nrtyantas ca kalapibhih                        vikarsantah kisa-balan                       arohantas ca tair druman                      vikurvantas ca taih sakam                        plavantas ca palasisu                      sakam bhekair vilanghantah                       saritah srava-samplutah                       vihasantah praticchayah                       sapantas ca pratisvanan                  ittham satam brahma-sukhanubhutya                    dasyam gatanam para-daivatena                      mayasritanam nara-darakena                   sakam vijahruh krta-punya-punjah                               SYNONYMS
   kecit--some of them; venun--flutes; vadayantah--blowing; dhmantah--bugling;srngani--the horn bugles; kecana--someone else; kecit--someone; bhrngaih--withthe bumblebees; pragayantah--singing along with; kujantah--imitating the soundof; kokilaih--with the cuckoos; pare--others; vicchayabhih--with runningshadows; pradhavantah--someone running on the ground after the birds;gacchantah--going along; sadhu--beautiful; hamsakaih--with the swans; bakaih--with the ducks sitting in one place; upavisantah ca--sitting silently like them;nrtyantah ca--and dancing with; kalapibhih--with the peacocks; vikarsantah--attracting; kisa-balan--the young monkeys; arohantah ca--gliding over; taih--with the monkeys; druman--the trees; vikurvantah ca--exactly imitating them;taih--with the monkeys; sakam--along with; plavantah ca--gliding over; palasisu--on the trees; sakam--along with; bhekaih--with the frogs; vilanghantah--jumpinglike them; saritah--the water; srava-samplutah--became wet in the water of theriver; vihasantah--laughing; praticchayah--at the shadows; sapantah ca--condemned; pratisvanan--the sound of their echoes; ittham--in this way; satam--of the transcendentalists; brahma-sukha-anubhutya--with Krsna, the source ofbrahma-sukha (Krsna is Parabrahman, and from Him originates His personaleffulgence); dasyam--servitorship; gatanam--of the devotees who have accepted;para-daivatena--with the Supreme Personality of Godhead; maya-asritanam--forthose in the clutches of material energy; nara-darakena--with Him who is like anordinary child; sakam--along with; vijahruh--enjoyed; krta-punya-punjah--allthese boys, who had accumulated the results of life after life of piousactivities.                             TRANSLATION   All the boys would be differently engaged. Some boys blew their flutes, andothers blew bugles made of horn. Some imitated the buzzing of the bumblebees,and others imitated the voice of the cuckoo. Some boys imitated flying birds byrunning after the birds' shadows on the ground, some imitated the beautifulmovements and attractive postures of the swans, some sat down with the ducks,sitting silently, and others imitated the dancing of the peacocks. Some boysattracted young monkeys in the trees, some jumped into the trees, imitating themonkeys, some made faces as the monkeys were accustomed to do, and others jumpedfrom one branch to another. Some boys went to the waterfalls and crossed overthe river, jumping with the frogs, and when they saw their own reflections onthe water they would laugh. They would also condemn the sounds of their ownechoes. In this way, all the cowherd boys used to play with Krsna, who is thesource of the Brahman effulgence for jnanis desiring to merge into thateffulgence, who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead for devotees who haveaccepted eternal servitorship, and who for ordinary persons is but anotherordinary child. The cowherd boys, having accumulated the results of piousactivities for many lives, were able to associate in this way with the SupremePersonality of Godhead. How can one explain their great fortune?                               PURPORT   As recommended by Srila Rupa Gosvami, tasmat kenapy upayena manah krsnenivesayet (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2.4). Somehow or other, whether one thinksof Krsna as an ordinary human child, as the source of the Brahman effulgence, asthe origin of Paramatma, or as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one shouldconcentrate one's full attention upon the lotus feet of Krsna. That is also theinstruction of Bhagavad-gita (18.66): sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranamvraja. Srimad-Bhagavatam is the easiest way of directly approaching Krsna.Isvarah sadyo hrdy avarudhyate 'tra krtibhih susrusubhis tat-ksanat (Bhag.1.1.2). Diverting even a little of one's attention toward Krsna and activitiesin Krsna consciousness immediately enables one to achieve the highest perfectionof life. This is the purpose of the Krsna consciousness movement. Lokasyajanato
vidvams cakre satvata-samhitam (Bhag. 1.7.6). The secret of success is unknownto people in general, and therefore Srila Vyasadeva, being compassionate towardthe poor souls in this material world, especially in this age of Kali, has givenus the Srimad-Bhagavatam. Srimad-bhagavatam puranam amalam yad vaisnavanampriyam (Bhag. 12.13.18). For Vaisnavas who are somewhat advanced, or who arefully aware of the glories and potencies of the Lord, Srimad-Bhagavatam is abeloved Vedic literature. After all, we have to change this body (tathadehantara-praptih). If we do not care about Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam,we do not know what the next body will be. But if one adheres to these twobooks--Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhagavatam--one is sure to obtain theassociation of Krsna in the next life (tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam etiso 'rjuna). Therefore, distribution of Srimad-Bhagavatam all over the world is agreat welfare activity for theologians, philosophers, transcendentalists andyogis (yoginam api sarvesam), as well as for people in general. Janma-labhahparah pumsam ante narayana-smrtih (Bhag. 2.1.6): if we can somehow or otherremember Krsna, Narayana, at the end of life, our life will be successful.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                 yat-pada-pamsur bahu-janma-krcchrato                  dhrtatmabhir yogibhir apy alabhyah                sa eva yad-drg-visayah svayam sthitah                 kim varnyate distam ato vrajaukasam                               SYNONYMS   yat--whose; pada-pamsuh--dust of the lotus feet; bahu-janma--in many births;krcchratah--from undergoing severe austerities and penances as a way ofpracticing yoga, meditation, etc.; dhrta-atmabhih--by persons able to controlthe mind; yogibhih--by such yogis (jna-na-yogis, raja-yogis, dhyana-yogis,etc.); api--indeed; alabhyah--cannot be achieved; sah--the Supreme Personalityof Godhead; eva--indeed; yat-drk-visayah--has become the object of directvision, face to face; svayam--personally; sthitah--present in front of them;kim--what; varnyate--can be described; distam--about the fortune; atah--therefore; vraja-okasam--of the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi, Vrndavana.                             TRANSLATION   Yogis may undergo severe austerities and penances for many births bypracticing yama, niyama, asana and pranayama, none of which are easilyperformed. Yet in due course of time, when these yogis attain the perfection ofcontrolling the mind, they will still be unable to taste even a particle of dustfrom the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. What then can wedescribe about the great fortune of the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi, Vrndavana,with whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead personally lived and who saw theLord face to face?                               PURPORT   We can simply imagine the great fortune of the inhabitants of Vrndavana. Itis impossible to describe how, after many, many births of pious activities, theyhave become so fortunate.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT
                   athagha-namabhyapatan mahasuras                  tesam sukha-kridana-viksanaksamah                 nityam yad-antar nija-jivitepsubhih                  pitamrtair apy amaraih pratiksyate                               SYNONYMS   atha--thereafter; agha-nama--a very powerful demon by the name Agha;abhyapatat--appeared on the spot; maha-asurah--a great, extremely powerfuldemon; tesam--of the cowherd boys; sukha-kridana--the enjoyment of theirtranscendental pastimes; viksana-aksamah--being unable to see, he could nottolerate the transcendental happiness of the cowherd boys; nityam--perpetually;yat-antah--the end of the life of Aghasura; nija-jivita-ipsubhih--just to liveundisturbed by Aghasura; pita-amrtaih api--although they drank nectar every day;amaraih--by such demigods; pratiksyate--was also being awaited (the demigodswere also awaiting the death of the great demon Aghasura).                             TRANSLATION   My dear King Pariksit, thereafter there appeared a great demon namedAghasura, whose death was being awaited even by the demigods. The demigods dranknectar every day, but still they feared this great demon and awaited his death.This demon could not tolerate the transcendental pleasure being enjoyed in theforest by the cowherd boys.                               PURPORT   One may ask how Krsna's pastimes could be interrupted by a demon. SrilaVisvanatha Cakravarti Thakura answers this question by saying that although thetranscendental pleasure being enjoyed by the cowherd boys could not be stopped,unless they stopped the transcendental pleasure of their various activities theycould not eat their lunch. Therefore at lunchtime Aghasura appeared by thearrangement of yogamaya, so that for the time being they could stop theiractivities and take lunch. Changing varieties are the mother of enjoyment. Thecowherd boys would continuously play, then stop, and then again enjoy in adifferent way. Therefore every day a demon would come and interrupt theirsporting pastimes. The demon would be killed, and then the boys would engageagain in their transcendental pastimes.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                 drstvarbhakan krsna-mukhan aghasurah                   kamsanusistah sa baki-bakanujah                   ayam tu me sodara-nasa-krt tayor                   dvayor mamainam sa-balam hanisye                               SYNONYMS   drstva--after seeing; arbhakan--all the cowherd boys; krsna-mukhan--headed byKrsna; aghasurah--the demon by the name Aghasura; kamsa-anusistah--sent byKamsa; sah--he (Aghasura); baki-baka-anujah--the younger brother of Putana andBakasura; ayam--this Krsna; tu--indeed; me--my; sodara-nasa-krt--the killer ofmy brother and sister; tayoh--for my brother and sister; dvayoh--for those two;mama--my; enam--Krsna; sa-balam--along with His assistants, the cowherd boys;hanisye--I shall kill.
                             TRANSLATION   Aghasura, who had been sent by Kamsa, was the younger brother of Putana andBakasura. Therefore when he came and saw Krsna at the head of all the cowherdboys, he thought, "This Krsna has killed my sister and brother, Putana andBakasura. Therefore, in order to please them both, I shall kill this Krsna,along with His assistants, the other cowherd boys."                               TEXT 15                                 TEXT                     ete yada mat-suhrdos tilapah                  krtas tada nasta-sama vrajaukasah                   prane gate varsmasu ka nu cinta                   prajasavah prana-bhrto hi ye te                               SYNONYMS   ete--this Krsna and His associates, the cowherd boys; yada--when; mat-suhrdoh--of my brother and sister; tila-apah krtah--become the last ritualisticceremonial offering of sesame and water; tada--at that time; nasta-samah--without life; vraja-okasah--all the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi, Vrndavana; prane--when the vital force; gate--has been thrown out of the body; varsmasu--as faras the body is concerned; ka--what; nu--indeed; cinta--consideration; praja-asavah--those whose love for their children is the same as their love for theirown life; prana-bhrtah--those living beings; hi--indeed; ye te--all theinhabitants of Vrajabhumi.                             TRANSLATION   Aghasura thought: If somehow or other I can make Krsna and His associatesserve as the last offering of sesame and water for the departed souls of mybrother and sister, then the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi, for whom these boys arethe life and soul, will automatically die. If there is no life, there is no needfor the body; consequently, when their sons are dead, naturally all theinhabitants of Vraja will die.                               TEXT 16                                 TEXT                   iti vyavasyajagaram brhad vapuh                    sa yojanayama-mahadri-pivaram                 dhrtvadbhutam vyatta-guhananam tada                   pathi vyaseta grasanasaya khalah                               SYNONYMS   iti--in this way; vyavasya--deciding; ajagaram--python; brhat vapuh--a very,very large body; sah--Aghasura; yojana-ayama--occupying eight miles of land;maha-adri-pivaram--as thick as a great mountain; dhrtva--assuming this form;adbhutam--wonderful; vyatta--spread; guha-ananam--having a mouth resembling abig cave in a mountain; tada--at that time; pathi--on the road; vyaseta--occupied; grasana-asaya--expecting to swallow all the cowherd boys; khalah--themost crooked.
                             TRANSLATION   After thus deciding, that crooked Aghasura assumed the form of a huge python,as thick as a big mountain and as long as eight miles. Having assumed thiswonderful python's body, he spread his mouth like a big cave in the mountainsand lay down on the road, expecting to swallow Krsna and His associates thecowherd boys.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                    dharadharostho jaladottarostho                  dary-anananto giri-srnga-damstrah                  dhvantantar-asyo vitatadhva-jihvah                    parusanila-svasa-daveksanosnah                               SYNONYMS   dhara--on the surface of the globe; adhara-osthah--whose lower lip; jalada-uttara-osthah--whose upper lip was touching the clouds; dari-anana-antah--whosemouth was expanded very widely like a mountain cave; giri-srnga--like a mountainpeak; damstrah--whose teeth; dhvanta-antah-asyah--within whose mouth theatmosphere was as dark as possible; vitata-adhva-jihvah--whose tongue was like abroad way; parusa-anila-svasa--whose breath was like a warm wind; dava-iksana-usnah--and whose glance was like flames of fire.                             TRANSLATION   His lower lip rested on the surface of the earth, and his upper lip wastouching the clouds in the sky. The borders of his mouth resembled the sides ofa big cave in a mountain, and the middle of his mouth was as dark as possible.His tongue resembled a broad traffic-way, his breath was like a warm wind, andhis eyes blazed like fire.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                       drstva tam tadrsam sarve                        matva vrndavana-sriyam                         vyattajagara-tundena                      hy utpreksante sma lilaya                               SYNONYMS   drstva--seeing; tam--that Aghasura; tadrsam--in that posture; sarve--Krsnaand all the cowherd boys; matva--thought it; vrndavana-sriyam--a beautifulstatue of Vrndavana; vyatta--spread; ajagara-tundena--with the form of apython's mouth; hi--indeed; utpreksante--as if observing; sma--in the past;lilaya--as a matter of pastimes.                             TRANSLATION   Upon seeing this demon's wonderful form, which resembled a great python, theboys thought that it must be a beautiful scenic spot of Vrndavana. Thereafter,they imagined it to be similar to the mouth of a great python. In other words,
the boys, unafraid, thought that it was a statue made in the shape of a greatpython for the enjoyment of their pastimes.                               PURPORT   Some of the boys, upon seeing this wonderful phenomenon, thought that it wasin fact a python, and they were fleeing from the spot. But others said, "Why areyou fleeing? It is not possible that a python like this is staying here. This isa spot of beauty for sporting." This is what they imagined.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT                          aho mitrani gadata                      sattva-kutam purah sthitam                       asmat-sangrasana-vyatta-                        vyala-tundayate na va                               SYNONYMS   aho--oh; mitrani--friends; gadata--just let us know; sattva-kutam--deadpython; purah sthitam--as it is just before us all; asmat--all of us;sangrasana--to devour us altogether; vyatta-vyala-tunda-yate--the python hasspread its mouth; na va--whether it is a fact or not.                             TRANSLATION   The boys said: Dear friends, is this creature dead, or is it actually aliving python with its mouth spread wide just to swallow us all? Kindly clear upthis doubt.                               PURPORT   The friends began to discuss among themselves the reality of the wonderfulcreature laying before them. Was it dead, or was it actually a living pythontrying to swallow them up?                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                        satyam arka-kararaktam                        uttara-hanuvad ghanam                        adhara-hanuvad rodhas                        tat-praticchayayarunam                               SYNONYMS   satyam--now the boys decided that it was in fact a living python; arka-kara-araktam--appearing like the sunshine; uttara-hanuvat ghanam--on the cloudresembling the upper lips; adhara-hanuvat--resembling the lower lips; rodhah--big bank; tat-praticchayaya--by the reflection of sunshine; arunam--reddish.                             TRANSLATION
   Thereafter they decided: Dear friends, this is certainly an animal sittinghere to swallow us all. Its upper lip resembles a cloud reddened by thesunshine, and its lower lip resembles the reddish shadows of a cloud.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                      pratispardhete srkkabhyam                         savyasavye nagodare                       tunga-srngalayo 'py etas                      tad-damstrabhis ca pasyata                               SYNONYMS   pratispardhete--just resembling; srkkabhyam--with the corners of the mouth;savya-asavye--left and right; naga-udare--caves of a mountain; tunga-srnga-alayah--the high mountain peaks; api--although it is so; etah tat-damstrabhih--they resemble the teeth of the animal; ca--and; pasyata--just see.                             TRANSLATION   On the left and right, the two depressions resembling mountain caves are thecorners of its mouth, and the high mountain peaks are its teeth.                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT                        astrtayama-margo 'yam                         rasanam pratigarjati                      esam antar-gatam dhvantam                        etad apy antar-ananam                               SYNONYMS   astrta-ayama--the length and breadth; margah ayam--a broad way; rasanam--thetongue; pratigarjati--resembles; esam antah-gatam--on the inside of themountains; dhvantam--darkness; etat--this; api--indeed; antah-ananam--the insideof the mouth.                             TRANSLATION   In length and breadth the animal's tongue resembles a broad traffic-way, andthe inside of its mouth is very, very dark, like a cave in a mountain.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                       davosna-khara-vato 'yam                        svasavad bhati pasyata                     tad-dagdha-sattva-durgandho                      'py antar-amisa-gandhavat                               SYNONYMS
   dava-usna-khara-vatah ayam--hot breath coming out exactly like fire; svasa-vat bhati pasyata--just see how it resembles his breath; tat-dagdha-sattva--ofburning corpses; durgandhah--the bad smell; api--indeed; antah-amisa-gandha-vat--is like the fleshy smell coming out from within.                             TRANSLATION   The hot fiery wind is the breath coming out of his mouth, which is giving offthe bad smell of burning flesh because of all the dead bodies he has eaten.                               TEXT 24                                 TEXT                   asman kim atra grasita nivistan                  ayam tatha ced bakavad vinanksyati                  ksanad aneneti bakary-usan-mukham                 viksyoddhasantah kara-tadanair yayuh                               SYNONYMS   asman--all of us; kim--whether; atra--here; grasita--will swallow; nivistan--who have attempted to enter; ayam--this animal; tatha--so; cet--if; baka-vat--like Bakasura; vinanksyati--he will be vanquished; ksanat--immediately; anena--by this Krsna; iti--in this way; baka-ari-usat-mukham--the beautiful face ofKrsna, the enemy of Bakasura; viksya--observing, looking at; uddhasantah--loudlylaughing; kara-tadanaih--with clapping of hands; yayuh--entered the mouth.                             TRANSLATION   Then the boys said, "Has this living creature come to swallow us? If he doesso, he will immediately be killed like Bakasura, without delay." Thus theylooked at the beautiful face of Krsna, the enemy of Bakasura, and, laughingloudly and clapping their hands, they entered the mouth of the python.                               PURPORT   After talking about the terrible animal this way and that way, they decidedto enter the demon's mouth. They had full faith in Krsna because they hadexperienced how Krsna had saved them from the mouth of Bakasura. Now, here wasanother asura, Aghasura. Therefore, they wanted to enjoy the sport of enteringthe demon's mouth and being saved by Krsna, the enemy of Bakasura.                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT               ittham mitho 'tathyam ataj-jna-bhasitam                   srutva vicintyety amrsa mrsayate                 rakso viditvakhila-bhuta-hrt-sthitah                 svanam niroddhum bhagavan mano dadhe                               SYNONYMS   ittham--in this way; mithah--or another; atathyam--a subject matter that isnot a fact; a-tat-jna--without knowledge; bhasitam--while they were talking;srutva--Krsna hearing them; vicintya--thinking; iti--thus; amrsa--actually,truly; mrsayate--who is trying to appear as a false thing (actually the animal
was Aghasura, but because of poor knowledge they were thinking him to be a deadpython); raksah--(Krsna, however, could understand that) he was a demon;viditva--knowing it; akhila-bhuta-hrt-sthitah--because He is antaryami, situatedeverywhere, in the core of everyone's heart; svanam--of His own associates;niroddhum--just to forbid them; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead;manah dadhe--made up His mind.                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna, who is situated as antaryami,the Supersoul, in the core of everyone's heart, heard the boys talking amongthemselves about the artificial python. Unknown to them, it was actuallyAghasura, a demon who had appeared as a python. Krsna, knowing this, wanted toforbid His associates to enter the demon's mouth.                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                  tavat pravistas tv asurodarantaram                  param na girnah sisavah sa-vatsah                    pratiksamanena bakari-vesanam                   hata-sva-kanta-smaranena raksasa                               SYNONYMS   tavat--in the meantime; pravistah--all entered; tu--indeed; asura-udara-antaram--within the belly of the great demon; param--but; na girnah--they werenot swallowed; sisavah--all the boys; sa-vatsah--along with their calves;pratiksamanena--who was just waiting for; baka-ari--of the enemy of Bakasura;vesanam--the entering; hata-sva-kanta-smaranena--the asura was thinking of hisown dead relatives, who would not be satisfied unless Krsna were dead; raksasa--by the demon.                             TRANSLATION   In the meantime, while Krsna was considering how to stop them, all thecowherd boys entered the mouth of the demon. The demon, however, did not swallowthem, for he was thinking of his own relatives who had been killed by Krsna andwas just waiting for Krsna to enter his mouth.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                 tan viksya krsnah sakalabhaya-prado                 hy ananya-nathan sva-karad avacyutan                  dinams ca mrtyor jatharagni-ghasan                   ghrnardito dista-krtena vismitah                               SYNONYMS   tan--all those boys; viksya--seeing; krsnah--the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, Krsna; sakala-abhaya-pradah--who is the source of fearlessness foreveryone; hi--indeed; ananya-nathan--especially for the cowherd boys, who didnot know anyone except Krsna; sva-karat--from the control of His hand;avacyutan--now gone out; dinan ca--helpless; mrtyoh jathara-agni-ghasan--who hadall entered like straws into the fire of the abdomen of Aghasura, who was very
bold and hungry, like death personified (because the asura had assumed a bigbody, he must have had a very strong appetite); ghrna-arditah--therefore, beingcompassionate due to causeless mercy; dista-krtena--by things arranged by Hisinternal potency; vismitah--He also, for the time being, was astonished.                             TRANSLATION   Krsna saw that all the cowherd boys, who did not know anyone but Him as theirLord, had now gone out of His hand and were helpless, having entered like strawsinto the fire of the abdomen of Aghasura, who was death personified. It wasintolerable for Krsna to be separated from His friends the cowherd boys.Therefore, as if seeing that this had been arranged by His internal potency,Krsna was momentarily struck with wonder and unsure of what to do.                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                 krtyam kim atrasya khalasya jivanam                   na va amisam ca satam vihimsanam                  dvayam katham syad iti samvicintya                 jnatvavisat tundam asesa-drg gharih                               SYNONYMS   krtyam kim--what to do; atra--in this situation; asya khalasya--of thisenvious demon; jivanam--the existence of life; na--there should not be; va--either; amisam ca--and of those who are innocent; satam--of the devotees;vihimsanam--the death; dvayam--both actions (killing the demon and saving theboys); katham--how; syat--can be possible; iti samvicintya--very perfectlythinking about the subject matter; jnatva--and deciding what to do; avisat--entered; tundam--within the mouth of the demon; asesa-drk harih--Krsna, who hasunlimited potency, could understand past, future and present.                             TRANSLATION   Now, what was to be done? How could both the killing of this demon and thesaving of the devotees be performed simultaneously? Krsna, being unlimitedlypotent, decided to wait for an intelligent means by which He couldsimultaneously save the boys and kill the demon. Then He entered the mouth ofAghasura.                               PURPORT   Krsna is known as ananta-virya-sarvajna because everything is known to Him.Because He knows everything perfectly well, it was not difficult for Him to finda means by which He could save the boys and at the same time kill the demon.Thus He also decided to enter the demon's mouth.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                        tada ghana-cchada deva                       bhayad dha-heti cukrusuh                       jahrsur ye ca kamsadyah                      kaunapas tv agha-bandhavah
                               SYNONYMS   tada--at that time; ghana-chadah--behind the clouds; devah--all the demigods;bhayat--on account of feeling danger because Krsna had entered the mouth of thedemon; ha-ha--alas, alas; iti--in this way; cukrusuh--they exclaimed; jahrsuh--became jubilant; ye--those; ca--also; kamsa-adyah--Kamsa and others; kaunapah--the demons; tu--indeed; agha-bandhavah--the friends of Aghasura.                             TRANSLATION   When Krsna entered the mouth of Aghasura, the demigods hidden behind theclouds exclaimed, "Alas! Alas!" But the friends of Aghasura, like Kamsa andother demons, were jubilant.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                     tac chrutva bhagavan krsnas                      tv avyayah sarbha-vatsakam                        curni-cikirsor atmanam                         tarasa vavrdhe gale                               SYNONYMS   tat--that exclamation of ha-ha; srutva--hearing; bhagavan--the SupremePersonality of Godhead; krsnah--Lord Krsna; tu--indeed; avyayah--nevervanquishable; sa-arbha-vatsakam--along with the cowherd boys and the calves;curni-cikirsoh--of that demon, who desired to smash within the abdomen; atmanam--personally, Himself; tarasa--very soon; vavrdhe--enlarged; gale--within thethroat.                             TRANSLATION   When the invincible Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna, heard the demigodscrying "Alas! Alas!" from behind the clouds, He immediately enlarged Himselfwithin the demon's throat, just to save Himself and the cowherd boys, His ownassociates, from the demon who wished to smash them.                               PURPORT   Such are the acts of Krsna. paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam (Bg.4.8). By enlarging Himself within the throat of the demon, Krsna suffocated andkilled him and at the same time saved Himself and His associates from imminentdeath and also saved the demigods from lamentation.                               TEXT 31                                 TEXT                   tato 'tikayasya niruddha-margino              hy udgirna-drster bhramatas tv itas tatah                   purno 'ntar-ange pavano niruddho                 murdhan vinirbhidya vinirgato bahih                               SYNONYMS
   tatah--after Krsna took action to kill the demon's body from within themouth; ati-kayasya--of that great demon, who had expanded his body to a verylarge size; niruddha-marginah--because of suffocating, all outlets being stoppedup; hi udgirna-drsteh--whose eyes had popped out; bhramatah tu itah tatah--theeyeballs, or the life air, moving here and there; purnah--completely filled;antah-ange--within the body; pavanah--the life air; niruddhah--being stopped;murdhan--the hole in the top of the head; vinirbhidya--breaking; vinirgatah--went out; bahih--externally.                             TRANSLATION   Then, because Krsna had increased the size of His body, the demon extendedhis own body to a very large size. Nonetheless, his breathing stopped, hesuffocated, and his eyes rolled here and there and popped out. The demon's lifeair, however, could not pass through any outlet, and therefore it finally burstout through a hole in the top of the demon's head.                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                     tenaiva sarvesu bahir gatesu                    pranesu vatsan suhrdah paretan                drstya svayotthapya tad-anvitah punar                 vaktran mukundo bhagavan viniryayau                               SYNONYMS   tena eva--through that brahma-randhra, or the hole in the top of the head;sarvesu--all the air within the body; bahih gatesu--having gone out; pranesu--the life airs, along with the vital force; vatsan--the calves; suhrdah--thecowherd boy friends; paretan--who were all dead within; drstya svaya--by Krsna'sglancing over; utthapya--brought them back to life; tat-anvitah--thusaccompanied by them; punah--again; vaktrat--from the mouth; mukundah--theSupreme Personality of Godhead; bhagavan--Krsna; viniryayau--came out.                             TRANSLATION   When all the demon's life air had passed away through that hole in the top ofhis head, Krsna glanced over the dead calves and cowherd boys and brought themback to life. Then Mukunda, who can give one liberation, came out from thedemon's mouth with His friends and the calves.                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                  pinahi-bhogotthitam adbhutam mahaj                 jyotih sva-dhamna jvalayad diso dasa                pratiksya khe 'vasthitam isa-nirgamam                   vivesa tasmin misatam divaukasam                               SYNONYMS   pina--very great; ahi-bhoga-utthitam--issuing from the serpent's body, whichwas meant for material enjoyment; adbhutam--very wonderful; mahat--great;jyotih--effulgence; sva-dhamna--by his own illumination; jvalayat--makingglaring; disah dasa--all the ten directions; pratiksya--waiting; khe--in the
sky; avasthitam--individually staying; isa-nirgamam--until the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, came out; vivesa--entered; tasmin--in the body ofKrsna; misatam--while observing; divaukasam--all the demigods.                             TRANSLATION   From the body of the gigantic python, a glaring effulgence came out,illuminating all directions, and stayed individually in the sky until Krsna cameout from the corpse's mouth. Then, as all the demigods looked on, thiseffulgence entered into Krsna's body.                               PURPORT   Apparently the serpent named Aghasura, because of having received associationwith Krsna, attained mukti by entering Krsna's body. Entering the body of Krsnais called sayujya-mukti, but later verses prove that Aghasura, like Dantavakraand others, received sarupya-mukti. This has been broadly described by SrilaVisvanatha Cakravarti Thakura with references from the Vaisnava-tosani of SrilaJiva Gosvami. Aghasura attained sarupya-mukti, being promoted to the Vaikunthaplanets to live with the same four-armed bodily features as Visnu. Theexplanation of how this is so may be summarized as follows.   The effulgence came out from the python's body and became purified, attainingspiritual suddha-sattva, freedom from material contamination, because Krsna hadstayed within the serpent's body, even after the serpent's death. One may doubtthat such a demon, full of mischievous activities, could attain the liberationof sarupya or sayujya, and one may be astonished about this. But Krsna is sokind that in order to drive away such doubts, He had the effulgence, theindividual life of the python, wait for some time in its individuality, in thepresence of all the demigods.   Krsna is the full effulgence, and every living being is part and parcel ofthat effulgence. As proved here, the effulgence in every living being isindividual. For some time, the effulgence remained outside the demon's body,individually, and did not mix with the whole effulgence, the brahmajyoti. TheBrahman effulgence is not visible to material eyes, but to prove that everyliving being is individual, Krsna had this individual effulgence stay outsidethe demon's body for some time, for everyone to see. Then Krsna proved thatanyone killed by Him attains liberation, whether sayujya, sarupya, samipya orwhatever.   But the liberation of those who are on the transcendental platform of loveand affection is vimukti, special liberation. Thus the serpent first entered thebody of Krsna personally and mixed with the Brahman effulgence. This merging iscalled sayujya-mukti. But from later verses we find that Aghasura attainedsarupya-mukti. Text 38 explains that Aghasura attained a body exactly like thatof Visnu, and the verse after that also clearly states that he attained acompletely spiritual body like that of Narayana. Therefore in two or threeplaces the Bhagavatam has confirmed that Aghasura attained sarupya-mukti. Onemay then argue, How is it that he mixed with the Brahman effulgence? The answeris that as Jaya and Vijaya, after three births, again attained sarupya-mukti andassociation with the Lord, Aghasura received a similar liberation.                               TEXT 34                                 TEXT                 tato 'tihrstah sva-krto 'krtarhanam                 puspaih suga apsarasas ca nartanaih                gitaih sura vadya-dharas ca vadyakaih                stavais ca vipra jaya-nihsvanair ganah
                               SYNONYMS   tatah--thereafter; ati-hrstah--everyone becoming very much pleased; sva-krtah--own respective duty; akrta--executed; arhanam--in the shape of worshipingthe Supreme Personality of Godhead; puspaih--by showering flowers grown inNandana-kanana from the heavens; su-gah--the celestial singers; apsarasah ca--and the celestial dancing girls; nartanaih--by dancing; gitaih--by singingcelestial songs; surah--all the demigods; vadya-dharah ca--those who played onmusical drums; vadyakaih--by playing respectively; stavaih ca--and by offeringprayers; viprah--the brahmanas; jaya-nihsvanaih--simply by glorifying theSupreme Personality of Godhead; ganah--everyone.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, everyone being pleased, the demigods began to shower flowers fromNandana-kanana, the celestial dancing girls began to dance, and the Gandharvas,who are famous for singing, offered songs of prayer. The drummers began to beattheir kettledrums, and the brahmanas offered Vedic hymns. In this way, both inthe heavens and on earth, everyone began to perform his own duties, glorifyingthe Lord.                               PURPORT   Everyone has some particular duty. The sastra has concluded (nirupitah) thateveryone should glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead by his ownqualifications. If you are a singer, always glorify the Supreme Lord by singingvery nicely. If you are a musician, glorify the Supreme Lord by playing musicalinstruments. Svanusthitasya dharmasya samsiddhir hari-tosanam (Bhag. 1.2.13).The perfection of life is to satisfy the Personality of Godhead. Therefore,beginning from this earth up to the celestial kingdom, everyone engaged inglorifying the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The decision of all great saintlypersons is that whatever qualifications one has acquired should be utilized toglorify the Supreme Lord.                  idam hi pumsas tapasah srutasya va                svistasya suktasya ca buddhi-dattayoh                  avicyuto 'rthah kavibhir nirupito                    yad uttamasloka-gunanuvarnanam   "Learned sages have definitely concluded that the infallible purpose of theadvancement of knowledge, austerity, Vedic study, sacrifice, the chanting ofhymns, and charity is found in the transcendental descriptions of the qualitiesof the Lord, who is defined in choice poetry." (Bhag. 1.5.22) This is theperfection of life. One should be trained how to glorify the Supreme Personalityof Godhead by one's respective qualities. Education, austerity, penance or, inthe modern world, business, industry, education and so on--all should be engagedin glorifying the Lord. Then everyone in the world will be happy.   Krsna comes, therefore, to exhibit His transcendental activities so thatpeople may have the chance to glorify Him in every respect. To understand how toglorify the Lord is actual research work. It is not that everything should beunderstood without God. That is condemned.                       bhagavad-bhakti-hinasya                      jatih sastram japas tapah                         apranasyaiva dehasya                        mandanam loka-ranjanam
   (Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 3.11)   Without bhagavad-bhakti, without glorification of the Supreme Lord, whateverwe have is simply a decoration of the dead body.                               TEXT 35                                 TEXT                  tad-adbhuta-stotra-suvadya-gitika-                   jayadi-naikotsava-mangala-svanan               srutva sva-dhamno 'nty aja agato 'cirad                   drstva mahisasya jagama vismayam                               SYNONYMS   tat--that celebration performed by the demigods in the upper planetarysystem; adbhuta--wonderful; stotra--prayers; su-vadya--glorious musical soundsof drums and other instruments; gitika--celestial songs; jaya-adi--sounds ofjaya, etc.; na-eka-utsava--celebrations simply for glorifying the SupremePersonality of Godhead; mangala-svanan--transcendental sounds auspicious foreveryone; srutva--hearing such sounds; sva-dhamnah--from his abode; anti--nearby; ajah--Lord Brahma; agatah--coming there; acirat--very soon; drstva--seeing; mahi--the glorification; isasya--of Lord Krsna; jagama vismayam--becameastonished.                             TRANSLATION   When Lord Brahma heard the wonderful ceremony going on near his planet,accompanied by music and songs and sounds of "Jaya! Jaya!" he immediately camedown to see the function. Upon seeing so much glorification of Lord Krsna, hewas completely astonished.                               PURPORT   Here the word anti means "near," indicating that even in the higher planetarysystems near Brahmaloka, like Maharloka, Janaloka and Tapoloka, the festival ofglorification of Lord Krsna was going on.                               TEXT 36                                 TEXT                        rajann ajagaram carma                      suskam vrndavane 'dbhutam                       vrajaukasam bahu-titham                        babhuvakrida-gahvaram                               SYNONYMS   rajan--O Maharaja Pariksit; ajagaram carma--the dry body of Aghasura, whichremained only a big skin; suskam--when it completely dried up; vrndavaneadbhutam--like a wonderful museum piece in Vrndavana; vraja-okasam--for theinhabitants of Vrajabhumi, Vrndavana; bahu-titham--for many days, or for a longtime; babhuva--became; akrida--sporting place; gahvaram--a cave.                             TRANSLATION
   O King Pariksit, when the python-shaped body of Aghasura dried up into merelya big skin, it became a wonderful place for the inhabitants of Vrndavana tovisit, and it remained so for a long, long time.                               TEXT 37                                 TEXT                        etat kaumarajam karma                        harer atmahi-moksanam                        mrtyoh paugandake bala                       drstvocur vismita vraje                               SYNONYMS   etat--this incident of delivering both Aghasura and Krsna's associates fromdeath; kaumara-jam karma--performed during their kaumara age (the age of fiveyears); hareh--of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atma--the devotees are theLord's heart and soul; ahi-moksanam--their deliverance and the deliverance ofthe python; mrtyoh--from the path of repeated birth and death; paugandake--atthe age of pauganda, beginning with the sixth year (one year later); balah--allthe boys; drstva ucuh--disclosed the fact after one year; vismitah--as if it hadhappened on that very day; vraje--in Vrndavana.                             TRANSLATION   This incident of Krsna's saving Himself and His associates from death and ofgiving deliverance to Aghasura, who had assumed the form of a python, took placewhen Krsna was five years old. It was disclosed in Vrajabhumi after one year, asif it had taken place on that very day.                               PURPORT   The word moksanam means "liberation." For the associates of Krsna and forKrsna Himself, there is no question about liberation; they are alreadyliberated, being in the spiritual world. In the material world there are birth,death, old age and disease, but in the spiritual world there are no such thingsbecause everything is eternal. As for the python, however, by the association ofKrsna and His devotees, Aghasura also achieved the same facility of eternallife. Therefore, as indicated here by the word atmahi-moksanam, if the pythonAghasura could receive eternal association with the Supreme Personality ofGodhead, what is to be said of those who are already associates of the Lord?Sakam vijahruh krta-punya-punjah (Bhag. 10.12.11). Here is proof that God isgood for everyone. Even when He kills someone, the one who is killed attainsliberation. What then is to be said of those who are already in the associationof the Lord?                               TEXT 38                                 TEXT                  naitad vicitram manujarbha-mayinah                    paravaranam paramasya vedhasah                 agho 'pi yat-sparsana-dhauta-patakah                prapatma-samyam tv asatam sudurlabham                               SYNONYMS
   na--not; etat--this; vicitram--is wonderful; manuja-arbha-mayinah--of Krsna,who appeared as the son of Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda, being compassionate uponthem; para-avaranam--of all causes and effects; paramasya vedhasah--of thesupreme creator; aghah api--Aghasura also; yat-sparsana--simply by the slightassociation of whom; dhauta-patakah--became freed from all contamination ofmaterial existence; prapa--became elevated; atma-samyam--to a body exactlyresembling that of Narayana; tu--but; asatam sudurlabham--which is not at allpossible to be obtained by contaminated souls (but everything can be possible bythe mercy of the Supreme Lord).                             TRANSLATION   Krsna is the cause of all causes. The causes and effects of the materialworld, both higher and lower, are all created by the Supreme Lord, the originalcontroller. When Krsna appeared as the son of Nanda Maharaja and Yasoda, He didso by His causeless mercy. Consequently, for Him to exhibit His unlimitedopulence was not at all wonderful. Indeed, He showed such great mercy that evenAghasura, the most sinful miscreant, was elevated to being one of His associatesand achieving sarupya-mukti, which is actually impossible for materiallycontaminated persons to attain.                               PURPORT   The word maya is also used in connection with love. Out of maya, love, afather has affection for his child. Therefore the word mayinah indicates thatKrsna, out of love, appeared as the son of Nanda Maharaja and assumed the formof a human child (manujarbha). Krsna is the cause of all causes. He is thecreator of cause and effect, and He is the supreme controller. Nothing isimpossible for Him. Therefore, that He enabled even a living being like Aghasurato attain the salvation of sarupya-mukti was not at all wonderful for Krsna.Krsna took pleasure in entering the mouth of Aghasura in a sporting spirit alongwith His associates. Therefore, when Aghasura, by that sporting association, asmaintained in the spiritual world, was purified of all contamination, heattained sarupya-mukti and vimukti by the grace of Krsna. For Krsna this was notat all wonderful.                               TEXT 39                                 TEXT                   sakrd yad-anga-pratimantar-ahita                   manomayi bhagavatim dadau gatim                  sa eva nityatma-sukhanubhuty-abhi-                vyudasta-mayo 'ntar-gato hi kim punah                               SYNONYMS   sakrt--once only; yat--whose; anga-pratima--the form of the Supreme Lord(there are many forms, but Krsna is the original form); antah-ahita--placingwithin the core of the heart, somehow or other; manah-mayi--thinking of Him evenby force; bhagavatim--which is competent to offer devotional service to theLord; dadau--Krsna gave; gatim--the best destination; sah--He (the SupremePersonality of Godhead); eva--indeed; nitya--always; atma--of all livingentities; sukha-anubhuti--anyone thinking of Him immediately enjoystranscendental pleasure; abhivyudasta-mayah--because all illusion is completelyremoved by Him; antah-gatah--He is always present within the core of the heart;hi--indeed; kim punah--what to speak.
                             TRANSLATION   If even only once or even by force one brings the form of the SupremePersonality of Godhead into one's mind, one can attain the supreme salvation bythe mercy of Krsna, as did Aghasura. What then is to be said of those whosehearts the Supreme Personality of Godhead enters when He appears as anincarnation, or those who always think of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is thesource of transcendental bliss for all living entities and by whom all illusionis completely removed?                               PURPORT   The process for receiving the favor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead isdescribed here. Yat-pada-pankaja-palasa-vilasa-bhaktya (Bhag. 4.22.39). Simplyby thinking of Krsna, one can attain Him very easily. Krsna is also described ashaving His lotus feet always within the hearts of His devotees (bhagavan bhakta-hrdi sthitah). In the case of Aghasura, one may argue that he was not a devotee.The answer to this is that he thought of Krsna for a moment with devotion.Bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah. Without devotion, one cannot think of Krsna; and,conversely, whenever one thinks of Krsna, one undoubtedly has devotion. AlthoughAghasura's purpose was to kill Krsna, for a moment Aghasura thought of Krsnawith devotion, and Krsna and His associates wanted to sport within Aghasura'smouth. Similarly, Putana wanted to kill Krsna by poisoning Him, but Krsna tookher as His mother because He had accepted the milk of her breast. Svalpam apyasya dharmasya trayate mahato bhayat (Bg. 2.40). Especially when Krsna appearsas an avatara, anyone who thinks of Krsna in His different incarnations (ramadi-murtisu kala-niyamena tisthan), and especially in His original form as Krsna,attains salvation. There are many instances of this, and among them is Aghasura,who attained the salvation of sarupya-mukti. Therefore the process is satatamkirtayanto mam yatantas ca drdha-vratah (Bg. 9.14). Those who are devoteesalways engage in glorifying Krsna. Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam: when wespeak of Krsna, we refer to all His avataras, such as Krsna, Govinda, Narayana,Visnu, Lord Caitanya, Krsna-Balarama and Syamasundara. One who always thinks ofKrsna must attain vimukti, special salvation as the Lord's personal associate,not necessarily in Vrndavana, but at least in Vaikuntha. This is called sarupya-mukti.                               TEXT 40                                 TEXT                            sri-suta uvaca                    ittham dvija yadavadeva-dattah                  srutva sva-ratus caritam vicitram                  papraccha bhuyo 'pi tad eva punyam                    vaiyasakim yan nigrhita-cetah                               SYNONYMS   sri-sutah uvaca--Sri Suta Gosvami spoke to the assembled saints atNaimisaranya; ittham--in this way; dvijah--O learned brahmanas; yadava-deva-dattah--Maharaja Pariksit (or Maharaja Yudhisthira), who was protected byYadavadeva, Krsna; srutva--hearing; sva-ratuh--of Krsna, who was his saviorwithin the womb of his mother, Uttara; caritam--the activities; vicitram--allwonderful; papraccha--inquired; bhuyah api--even again; tat eva--suchactivities; punyam--which are always full of pious activities (srnvatam sva-kathah krsnah punya-sravana-kirtanah: to hear about Krsna is always pious);
vaiyasakim--unto Sukadeva Gosvami; yat--because; nigrhita-cetah--PariksitMaharaja had already become steady in hearing about Krsna.                             TRANSLATION   Sri Suta Gosvami said: O learned saints, the childhood pastimes of Sri Krsnaare very wonderful. Maharaja Pariksit, after hearing about those pastimes ofKrsna, who had saved him in the womb of his mother, became steady in his mindand again inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami to hear about those pious activities.                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT                             sri-rajovaca                       brahman kalantara-krtam                      tat-kalinam katham bhavet                        yat kaumare hari-krtam                      jaguh paugandake 'rbhakah                               SYNONYMS   sri-raja uvaca--Maharaja Pariksit inquired; brahman--O learned brahmana(Sukadeva Gosvami); kala-antara-krtam--things done in the past, at a differenttime (in the kaumara age); tat-kalinam--described as happening now (in thepauganda age); katham bhavet--how could it be so; yat--which pastime; kaumare--in the kaumara age; hari-krtam--was done by Krsna; jaguh--they described;paugandake--in the pauganda age (after one year); arbhakah--all the boys.                             TRANSLATION   Maharaja Pariksit inquired: O great sage, how could things done in the pasthave been described as being done at the present? Lord Sri Krsna performed thispastime of killing Aghasura during His kaumara age. How then, during Hispauganda age, could the boys have described this incident as having happenedrecently?                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                       tad bruhi me maha-yogin                        param kautuhalam guro                        nunam etad dharer eva                        maya bhavati nanyatha                               SYNONYMS   tat bruhi--therefore please explain that; me--unto me; maha-yogin--O greatyogi; param--very much; kautuhalam--curiosity; guro--O my lord, my spiritualmaster; nunam--otherwise; etat--this incident; hareh--of the Supreme Personalityof Godhead; eva--indeed; maya--the illusion; bhavati--becomes; na anyatha--nothing more.                             TRANSLATION
   O greatest yogi, my spiritual master, kindly describe why this happened. I amvery much curious to know about it. I think that it was nothing but anotherillusion due to Krsna.                               PURPORT   Krsna has many potencies: parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate (SvetasvataraUpanisad 6.8). The description of Aghasura was disclosed after one year. Someact of Krsna's potency must have been involved. Therefore Maharaja Pariksit wasvery curious to know about this, and he requested Sukadeva Gosvami to explainit.                               TEXT 43                                 TEXT                        vayam dhanyatama loke                      guro 'pi ksatra-bandhavah                      vayam pibamo muhus tvattah                       punyam krsna-kathamrtam                               SYNONYMS   vayam--we are; dhanya-tamah--most glorified; loke--in this world; guro--O mylord, my spiritual master; api--although; ksatra-bandhavah--the lowest of theksatriyas (because we did not act like ksatriyas); vayam--we are; pibamah--drinking; muhuh--always; tvattah--from you; punyam--pious; krsna-katha-amrtam--the nectar of krsna-katha.                             TRANSLATION   O my lord, my spiritual master, although we are the lowest of ksatriyas, weare glorified and benefited because we have the opportunity of always hearingfrom you the nectar of the pious activities of the Supreme Personality ofGodhead.                               PURPORT   The pious activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are veryconfidential. It is not ordinarily possible to hear such activities unless oneis very, very fortunate. Pariksit Maharaja placed himself as ksatra-bandhavah,which means "the lowest of the ksatriyas." The qualities of the ksatriya aredescribed in Bhagavad-gita, and although the general quality of the ksatriya isisvara-bhava, the tendency to rule, a ksatriya is not supposed to rule over abrahmana. Thus Maharaja Pariksit regretted that he had wanted to rule over thebrahmanas and had therefore been cursed. He considered himself the lowest of theksatriyas. Danam isvara-bhavas ca ksatram karma svabhavajam (Bg. 18.43). Therewas no doubt that Maharaja Pariksit had the good qualities of a ksatriya, but asa devotee he presented himself, with submissiveness and humility, as the lowestof the ksatriyas, remembering his act of wrapping a dead serpent around the neckof a brahmana. A student and disciple has the right to ask the guru about anyconfidential service, and it is the duty of the guru to explain theseconfidential matters to his disciple.                               TEXT 44                                 TEXT
                            sri-suta uvaca                 ittham sma prstah sa tu badarayanis                  tat-smaritananta-hrtakhilendriyah               krcchrat punar labdha-bahir-drsih sanaih                   pratyaha tam bhagavatottamottama                               SYNONYMS   sri-sutah uvaca--Sri Suta Gosvami said; ittham--in this way; sma--in thepast; prstah--being inquired from; sah--he; tu--indeed; badarayanih--SukadevaGosvami; tat--by him (Sukadeva Gosvami); smarita-ananta--as soon as Lord Krsnawas remembered; hrta--lost in ecstasy; akhila-indriyah--all actions of theexternal senses; krcchrat--with great difficulty; punah--again; labdha-bahih-drsih--having revived his external sensory perception; sanaih--slowly; pratyaha--replied; tam--unto Maharaja Pariksit; bhagavata-uttama-uttama--O great saintlyperson, greatest of all devotees (Saunaka).                             TRANSLATION   Suta Gosvami said: O Saunaka, greatest of saints and devotees, when MaharajaPariksit inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami in this way, Sukadeva Gosvami,immediately remembering subject matters about Krsna within the core of hisheart, externally lost contact with the actions of his senses. Thereafter, withgreat difficulty, he revived his external sensory perception and began to speakto Maharaja Pariksit about krsna-katha.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Twelfth Chapter, of theSrimad-Bhagavatam, entitled, "The Killing of the Demon Aghasura."                           Chapter Thirteen            The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahma   This chapter describes Lord Brahma's attempt to take away the calves andcowherd boys, and it also describes the bewilderment of Lord Brahma and finallythe clearance of his illusion.   Although the incident concerning Aghasura had been performed one year before,when the cowherd boys were five years old, when they were six years old theysaid, "It happened today." What happened was this. After killing Aghasura,Krsna, along with His associates the cowherd boys, went for a picnic within theforest. The calves, being allured by green grasses, gradually went far away, andtherefore Krsna's associates became a little agitated and wanted to bring backthe calves. Krsna, however, encouraged the boys by saying, "You take your tiffinwithout being agitated. I shall go find the calves." And thus the Lord departed.Then, just to examine the potency of Krsna, Lord Brahma took away all the calvesand cowherd boys and kept them in a secluded place.   When Krsna was unable to find the calves and boys, He could understand thatthis was a trick performed by Brahma. Then the Supreme Personality of Godhead,the cause of all causes, in order to please Lord Brahma, as well as His ownassociates and their mothers, expanded Himself to become the calves and boys,exactly as they were before. In this way, He discovered another pastime. Aspecial feature of this pastime was that the mothers of the cowherd boys thusbecame more attached to their respective sons, and the cows became more attachedto their calves. After nearly a year, Baladeva observed that all the cowherdboys and calves were expansions of Krsna. Thus He inquired from Krsna and wasinformed of what had happened.   When one full year had passed, Brahma returned and saw that Krsna was stillengaged as usual with His friends and the calves and cows. Then Krsna exhibitedall the calves and cowherd boys as four-armed forms of Narayana. Brahma couldthen understand Krsna's potency, and he was astonished by the pastimes of Krsna,his worshipable Lord. Krsna, however, bestowed His causeless mercy upon Brahma
and released him from illusion. Thus Brahma began to offer prayers to glorifythe Supreme Personality of Godhead.                                TEXT 1                                 TEXT                            sri-suka uvaca                       sadhu prstam maha-bhaga                         tvaya bhagavatottama                         yan nutanayasisasya                       srnvann api katham muhuh                               SYNONYMS   sri-sukah uvaca--Sukadeva Gosvami said; sadhu prstam--I have been very muchhonored by your inquiry; maha-bhaga--you are a greatly fortunate personality;tvaya--by you; bhagavata-uttama--O best of devotees; yat--because; nutanayasi--you are making newer and newer; isasya--of the Supreme Personality of Godhead;srnvan api--although you are continuously hearing; katham--the pastimes; muhuh--again and again.                             TRANSLATION   Srila Sukadeva Gosvami said: O best of devotees, most fortunate Pariksit, youhave inquired very nicely, for although constantly hearing the pastimes of theLord, you are perceiving His activities to be newer and newer.                               PURPORT   Unless one is very advanced in Krsna consciousness, one cannot stick tohearing the pastimes of the Lord constantly. Nityam nava-navaya-manam: eventhough advanced devotees hear continually about the Lord for years, they stillfeel that these topics are coming to them as newer and fresher. Therefore suchdevotees cannot give up hearing of the pastimes of Lord Krsna. premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti. The word santahis used to refer to persons who have developed love for Krsna. Yam syamasundaramacintya-guna-svarupam govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami (Brahma-samhita5.38). Pariksit Maharaja, therefore, is addressed as bhagavatottama, the best ofdevotees, because unless one is very much elevated in devotional service, onecannot feel ecstasy from hearing more and more and appreciate the topics as everfresher and newer.                                TEXT 2                                 TEXT                    satam ayam sara-bhrtam nisargo                   yad-artha-vani-sruti-cetasam api                 prati-ksanam navya-vad acyutasya yat                    striya vitanam iva sadhu varta                               SYNONYMS   satam--of the devotees; ayam--this; sara-bhrtam--those who are paramahamsas,who have accepted the essence of life; nisargah--feature or symptom; yat--which;artha-vani--the aim of life, the aim of profit; sruti--the aim of understanding;cetasam api--who have decided to accept the bliss of transcendental subjects as
the aim and object of life; prati-ksanam--every moment; navya-vat--as if newerand newer; acyutasya--of Lord Krsna; yat--because; striyah--(topics) of woman orsex; vitanam--of debauchees, who are attached to women; iva--exactly like; sadhuvarta--actual conversation.                             TRANSLATION   Paramahamsas, devotees who have accepted the essence of life, are attached toKrsna in the core of their hearts, and He is the aim of their lives. It is theirnature to talk only of Krsna at every moment, as if such topics were newer andnewer. They are attached to such topics, just as materialists are attached totopics of women and sex.                               PURPORT   The word sara-bhrtam means paramahamsas. The hamsa, or swan, accepts milkfrom a mixture of milk and water and rejects the water. Similarly, the nature ofpersons who have taken to spiritual life and Krsna consciousness, understandingKrsna to be the life and soul of everyone, is that they cannot give up krsna-katha, or topics about Krsna, at any moment. Such paramahamsas always see Krsnawithin the core of the heart (santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti). Kama(desires), krodha (anger) and bhaya (fear) are always present in the materialworld, but in the spiritual, or transcendental, world one can use them forKrsna. Kamam krsna-karmarpane. The desire of the paramahamsas, therefore, is toact always for Krsna. Krodham bhakta-dvesi jane. They use anger against thenondevotees and transform bhaya, or fear, into fear of being deviated from Krsnaconsciousness. In this way, the life of a paramahamsa devotee is used entirelyfor Krsna, just as the life of a person attached to the material world is usedsimply for women and money. What is day for the materialistic person is nightfor the spiritualist. What is very sweet for the materialist--namely women andmoney--is regarded as poison by the spiritualist.                sandarsanam visayinam atha yositam ca              ha hanta hanta visa-bhaksanato 'py asadhu   This is the instruction of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. For the paramahamsa, Krsna iseverything, but for the materialist, women and money are everything.                                TEXT 3                                 TEXT                         srnusvavahito rajann                         api guhyam vadami te                      bruyuh snigdhasya sisyasya                        guravo guhyam apy uta                               SYNONYMS   srnusva--please hear; avahitah--with great attention; rajan--O King (MaharajaPariksit); api--although; guhyam--very confidential (because ordinary men cannotunderstand the activities of Krsna); vadami--I shall explain; te--unto you;bruyuh--explain; snigdhasya--submissive; sisyasya--of a disciple; guravah--spiritual masters; guhyam--very confidential; api uta--even so.                             TRANSLATION
   O King, kindly hear me with great attention. Although the activities of theSupreme Lord are very confidential, no ordinary man being able to understandthem, I shall speak about them to you, for spiritual masters explain to asubmissive disciple even subject matters that are very confidential anddifficult to understand.                                TEXT 4                                 TEXT                        tathagha-vadanan mrtyo                        raksitva vatsa-palakan                         sarit-pulinam aniya                        bhagavan idam abravit                               SYNONYMS   tatha--thereafter; agha-vadanat--from the mouth of Aghasura; mrtyoh--deathpersonified; raksitva--after saving; vatsa-palakan--all the cowherd boys andcalves; sarit-pulinam--to the bank of the river; aniya--bringing them; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krsna; idam--these words; abravit--spoke.                             TRANSLATION   Then, after saving the boys and calves from the mouth of Aghasura, who wasdeath personified, Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, brought themall to the bank of the river and spoke the following words.                                TEXT 5                                 TEXT                    aho 'tiramyam pulinam vayasyah                  sva-keli-sampan mrdulaccha-balukam                 sphutat-saro-gandha-hrtali-patrika-                 dhvani-pratidhvana-lasad-drumakulam                               SYNONYMS   aho--oh; ati-ramyam--very, very beautiful; pulinam--the bank of the river;vayasyah--My dear friends; sva-keli-sampat--full with all paraphernalia forpastimes of play; mrdula-accha-balukam--the very soft and clean sandy bank;sphutat--in full bloom; sarah-gandha--by the aroma of the lotus flower; hrta--attracted; ali--of the bumblebees; patrika--and of the birds; dhvani-pratidhvana--the sounds of their chirping and moving and the echoes of thesesounds; lasat--moving all over; druma-akulam--full of nice trees.                             TRANSLATION   My dear friends, just see how this riverbank is extremely beautiful becauseof its pleasing atmosphere. And just see how the blooming lotuses are attractingbees and birds by their aroma. The humming and chirping of the bees and birds isechoing throughout the beautiful trees in the forest. Also, here the sands areclean and soft. Therefore, this must be considered the best place for oursporting and pastimes.                               PURPORT
   The description of Vrndavana forest as given herewith was spoken by Krsnafive thousand years ago, and the same condition prevailed during the time of theVaisnava acaryas three or four hundred years ago. Kujat-kokila-hamsa-sarasa-ganakirne mayurakule. Vrndavana forest is always filled with the chirping andcooing of birds like cuckoos (kokila), ducks (hamsa) and cranes (sarasa), and itis also full of peacocks (mayurakule). The same sounds and atmosphere stillprevail in the area where our Krsna-Balarama temple is situated. Everyone whovisits this temple is pleased to hear the chirping of the birds as describedhere (kujat-kokila-hamsa-sarasa).                                TEXT 6                                 TEXT                       atra bhoktavyam asmabhir                       divarudham ksudharditah                       vatsah samipe 'pah pitva                        carantu sanakais trnam                               SYNONYMS   atra--here, on this spot; bhoktavyam--our lunch should be eaten; asmabhih--byus; diva-arudham--it is very late now; ksudha arditah--we are fatigued withhunger; vatsah--the calves; samipe--nearby; apah--water; pitva--after drinking;carantu--let them eat; sanakaih--slowly; trnam--the grasses.                             TRANSLATION   I think we should take our lunch here, since we are already hungry becausethe time is very late. Here the calves may drink water and go slowly here andthere and eat the grass.                                TEXT 7                                 TEXT                        tatheti payayitvarbha                        vatsan arudhya sadvale                       muktva sikyani bubhujuh                         samam bhagavata muda                               SYNONYMS   tatha iti--as Krsna proposed, the other cowherd boys agreed; payayitvaarbhah--they allowed to drink water; vatsan--the calves; arudhya--tying them tothe trees, allowed them to eat; sadvale--in a place of green, tender grasses;muktva--opening; sikyani--their bags of eatables and other paraphernalia;bubhujuh--went and enjoyed; samam--equally; bhagavata--with the Supremepersonality of Godhead; muda--in transcendental pleasure.                             TRANSLATION   Accepting Lord Krsna's proposal, the cowherd boys allowed the calves to drinkwater from the river and then tied them to trees where there was green, tendergrass. Then the boys opened their baskets of food and began eating with Krsna ingreat transcendental pleasure.                                TEXT 8
                                 TEXT                 krsnasya visvak puru-raji-mandalair                 abhyananah phulla-drso vrajarbhakah                      sahopavista vipine virejus                    chada yathambhoruha-karnikayah                               SYNONYMS   krsnasya visvak--surrounding Krsna; puru-raji-mandalaih--by differentencirclements of associates; abhyananah--everyone looking forward to the center,where Krsna was sitting; phulla-drsah--their faces looking very bright becauseof transcendental pleasure; vraja-arbhakah--all the cowherd boys of Vrajabhumi;saha-upavistah--sitting with Krsna; vipine--in the forest; virejuh--so nicelyand beautifully made; chadah--petals and leaves; yatha--just as; ambhoruha--of alotus flower; karnikayah--of the whorl.                             TRANSLATION   Like the whorl of a lotus flower surrounded by its petals and leaves, Krsnasat in the center, encircled by lines of His friends, who all looked verybeautiful. Every one of them was trying to look forward toward Krsna, thinkingthat Krsna might look toward him. In this way they all enjoyed their lunch inthe forest.                               PURPORT   To a pure devotee, Krsna is always visible, as stated in the Brahma samhita(santah sadaiva hrdayesu vilokayanti) and as indicated by Krsna Himself inBhagavad-gita (sarvatah pani-padam tat sarvato 'ksi-siro-mukham). If byaccumulating pious activities (krta-punya-punjah) one is raised to the platformof pure devotional service, Krsna is always visible in the core of one's heart.One who has attained such perfection is all-beautiful in transcendental bliss.The present Krsna consciousness movement is an attempt to keep Krsna in thecenter, for if this is done all activities will automatically become beautifuland blissful.                                TEXT 9                                 TEXT                      kecit puspair dalaih kecit                      pallavair ankuraih phalaih                    sigbhis tvagbhir drsadbhis ca                        bubhujuh krta-bhajanah                               SYNONYMS   kecit--someone; puspaih--by flowers; dalaih--by nice leaves of flowers;kecit--someone; pallavaih--on the surface of bunches of leaves; ankuraih--on thesprouts of flowers; phalaih--and some on fruits; sigbhih--some actually in thebasket or packet; tvagbhih--by the bark of trees; drsadbhih--on rocks; ca--and;bubhujuh--enjoyed; krta-bhajanah--as if they had made their plates for eating.                             TRANSLATION
   Among the cowherd boys, some placed their lunch on flowers, some on leaves,fruits, or bunches of leaves, some actually in their baskets, some on the barkof trees and some on rocks. This is what the children imagined to be theirplates as they ate their lunch.                               TEXT 10                                 TEXT                       sarve mitho darsayantah                     sva-sva-bhojya-rucim prthak                        hasanto hasayantas ca-                       bhyavajahruh sahesvarah                               SYNONYMS   sarve--all the cowherd boys; mithah--to one another; darsayantah--showing;sva-sva-bhojya-rucim prthak--different varieties of foodstuffs brought fromhome, with their separate and different tastes; hasantah--after tasting, theywere all laughing; hasayantah ca--and making others laugh; abhyavajahruh--enjoyed lunch; saha-isvarah--along with Krsna.                             TRANSLATION   All the cowherd boys enjoyed their lunch with Krsna, showing one another thedifferent tastes of the different varieties of preparations they had broughtfrom home. Tasting one another's preparations, they began to laugh and make oneanother laugh.                               PURPORT   Sometimes one friend would say, "Krsna, see how my food is relishable," andKrsna would take some and laugh. Similarly, Balarama, Sudama and other friendswould taste one another's food and laugh. In this way, the friends veryjubilantly began to eat their respective preparations brought from home.                               TEXT 11                                 TEXT          bibhrad venum jathara-patayoh srnga-vetre ca kakse            vame panau masrna-kavalam tat-phalany angulisu        tisthan madhye sva-parisuhrdo hasayan narmabhih svaih           svarge loke misati bubhuje yajna-bhug bala-kelih                               SYNONYMS   bibhrat venum--keeping the flute; jathara-patayoh--between the tight clothingand the abdomen; srnga-vetre--both the horn bugle and the cow-driving stick; ca--also; kakse--on the waist; vame--on the left-hand side; panau--taking in hand;masrna-kavalam--very nice food prepared with rice and first-class curd; tat-phalani--suitable pieces of fruit like bael; angulisu--between the fingers;tisthan--staying in this way; madhye--in the middle; sva-pari-suhrdah--His ownpersonal associates; hasayan--making them laugh; narmabhih--with joking words;svaih--His own; svarge loke misati--while the inhabitants of the heavenlyplanets, Svargaloka, were watching this wonderful scene; bubhuje--Krsna enjoyed;yajna-bhuk bala-kelih--although He accepts offerings in yajna, for the sake of
childhood pastimes He was enjoying foodstuffs very jubilantly with His cowherdboyfriends.                             TRANSLATION   Krsna is yajna-bhuk--that is, He eats only offerings of yajna--but to exhibitHis childhood pastimes, He now sat with His flute tucked between His waist andHis tight cloth on His right side and with His horn bugle and cow-driving stickon His left. Holding in His hand a very nice preparation of yogurt and rice,with pieces of suitable fruit between His fingers, He sat like the whorl of alotus flower, looking forward toward all His friends, personally joking withthem and creating jubilant laughter among them as He ate. At that time, thedenizens of heaven were watching, struck with wonder at how the Personality ofGodhead, who eats only in yajna, was now eating with His friends in the forest.                               PURPORT   When Krsna was eating with His cowherd boyfriends, a certain bumblebee camethere to take part in the eating. Thus Krsna joked, "Why have you come todisturb My brahmana friend Madhumangala? You want to kill a brahmana. This isnot good." All the boys would laugh and enjoy, speaking such joking words whileeating. Thus the inhabitants of the higher planets were astonished at how theSupreme personality of Godhead, who eats only when yajna is offered, was noweating like an ordinary child with His friends in the forest.                               TEXT 12                                 TEXT                        bharataivam vatsa-pesu                        bhunjanesv acyutatmasu                      vatsas tv antar-vane duram                        vivisus trna-lobhitah                               SYNONYMS   bharata--O Maharaja Pariksit; evam--in this way (while they were enjoyingtheir lunch); vatsa-pesu--along with all the boys tending the calves;bhunjanesu--engaged in taking their food; acyuta-atmasu--all of them being verynear and dear to Acyuta, Krsna; vatsah--the calves; tu--however; antah-vane--within the deep forest; duram--far away; vivisuh--entered; trna-lobhitah--beingallured by green grass.                             TRANSLATION   O Maharaja Pariksit, while the cowherd boys, who knew nothing within the coreof their hearts but Krsna, were thus engaged in eating their lunch in theforest, the calves went far away, deep into the forest, being allured by greengrass.                               TEXT 13                                 TEXT                     tan drstva bhaya-santrastan                      uce krsno 'sya bhi-bhayam                      mitrany asan ma viramate-                        hanesye vatsakan aham
                               SYNONYMS   tan--that those calves were going away; drstva--seeing; bhaya-santrastan--tothe cowherd boys, who were disturbed by fear that within the dense forest thecalves would be attacked by some ferocious animals; uce--Krsna said; krsnah asyabhi-bhayam--Krsna, who is Himself the fearful element of all kinds of fear (whenKrsna is present, there is no fear); mitrani--My dear friends; asat--from yourenjoyment of eating; ma viramata--do not stop; iha--in this place, in this spot;anesye--I shall bring back; vatsakan--the calves; aham--I.                             TRANSLATION   When Krsna saw that His friends the cowherd boys were frightened, He, thefierce controller even of fear itself, said, just to mitigate their fear, "Mydear friends, do not stop eating. I shall bring your calves back to this spot bypersonally going after them Myself."                               PURPORT   In the presence of Krsna's friendship, a devotee cannot have any fear. Krsnais the supreme controller, the controller of even death, which is supposed to bethe ultimate fear in this material world. Bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syat (Bhag.11.2.37). This fear arises because of lack of Krsna consciousness; otherwisethere cannot be any fear. For one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet ofKrsna, this material world of fear becomes hardly dangerous at all.                 bhavambudhir vatsa-padam param padam                   padam padam yad vipadam na tesam   Bhavambudhih, the material ocean of fear, becomes very easy to cross by themercy of the supreme controller. This material world, in which there is fear anddanger at every step (padam padam yad vipadam), is not meant for those who havetaken shelter at Krsna's lotus feet. Such persons are delivered from thisfearful world.                   samasrita ye pada-pallava-plavam                    mahat-padam punya-yaso murareh                 bhavambudhir vatsa-padam param padam                   padam padam yad vipadam na tesam   (Bhag. 10.14.58)   Everyone, therefore, should take shelter of the Supreme Person, who is thesource of fearlessness, and thus be secure.                               TEXT 14                                 TEXT                       ity uktvadri-dari-kunja-                       gahvaresv atma-vatsakan                       vicinvan bhagavan krsnah                         sapani-kavalo yayau                               SYNONYMS
   iti uktva--saying this ("Let Me bring your calves personally"); adri-dari-kunja-gahvaresu--everywhere in the mountains, the mountain caves, the bushes andnarrow places; atma-vatsakan--the calves belonging to His own personal friends;vicinvan--searching out; bhagavan--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; krsnah--Lord Krsna; sa-pani-kavalah--carrying His yogurt and rice in His hand; yayau--started out.                             TRANSLATION   "Let Me go and search for the calves," Krsna said. "Don't disturb yourenjoyment." Then, carrying His yogurt and rice in His hand, the SupremePersonality of Godhead, Krsna, immediately went out to search for the calves ofHis friends. To please His friends, He began searching in all the mountains,mountain caves, bushes and narrow passages.                               PURPORT   The Vedas (Svetasvatara Upanisad 6.8) assert that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead has nothing to do personally (na tasya karyam karanam ca vidyate)because He is doing everything through His energies and potencies (parasyasaktir vividhaiva sruyate). Nonetheless, here we see that He took personal careto find the calves of His friends. This was Krsna's causeless mercy.Mayadhyaksena prakrtih suyate sa-caracaram: all the affairs of the entire worldand the entire cosmic manifestation are working under His direction, through Hisdifferent energies. Still, when there is a need to take care of His friends, Hedoes this personally. Krsna assured His friends, "Don't be afraid. I am goingpersonally to search for your calves." This was Krsna's causeless mercy.                               TEXT 15                                 TEXT         ambhojanma-janis tad-antara-gato mayarbhakasyesitur       drastum manju mahitvam anyad api tad-vatsan ito vatsapan       nitvanyatra kurudvahantaradadhat khe 'vasthito yah pura      drstvaghasura-moksanam prabhavatah praptah param vismayam                               SYNONYMS   ambhojanma-janih--Lord Brahma, who was born from a lotus flower; tat-antara-gatah--now became entangled with the affairs of Krsna, who was enjoying luncheonpastimes with His cowherd boys; maya-arbhakasya--of the boys made by Krsna'smaya; isituh--of the supreme controller; drastum--just to see; manju--verypleasing; mahitvam anyat api--other glories of the Lord also; tat-vatsan--theircalves; itah--than that place where they were; vatsa-pan--and the cowherd boystaking care of the calves; nitva--bringing them; anyatra--to a different place;kurudvaha--O Maharaja Pariksit; antara-dadhat--kept hidden and invisible forsome time; khe avasthitah yah--this person Brahma, who was situated in thehigher planetary system in the sky; pura--formerly; drstva--was observing;aghasura-moksanam--the wonderful killing and deliverance of Aghasura frommaterial tribulation; prabhavatah--of the all-potent Supreme Person; praptahparam vismayam--had become extremely astonished.                             TRANSLATION   O Maharaja Pariksit, Brahma, who resides in the higher planetary system inthe sky, had observed the activities of the most powerful Krsna in killing anddelivering Aghasura, and he was astonished. Now that same Brahma wanted to show
some of his own power and see the power of Krsna, who was engaged in Hischildhood pastimes, playing as if with ordinary cowherd boys. Therefore, inKrsna's absence, Brahma took all the boys and calves to another place. Thus hebecame entangled, for in the very near future he would see how powerful Krsnawas.                               PURPORT   When Aghasura was being killed by Krsna, who was accompanied by Hisassociates, Brahma was astonished, but when he saw that Krsna was very muchenjoying His pastimes of lunch, he was even more astonished and wanted to testwhether Krsna was actually there. Thus he became entangled in Krsna's maya.After all, Brahma was born materially. As mentioned here, ambhojanma janih: hewas born of ambhoja, a lotus flower. It does not matter that he was born of alotus and not of any man, animal or material father. A lotus is also material,and anyone born through the material energy must be subject to the four materialdeficiencies: bhrama (the tendency to commit mistakes), pramada (the tendency tobe illusioned), vipralipsa (the tendency to cheat) and karanapatava (imperfectsenses). Thus Brahma also became entangled.   Brahma, with his maya, wanted to test whether Krsna was actually present.These cowherd boys were but expansions of Krsna's personal self (ananda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhavitabhih). Later Krsna would show Brahma how He expands Himselfinto everything as His personal pleasure, ananda-cinmaya-rasa. Hladini saktirasmat: Krsna has a transcendental potency called hladini sakti. He does notenjoy anything that is a product of the material energy. Brahma, therefore,would see Lord Krsna expand His energy.   Brahma wanted to take away Krsna's associates, but instead he took away someother boys and calves. Ravana wanted to take away Sita, but that was impossible,and instead he took away a maya Sita. Similarly, Brahma took away mayarbhakah:boys manifested by Krsna's maya. Brahma could show some extraordinary opulenceto the mayarbhakah; but he could not show any extraordinary potency to Krsna'sassociates. That he would see in the very near future. Mayarbhakasya isituh.This bewilderment, this maya, was caused by the supreme controller, prabhavatah--the all-potent Supreme person, Krsna--and we shall see the result. Anyonematerially born is subject to bewilderment. This pastime is therefore calledbrahma-vimohana-lila, the pastime of bewildering Brahma. Mohitam nabhijanati mamebhyah param avyayam (Bg. 7.13). Materially born persons cannot fully understandKrsna. Even the demigods cannot understand Him (muhyanti yat surayah). Tenebrahma hrda ya adi-kavaye (Bhag. 1.1.1). Everyone, from Brahma down to the smallinsect, must take lessons from Krsna.                               TEXT 16                                 TEXT                       tato vatsan adrstvaitya                        puline 'pi ca vatsapan                         ubhav api vane krsno                         vicikaya samantatah                               SYNONYMS   tatah--thereafter; vatsan--the calves; adrstva--not seeing there within theforest; etya--after; puline api--to the bank of the Yamuna; ca--also; vatsapan--could not see the cowherd boys; ubhau api--both of them (the calves and thecowherd boys); vane--within the forest; krsnah--Lord Krsna; vicikaya--searchedall over; samantatah--here and there.
                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, when Krsna was unable to find the calves, He returned to the bankof the river, but there He was also unable to see the cowherd boys. Thus Hebegan to search for both the calves and the boys, as if He could not understandwhat had happened.                               PURPORT   Krsna could immediately understand that Brahma had taken away both the calvesand the boys, but as an innocent child He searched here and there so that Brahmacould not understand Krsna's maya. This was all a dramatic performance. A playerknows everything, but still he plays on the stage in such a way that others donot understand him.                               TEXT 17                                 TEXT                       kvapy adrstvantar-vipine                      vatsan palams ca visva-vit                      sarvam vidhi-krtam krsnah                          sahasavajagama ha                               SYNONYMS   kva api--anywhere; adrstva--not seeing at all; antah-vipine--within theforest; vatsan--the calves; palan ca--and their caretakers, the cowherd boys;visva-vit--Krsna, who is aware of everything going on throughout the wholecosmic manifestation; sarvam--everything; vidhi-krtam--was executed by Brahma;krsnah--Lord Krsna; sahasa--immediately; avajagama ha--could understand.                             TRANSLATION   When Krsna was unable to find the calves and their caretakers, the cowherdboys, anywhere in the forest, He could suddenly understand that this was thework of Lord Brahma.                               PURPORT   Although Krsna is visva-vit, the knower of everything happening in the entirecosmic manifestation, as an innocent child He showed ignorance of Brahma'sactions, although He could immediately understand that these were the doings ofBrahma. This pastime is called brahma-vimohana, the bewilderment of Brahma.Brahma was already bewildered by Krsna's activities as an innocent child, andnow he would be further bewildered.                               TEXT 18                                 TEXT                       tatah krsno mudam kartum                       tan-matrnam ca kasya ca                         ubhayayitam atmanam                       cakre visva-krd isvarah                               SYNONYMS
   tatah--thereafter; krsnah--the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mudam--pleasure; kartum--to create; tat-matrnam ca--of the mothers of the cowherd boysand calves; kasya ca--and (the pleasure) of Brahma; ubhayayitam--expansion, bothas the calves and as the cowherd boys; atmanam--Himself; cakre--did; visva-krtisvarah--it was not difficult for Him, for He is the creator of the whole cosmicmanifestation.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, just to create pleasure both for Brahma and for the mothers ofthe calves and cowherd boys, Krsna, the creator of the entire cosmicmanifestation, expanded Himself as calves and boys.                               PURPORT   Although Brahma was already entangled in bewilderment, he wanted to show hispower to the cowherd boys; but after he took away the boys and their calves andreturned to his abode, Krsna created further astonishment for Brahma, and forthe mothers of the boys, by establishing the lunch pastimes in the forest againand replacing all the calves and boys, just as they had appeared before.According to the Vedas, ekam bahu syam: the Personality of Godhead can becomemany, many millions upon millions of calves and cowherd boys, as He did tobewilder Brahma more and more.                               TEXT 19                                 TEXT       yavad vatsapa-vatsakalpaka-vapur yavat karanghry-adikam         yavad yasti-visana-venu-dala-sig yavad vibhusambaram          yavac chila-gunabhidhakrti-vayo yavad viharadikam      sarvam visnumayam giro 'nga-vad ajah sarva-svarupo babhau                               SYNONYMS   yavat vatsapa--exactly like the cowherd boys; vatsaka-alpaka-vapuh--andexactly like the tender bodies of the calves; yavat kara-anghri-adikam--exactlyto the measurement of their particular varieties of legs and hands; yavat yasti-visana-venu-dala-sik--not only like their bodies but exactly like their bugles,flutes, sticks, lunch bags and so on; yavat vibhusa-ambaram--exactly like theirornaments and dress in all their varied particulars; yavat sila-guna-abhidha-akrti-vayah--their exact character, habits, features, attributes and explicitbodily features; yavat vihara-adikam--exactly according to their tastes oramusements; sarvam--everything in detail; visnu-mayam--expansions of Vasudeva,Visnu; girah anga-vat--voices exactly like theirs; ajah--Krsna; sarva-svarupahbabhau--created everything in detail as Himself, without any change.                             TRANSLATION   By His Vasudeva feature, Krsna simultaneously expanded Himself into the exactnumber of missing cowherd boys and calves, with their exact bodily features,their particular types of hands, legs and other limbs, their sticks, bugles andflutes, their lunch bags, their particular types of dress and ornaments placedin various ways, their names, ages and forms, and their special activities andcharacteristics. By expanding Himself in this way, beautiful Krsna proved thestatement samagra-jagad visnumayam: "Lord Visnu is all-pervading."                               PURPORT
   As stated in the Brahma-samhita (5.33):                 advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam                adyam purana-purusam nava-yauvanam ca   Krsna, param brahma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is adyam, thebeginning of everything; He is adi-purusam, the ever-youthful original person.He can expand Himself in more forms than one can imagine, yet He does not falldown from His original form as Krsna; therefore He is called Acyuta. This is theSupreme personality of Godhead. Sarvam visnumayam jagat. Sarvam khalv idambrahma. Krsna thus proved that He is everything, that He can become everything,but that still He is personally different from everything (mat-sthani sarva-bhutani na caham tesv avasthitah). This is Krsna, who is understood by acintya-bhedabheda-tattva philosophy. purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavasisyate: Krsnais always complete, and although He can create millions of universes, all ofthem full in all opulences, He remains as opulent as ever, without any change(advaitam). This is explained by different Vaisnava acaryas through philosophiessuch as visuddhadvaita, visistadvaita and dvaitadvaita. Therefore one must learnabout Krsna from the acaryas. Acaryavan puruso veda: one who follows the path ofthe acaryas knows things as they are. Such a person can know Krsna as He is, atleast to some extent, and as soon as one understands Krsna (janma karma ca medivyam evam yo vetti tattvatah), one is liberated from material bondage (tyaktvadeham punar janma naiti mam eti so 'rjuna).                               TEXT 20                                 TEXT                       svayam atmatma-govatsan                       prativaryatma-vatsapaih                       kridann atma-viharais ca                       sarvatma pravisad vrajam                               SYNONYMS   svayam atma--Krsna, who is personally the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul; atma-go-vatsan--now expanded into calves that were also He Himself; prativarya atma-vatsapaih--again He Himself was represented as the cowherd boys controlling andcommanding the calves; kridan--thus Himself constituting everything in thesetranscendental pastimes; atma-viharaih ca--enjoying Himself by Himself indifferent ways; sarva-atma--the Supersoul, Krsna; pravisat--entered; vrajam--Vrajabhumi, the land of Maharaja Nanda and Yasoda.                             TRANSLATION   Now expanding Himself so as to appear as all the calves and cowherd boys, allof them as they were, and at the same time appear as their leader, Krsna enteredVrajabhumi, the land of His father, Nanda Maharaja, just as He usually did whileenjoying their company.                               PURPORT   Krsna usually stayed in the forest and pasturing ground, taking care of thecalves and cows with His associates the cowherd boys. Now that the originalgroup had been taken away by Brahma, Krsna Himself assumed the forms of everymember of the group, without anyone's knowledge, even the knowledge of Baladeva,and continued the usual program. He was ordering His friends to do this and
that, and He was controlling the calves and going into the forest to search forthem when they went astray, allured by new grass, but these calves and boys wereHe Himself. This was Krsna's inconceivable potency. As explained by Srila JivaGosvami, radha krsna-pranaya-vikrtir hladini saktir asmat. Radha and Krsna arethe same. Krsna, by expanding His pleasure potency, becomes Radharani. The samepleasure potency (ananda-cinmaya-rasa) was expanded by Krsna when He Himselfbecame all the calves and boys and enjoyed transcendental bliss in Vrajabhumi.This was done by the yogamaya potency and was inconceivable to persons under thepotency of mahamaya.                               TEXT 21                                 TEXT                     tat-tad-vatsan prthan nitva                      tat-tad-gosthe nivesya sah                      tat-tad-atmabhavad rajams                      tat-tat-sadma pravistavan                               SYNONYMS   tat-tat-vatsan--the calves, which belonged to different cows; prthak--separately; nitva--bringing; tat-tat-gosthe--to their respective cow sheds;nivesya--entering; sah--Krsna; tat-tat-atma--as originally different individualsouls; abhavat--He expanded Himself in that way; rajan--O King Pariksit; tat-tat-sadma--their respective houses; pravistavan--entered (Krsna thus enteredeverywhere).                             TRANSLATION   O Maharaja Pariksit, Krsna, who had divided Himself as different calves andalso as different cowherd boys, entered different cow sheds as the calves andthen different homes as different boys.                               PURPORT   Krsna had many, many friends, of whom Sridama, Sudama and Subala wereprominent. Thus Krsna Himself became Sridama, Sudama and Subala and enteredtheir respective houses with their respective calves.                               TEXT 22                                 TEXT                   tan-mataro venu-rava-tvarotthita                utthapya dorbhih parirabhya nirbharam                 sneha-snuta-stanya-payah-sudhasavam                  matva param brahma sutan apayayan                               SYNONYMS   tat-matarah--the mothers of the respective cowherd boys; venu-rava--becauseof the sounds played on flutes and bugles by the cowherd boys; tvara--immediately; utthitah--awakened from their respective household duties;utthapya--immediately lifted their respective sons; dorbhih--with their twoarms; parirabhya--embracing; nirbharam--without feeling any weight; sneha-snuta--which was flowing because of intense love; stanya-payah--their breast milk;sudha-asavam--tasting just like a nectarean beverage; matva--accepting the milk
like that; param--the Supreme; brahma--Krsna; sutan apayayan--began to feedtheir respective sons.                             TRANSLATION   The mothers of the boys, upon hearing the sounds of the flutes and buglesbeing played by their sons, immediately rose from their household tasks, liftedtheir boys onto their laps, embraced them with both arms and began to feed themwith their breast milk, which flowed forth because of extreme love specificallyfor Krsna. Actually Krsna is everything, but at that time, expressing extremelove and affection, they took special pleasure in feeding Krsna, theParabrahman, and Krsna drank the milk from His respective mothers as if it werea nectarean beverage.                               PURPORT   Although all the elderly gopis knew that Krsna was the son of mother Yasoda,they still desired, "If Krsna had become my son, I would also have taken care ofHim like mother Yasoda. "This was their inner ambition. Now, in order to pleasethem, Krsna personally took the role of their sons and fulfilled their desire.They enhanced their special love for Krsna by embracing Him and feeding Him, andKrsna tasted their breast milk to be just like a nectarean beverage. While thusbewildering Brahma, He enjoyed the special transcendental pleasure created byyogamaya between all the other mothers and Himself.                               TEXT 23                                 TEXT                   tato nrponmardana-majja-lepana-                    lankara-raksa-tilakasanadibhih                  samlalitah svacaritaih praharsayan                   sayam gato yama-yamena madhavah                               SYNONYMS   tatah--thereafter; nrpa--O King (Maharaja Pariksit); unmardana--by massagingthem with oil; majja--by bathing; lepana--by smearing the body with oil andsandalwood pulp; alankara--by decorating with ornaments; raksa--by chantingprotective mantras; tilaka--by decorating the body with tilaka marks in twelveplaces; asana-adibhih--and by feeding them sumptuously; samlalitah--in this waycared for by the mothers; sva-acaritaih--by their characteristic behavior;praharsa-yan--making the mothers very much pleased; sayam--evening; gatah--arrived; yama-yamena--as the time of each activity passed; madhavah--Lord Krsna.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, O Maharaja Pariksit, as required according to the scheduled roundof His pastimes, Krsna returned in the evening, entered the house of each of thecowherd boys, and engaged exactly like the former boys, thus enlivening theirmothers with transcendental pleasure. The mothers took care of the boys bymassaging them with oil, bathing them, smearing their bodies with sandalwoodpulp, decorating them with ornaments, chanting protective mantras, decoratingtheir bodies with tilaka and giving them food. In this way, the mothers servedKrsna personally.                               TEXT 24
                                 TEXT                  gavas tato gostham upetya satvaram                  hunkara-ghosaih parihuta-sangatan                  svakan svakan vatsataran apayayan                muhur lihantyah sravad audhasam payah                               SYNONYMS   gavah--the calves; tatah--thereafter; gostham--to the cow sheds; upetya--reaching; satvaram--very soon; hunkara-ghosaih--by making jubilant mooingsounds; parihuta-sangatan--to call the cows; svakan svakan--following theirrespective mothers; vatsataran--the respective calves; apayayan--feeding them;muhuh--again and again; lihantyah--licking the calves; sravat audhasam payah--abundant milk flowing from their milk bags.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter, all the cows entered their different sheds and began mooingloudly, calling for their respective calves. When the calves arrived, themothers began licking the calves' bodies again and again and profusely feedingthem with the milk flowing from their milk bags.                               PURPORT   All the dealings between the calves and their respective mothers taking careof them were enacted by Krsna Himself.                               TEXT 25                                 TEXT                        go-gopinam matrtasminn                        asit snehardhikam vina                        purovad asv api hares                          tokata mayaya vina                               SYNONYMS   go-gopinam--for both the cows and the gopis, the elderly cowherd women;matrta--motherly affection; asmin--unto Krsna; asit--there ordinarily was;sneha--of affection; rdhikam--any increase; vina--without; purah-vat--likebefore; asu--there was among the cows and gopis; api--although; hareh--of Krsna;tokata--Krsna is my son; mayaya vina--without maya.                             TRANSLATION   Previously, from the very beginning, the gopis had motherly affection forKrsna. Indeed, their affection for Krsna exceeded even their affection for theirown sons. In displaying their affection, they had thus distinguished betweenKrsna and their sons, but now that distinction disappeared.                               PURPORT   The distinction between one's own son and another's son is not unnatural.Many elderly women have motherly affection for the sons of others. They observedistinctions, however, between those other sons and their own. But now theelderly gopis could not distinguish between their own sons and Krsna, for since
their own sons had been taken by Brahma, Krsna had expanded as their sons.Therefore, their extra affection for their sons, who were now Krsna Himself, wasdue to bewilderment resembling that of Brahma. Previously, the mothers ofSridama, Sudama, Subala and Krsna's other friends did not have the sameaffection for one another's sons, but now the gopis treated all the boys astheir own. Sukadeva Gosvami, therefore, wanted to explain this increment ofaffection in terms of Krsna's bewilderment of Brahma, the gopis, the cows andeveryone else.                               TEXT 26                                 TEXT                        vrajaukasam sva-tokesu                      sneha-vally abdam anvaham                        sanair nihsima vavrdhe                       yatha krsne tv apurvavat                               SYNONYMS   vraja-okasam--of all the inhabitants of Vraja, Vrndavana; sva-tokesu--fortheir own sons; sneha-valli--the creeper of affection; a-abdam--for one year;anu-aham--every day; sanaih--gradually; nihsima--without limit; vavrdhe--increased; yatha krsne--exactly accepting Krsna as their son; tu--indeed;apurva-vat--as it had not been previously.                             TRANSLATION   Although the inhabitants of Vrajabhumi, the cowherd men and cowherd women,previously had more affection for Krsna than for their own children, now, forone year, their affection for their own sons continuously increased, for Krsnahad now become their sons. There was no limit to the increment of theiraffection for their sons, who were now Krsna. Every day they found newinspiration for loving their children as much as they loved Krsna.                               TEXT 27                                 TEXT                        ittham atmatmanatmanam                        vatsa-pala-misena sah                        palayan vatsapo varsam                        cikride vana-gosthayoh                               SYNONYMS   ittham--in this way; atma--the Supreme Soul, Krsna; atmana--by Himself;atmanam--Himself again; vatsa-pala-misena--with the forms of cowherd boys andcalves; sah--Krsna Himself; palayan--maintaining; vatsa-pah--tending the calves;varsam--continuously for one year; cikride--enjoyed the pastimes; vana-gosthayoh--both in Vrndavana and in the forest.                             TRANSLATION   In this way, Lord Sri Krsna, having Himself become the cowherd boys andgroups of calves, maintained Himself by Himself. Thus He continued His pastimes,both in Vrndavana and in the forest, for one year.
                               PURPORT   Everything was Krsna. The calves, the cowherd boys and their maintainerHimself were all Krsna. In other words, Krsna expanded Himself in varieties ofcalves and cowherd boys and continued His pastimes uninterrupted for one year.As stated in Bhagavad-gita, Krsna's expansion is situated in everyone's heart asthe Supersoul. Similarly, instead of expanding Himself as the Supersoul, Heexpanded Himself as a portion of calves and cowherd boys for one continuousyear.                               TEXT 28                                 TEXT                         ekada carayan vatsan                         sa-ramo vanam avisat                        panca-sasu tri-yamasu                         hayanapuranisv ajah                               SYNONYMS   ekada--one day; carayan vatsan--while taking care of all the calves; sa-ramah--along with Balarama; vanam--within the forest; avisat--entered; panca-sasu--five or six; tri-yamasu--nights; hayana--a whole year; apuranisu--notbeing fulfilled (five or six days before the completion of one year); ajah--LordSri Krsna.                             TRANSLATION   One day, five or six nights before the completion of the year, Krsna, tendingthe calves, entered the forest along with Balarama.                               PURPORT   Up to this time, even Balarama was captivated by the bewilderment thatcovered Brahma. Even Balarama did not know that all the calves and cowherd boyswere expansions of Krsna or that He Himself was also an expansion of Krsna. Thiswas disclosed to Balarama just five or six days before the completion of theyear.                               TEXT 29                                 TEXT                         tato vidurac carato                        gavo vatsan upavrajam                         govardhanadri-sirasi                        carantyo dadrsus trnam                               SYNONYMS   tatah--thereafter; vidurat--from a not-distant place; caratah--whilepasturing; gavah--all the cows; vatsan--and their respective calves; upavrajam--also pasturing near Vrndavana; govardhana-adri-sirasi--on the top of GovardhanaHill; carantyah--while pasturing to find; dadrsuh--saw; trnam--tender grassnearby.                             TRANSLATION
   Thereafter, while pasturing atop Govardhana Hill, the cows looked down tofind some green grass and saw their calves pasturing near Vrndavana, not veryfar away.                               TEXT 30                                 TEXT                  drstvatha tat-sneha-vaso 'smrtatma                  sa go-vrajo 'tyatmapa-durga-margah                  dvi-pat kakud-griva udasya-puccho                   'gad dhunkrtair asru-paya javena                               SYNONYMS   drstva--when the cows saw their calves below; atha--thereafter; tat-sneha-vasah--because of increased love for the calves; asmrta-atma--as if they hadforgotten themselves; sah--that; go-vrajah--herd of cows; ati-atma-pa-durga-margah--escaping their caretakers because of increased affection for the calves,although the way was very rough and hard; dvi-pat--pairs of legs together;kakut-grivah--their humps moving with their necks; udasya-pucchah--raising theirheads and tails; agat--came; hunkrtaih--lowing very loudly; asru-payah--withmilk flowing from the nipples; javena--very forcibly.                             TRANSLATION   When the cows saw their own calves from the top of Govardhana Hill, theyforgot themselves and their caretakers because of increased affection, andalthough the path was very rough, they ran toward their calves with greatanxiety, each running as if with one pair of legs. Their milk bags full andflowing with milk, their heads and tails raised, and their humps moving withtheir necks, they ran forcefully until they reached their calves to feed them.                               PURPORT   Generally the calves and cows are pastured separately. The elderly men takecare of the cows, and the small children see to the calves. This time, however,the cows immediately forgot their position as soon as they saw the calves belowGovardhana Hill, and they ran with great force, their tails erect and theirfront and hind legs joined, until they reached their calves.                               TEXT 31                                 TEXT                       sametya gavo 'dho vatsan                       vatsavatyo 'py apayayan                         gilantya iva cangani                      lihantyah svaudhasam payah                               SYNONYMS   sametya--assembling; gavah--all the cows; adhah--down at the foot ofGovardhana Hill; vatsan--all their calves; vatsa-vatyah--as if new calves hadbeen born from them; api--even though new calves were present; apayayan--fedthem; gilantyah--swallowing them; iva--as if; ca--also; angani--their bodies;
lihantyah--licking as they do when newborn calves are present; sva-odhasampayah--their own milk flowing from the milk bags.                             TRANSLATION   The cows had given birth to new calves, but while coming down from GovardhanaHill, the cows, because of increased affection for the older calves, allowed theolder calves to drink milk from their milk bags and then began licking thecalves' bodies in anxiety, as if wanting to swallow them.                               TEXT 32                                 TEXT                        gopas tad-rodhanayasa-                       maughya-lajjoru-manyuna                     durgadhva-krcchrato 'bhyetya                       go-vatsair dadrsuh sutan                               SYNONYMS   gopah--the cowherd men; tat-rodhana-ayasa--of their attempt to stop the cowsfrom going to their calves; maughya--on account of the frustration; lajja--beingashamed; uru-manyuna--and at the same time becoming very angry; durga-adhva-krcchratah--although they passed the very rough way with great difficulty;abhyetya--after reaching there; go-vatsaih--along with the calves; dadrsuh--saw;sutan--their respective sons.                             TRANSLATION   The cowherd men, having been unable to check the cows from going to theircalves, felt simultaneously ashamed and angry. They crossed the rough road withgreat difficulty, but when they came down and saw their own sons, they wereoverwhelmed by great affection.                               PURPORT   Everyone was increasing in affection for Krsna. When the cowherd men comingdown from the hill saw their own sons, who were no one else than Krsna, theiraffection increased.                               TEXT 33                                 TEXT                    tad-iksanotprema-rasaplutasaya                   jatanuraga gata-manyavo 'rbhakan                  uduhya dorbhih parirabhya murdhani                   ghranair avapuh paramam mudam te                               SYNONYMS   tat-iksana-utprema-rasa-apluta-asayah--all the thoughts of the cowherd menmerged in the mellow of paternal love, which was aroused by seeing their sons;jata-anuragah--experiencing a great longing or attraction; gata-manyavah--theiranger disappeared; arbhakan--their young sons; uduhya--lifting; dorbhih--withtheir arms; parirabhya--embracing; murdhani--on the head; ghranaih--by smelling;avapuh--obtained; paramam--the highest; mudam--pleasure; te--those cowherd men.
                             TRANSLATION   At that time, all the thoughts of the cowherd men merged in the mellow ofpaternal love, which was aroused by the sight of their sons. Experiencing agreat attraction, their anger completely disappearing, they lifted their sons,embraced them in their arms and enjoyed the highest pleasure by smelling theirsons' heads.                               PURPORT   After Brahma stole the original cowherd boys and calves, Krsna expandedHimself to become the boys and calves again. Therefore, because the boys wereactually Krsna's expansions, the cowherd men were especially attracted to them.At first the cowherd men, who were on top of the hill, were angry, but becauseof Krsna the boys were extremely attractive, and therefore the cowherd menimmediately came down from the hill with special affection.                               TEXT 34                                 TEXT                        tatah pravayaso gopas                         tokaslesa-sunirvrtah                      krcchrac chanair apagatas                        tad-anusmrty-udasravah                               SYNONYMS   tatah--thereafter; pravayasah--elderly; gopah--cowherd men; toka-aslesa-sunirvrtah--became overjoyed by embracing their sons; krcchrat--with difficulty;sanaih--gradually; apagatah--ceased from that embracing and returned to theforest; tat-anusmrti-uda-sravah--as they remembered their sons, tears began toroll down from their eyes.                             TRANSLATION   Thereafter the elderly cowherd men, having obtained great feeling fromembracing their sons, gradually and with great difficulty and reluctance ceasedembracing them and returned to the forest. But as the men remembered their sons,tears began to roll down from their eyes.                               PURPORT   In the beginning the cowherd men were angry that the cows were beingattracted by the calves, but when the men came down from the hill, theythemselves were attracted by their sons, and therefore the men embraced them. Toembrace one's son and smell his head are symptoms of affection.                               TEXT 35                                 TEXT                      vrajasya ramah premardher                      viksyautkanthyam anuksanam                      mukta-stanesv apatyesv apy                         ahetu-vid acintayat
                               SYNONYMS   vrajasya--of the herd of cows; ramah--Balarama; prema-rdheh--because of anincrease of affection; viksya--after observing; aut-kanthyam--attachment; anu-ksanam--constantly; mukta-stanesu--who had grown up and were no longer drawingmilk from their mothers; apatyesu--in regard to those calves; api--even; ahetu-vit--not understanding the reason; acintayat--began to consider as follows.                             TRANSLATION   Because of an increase of affection, the cows had constant attachment even tothose calves that were grown up and had stopped sucking milk from their mothers.When Baladeva saw this attachment, He was unable to understand the reason forit, and thus He began to consider as follows.                               PURPORT   The cows had younger calves who had started sucking milk from their mothers,and some of the cows had newly given birth, but now, because of love, the cowsenthusiastically showed their affection for the older calves, which had left offmilking. These calves were grown up, but still the mothers wanted to feed them.Therefore Balarama was a little surprised, and He wanted to inquire from Krsnaabout the reason for their behavior. The mothers were actually more anxious tofeed the older calves, although the new calves were present, because the oldercalves were expansions of Krsna. These surprising events were taking place bythe manipulation of yogamaya. There are two mayas working under the direction ofKrsna--mahamaya, the energy of the material world, and yogamaya, the energy ofthe spiritual world. These uncommon events were taking place because of theinfluence of yogamaya. From the very day on which Brahma stole the calves andboys, yogamaya acted in such a way that the residents of Vrndavana, includingeven Lord Balarama, could not understand how yogamaya was working and causingsuch uncommon things to happen. But as yogamaya gradually acted, Balarama inparticular was able to understand what was happening, and therefore He inquiredfrom Krsna.                               TEXT 36                                 TEXT                        kim etad adbhutam iva                         vasudeve 'khilatmani                       vrajasya satmanas tokesv                        apurvam prema vardhate                               SYNONYMS   kim--what; etat--this; adbhutam--wonderful; iva--just as; vasudeve--inVasudeva, Lord Sri Krsna; akhila-atmani--the Supersoul of all living entities;vrajasya--of all the inhabitants of Vraja; sa-atmanah--along with Me; tokesu--inthese boys; apurvam--unprecedented; prema--affection; vardhate--is increasing.                             TRANSLATION   What is this wonderful phenomenon? The affection of all the inhabitants ofVraja, including Me, toward these boys and calves is increasing as never before,just like our affection for Lord Krsna, the Supersoul of all living entities.                               PURPORT
   This increase of affection was not maya; rather, because Krsna had expandedHimself as everything and because the whole life of everyone in Vrndavana wasmeant for Krsna, the cows, because of affection for Krsna, had more affectionfor the older calves than for the new calves, and the men increased in theiraffection for their sons. Balarama was astonished to see all the residents ofVrndavana so affectionate toward their own children, exactly as they had beenfor Krsna. Similarly, the cows had grown affectionate toward their calves--asmuch as toward Krsna. Balarama was surprised to see the acts of yogamaya.Therefore He inquired from Krsna, "What is happening here? What is thismystery?"                               TEXT 37                                 TEXT                         keyam va kuta ayata                        daivi va nary utasuri                       prayo mayastu me bhartur                        nanya me 'pi vimohini                               SYNONYMS   ka--who; iyam--this; va--or; kutah--from where; ayata--has come; daivi--whether demigod; va--or; nari--woman; uta--or; asuri--demoness; prayah--in mostcases; maya--illusory energy; astu--she must be; me--My; bhartuh--of the master,Lord Krsna; na--not; anya--any other; me--My; api--certainly; vimohini--bewilderer.                             TRANSLATION   Who is this mystic power, and where has she come from? Is she a demigod or ademoness? She must be the illusory energy of My master, Lord Krsna, for who elsecan bewilder Me?                               PURPORT   Balarama was surprised. This extraordinary show of affection, He thought, wassomething mystical, performed either by the demigods or some wonderful man.Otherwise, how could this wonderful change take place? "This maya might be someraksasi-maya," He thought, "but how can raksasi-maya have any influence upon Me?This is not possible. Therefore it must be the maya of Krsna." He thus concludedthat the mystical change must have been caused by Krsna, whom Balaramaconsidered His worshipable personality of Godhead. He thought, "It was arrangedby Krsna, and even I could not check its mystic power." Thus Balarama understoodthat all these boys and calves were only expansions of Krsna.                               TEXT 38                                 TEXT                        iti sancintya dasarho                        vatsan sa-vayasan api                       sarvan acasta vaikuntham                         caksusa vayunena sah                               SYNONYMS
   iti sancintya--thinking in this way; dasarhah--Baladeva; vatsan--the calves;sa-vayasan--along with His companions; api--also; sarvan--all; acasta--saw;vaikuntham--as Sri Krsna only; caksusa vayunena--with the eye of transcendentalknowledge; sah--He (Baladeva).                             TRANSLATION   Thinking in this way, Lord Balarama was able to see, with the eye oftranscendental knowledge, that all these calves and Krsna's friends wereexpansions of the form of Sri Krsna.                               PURPORT   Every individual is different. There are even differences between twinbrothers. Yet when Krsna expanded Himself as the boys and calves, each boy andeach calf appeared in its own original feature, with the same individual way ofacting, the same tendencies, the same color, the same dress, and so on, forKrsna manifested Himself with all these differences. This was Krsna's opulence.                               TEXT 39                                 TEXT                     naite suresa rsayo na caite                   tvam eva bhasisa bhid-asraye 'pi               sarvam prthak tvam nigamat katham vadety                  uktena vrttam prabhuna balo 'vait                               SYNONYMS   na--not; ete--these boys; sura-isah--the best of the demigods; rsayah--greatsages; na--not; ca--and; ete--these calves; tvam--You (Krsna); eva--alone;bhasi--are manifesting; isa--O supreme controller; bhit-asraye--in the existenceof varieties of difference; api--even; sarvam--everything; prthak--existing;tvam--You (Krsna); nigamat--briefly; katham--how; vada--please explain; iti--thus; uktena--having been requested (by Baladeva); vrttam--the situation;prabhuna--(having been explained) by Lord Krsna; balah--Baladeva; avait--understood.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Baladeva said, "O supreme controller! These boys are not great demigods,as I previously thought. Nor are these calves great sages like Narada. Now I cansee that You alone are manifesting Yourself in all varieties of difference.Although one, You are existing in the different forms of the calves and boys.Please briefly explain this to Me." Having thus been requested by Lord Baladeva,Krsna explained the whole situation, and Baladeva understood it.                               PURPORT   Inquiring from Krsna about the actual situation, Lord Balarama said, "My dearKrsna, in the beginning I thought that all these cows, calves and cowherd boyswere either great sages and saintly persons or demigods, but at the present itappears that they are actually Your expansions. They are all You; You Yourselfare playing as the calves and cows and boys. What is the mystery of thissituation? Where have those other calves and cows and boys gone? And why are Youexpanding Yourself as the cows, calves and boys? Will You kindly tell Me what isthe cause?" At the request of Balarama, Krsna briefly explained the whole
situation: how the calves and boys were stolen by Brahma and how He wasconcealing the incident by expanding Himself so that people would not know thatthe original cows, calves and boys were missing. Balarama understood, therefore,that this was not maya but Krsna's opulence. Krsna has all opulences, and thiswas but another opulence of Krsna.   "At first," Lord Balarama said, "I thought that these boys and calves were adisplay of the power of great sages like Narada, but now I see that all theseboys and calves are You." After inquiring from Krsna, Lord Balarama understoodthat Krsna Himself had become many. That the Lord can do this is stated in theBrahma-samhita (5.33). Advaitam acyutam anadim ananta-rupam: although He is one,He can expand Himself in so many forms. According to the Vedic version, ekambahu syam: He can expand Himself into many thousands and millions but stillremain one. In that sense, everything is spiritual because everything is anexpansion of Krsna; that is, everything is an expansion either of Krsna Himselfor of His potency. Because the potency is nondifferent from the potent, thepotency and the potent are one (sakti-saktimatayor abhedah). The Mayavadis,however, say, cid-acit-samanvayah: spirit and matter are one. This is a wrongconception. Spirit (cit) is different from matter (acit), as explained by KrsnaHimself in Bhagavad-gita (7.4-5):                        bhumir apo 'nalo vayuh                       kham mano buddhir eva ca                          ahankara itiyam me                       bhinna prakrtir astadha                        apareyam itas tv anyam                       prakrtim viddhi me param                        jiva-bhutam maha-baho                        yayedam dharyate jagat   "Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego--alltogether these eight comprise My separated material energies. But besides thisinferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a superior energy of Mine,which consists of all living entities who are struggling with material natureand are sustaining the universe." Spirit and matter cannot be made one, foractually they are superior and inferior energies, yet the Mayavadis, or Advaita-vadis, try to make them one. This is wrong. Although spirit and matterultimately come from the same one source, they cannot be made one. For example,there are many things that come from our bodies, but although they come from thesame source, they cannot be made one. We should be careful to note that althoughthe supreme source is one, the emanations from this source should be separatelyregarded as inferior and superior. The difference between the Mayavada andVaisnava philosophies is that the Vaisnava philosophy recognizes this fact. SriCaitanya Mahaprabhu's philosophy, therefore, is called acintya-bhedabheda--simultaneous oneness and difference. For example, fire and heat cannot beseparated, for where there is fire there is heat and where there is heat thereis fire. Nonetheless, although we cannot touch fire, heat we can tolerate.Therefore, although they are one, they are different.                               TEXT 40                                 TEXT                       tavad etyatmabhur atma-                         manena truty-anehasa                       purovad abdam kridantam                        dadrse sa-kalam harim
                               SYNONYMS   tavat--for so long; etya--after returning; atma-bhuh--Lord Brahma; atma-manena--by his (Brahma's) own measurement; truti-anehasa--by a moment's time;purah-vat--just as previously; a-abdam--for one year (by human measurement oftime); kridantam--playing; dadrse--he saw; sa-kalam--along with His expansions;harim--Lord Hari (Sri Krsna).                             TRANSLATION   When Lord Brahma returned after a moment of time had passed (according to hisown measurement), he saw that although by human measurement a complete year hadpassed, Lord Krsna, after all that time, was engaged just as before in playingwith the boys and calves, who were His expansions.                               PURPORT   Lord Brahma had gone away for only a moment of his time, but when hereturned, a year of human time had passed. On different planets, the calculationof time is different. To give an example, a man-made satellite may orbit theearth in an hour and twenty-five minutes and thus complete one full day,although a day ordinarily takes twenty-four hours for those living on earth.Therefore, what was but a moment for Brahma was one year on earth. Krsnacontinued to expand Himself in so many forms for one year, but by thearrangement of yogamaya no one could understand this but Balarama.   After one moment of Brahma's calculation, Brahma came back to see the funcaused by his stealing the boys and calves. But he was also afraid that he wasplaying with fire. Krsna was his master, and he had played mischief for fun bytaking away Krsna's calves and boys. He was really anxious, so he did not stayaway very long; he came back after a moment (of his calculation). When Brahmareturned, he saw that all the boys, calves and cows were playing with Krsna inthe same way as when he had come upon them; by Krsna's display of yogamaya, thesame pastimes were going on without any change.   On the day when Lord Brahma had first come, Baladeva could not go with Krsnaand the cowherd boys, for it was His birthday, and His mother had kept Him backfor the proper ceremonial bath, called santika-snana. Therefore Lord Baladevawas not taken by Brahma at that time. Now, one year later, Brahma returned, andbecause he returned on exactly the same day, Baladeva was again kept at home forHis birthday. Therefore, although this verse mentions that Brahma saw Krsna andall the cowherd boys, Baladeva is not mentioned. It was five or six days earlierthat Baladeva had inquired from Krsna about the extraordinary affection of thecows and cowherd men, but now, when Brahma returned, Brahma saw all the calvesand cowherd boys playing with Krsna as expansions of Krsna, but he did not seeBaladeva. As in the previous year, Lord Baladeva did not go to the woods on theday Lord Brahma appeared there.                               TEXT 41                                 TEXT                         yavanto gokule balah                        sa-vatsah sarva eva hi                          mayasaye sayana me                        nadyapi punar utthitah                               SYNONYMS
   yavantah--whatsoever, as many as; gokule--in Gokula; balah--boys; sa-vatsah--along with their calves; sarve--all; eva--indeed; hi--because; maya-asaye--onthe bed of maya; sayanah--are sleeping; me--my; na--not; adya--today; api--even;punah--again; utthitah--have risen.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Brahma thought: Whatever boys and calves there were in Gokula, I havekept them sleeping on the bed of my mystic potency, and to this very day theyhave not yet risen again.                               PURPORT   For one year Lord Brahma kept the calves and boys lying down in a cave by hismystic power. Therefore when Brahma saw Lord Krsna still playing with all thecows and calves, he began trying to reason about what was happening. "What isthis?" he thought. "Maybe I took those calves and cowherd boys away but now theyhave been taken from that cave. Is this what has happened? Has Krsna broughtthem back here?" Then, however, Lord Brahma saw that the calves and boys he hadtaken were still in the same mystic maya into which he had put them. Thus heconcluded that the calves and cowherd boys now playing with Krsna were differentfrom the ones in the cave. He could understand that although the original calvesand boys were still in the cave where he had put them, Krsna had expandedHimself and so the present demonstration of calves and boys consisted ofexpansions of Krsna. They had the same features, the same mentality and the sameintentions, but they were all Krsna.                               TEXT 42                                 TEXT                        ita ete 'tra kutratya                         man-maya-mohitetare                        tavanta eva tatrabdam                        kridanto visnuna samam                               SYNONYMS   itah--for this reason; ete--these boys with their calves; atra--here;kutratyah--where have they come from; mat-maya-mohita-itare--different fromthose who were mystified by my illusory potency; tavantah--the same number ofboys; eva--indeed; tatra--there; a-abdam--for one year; kridantah--are playing;visnuna samam--along with Krsna.                             TRANSLATION   A similar number of boys and calves have been playing with Krsna for onewhole year, yet they are different from the ones illusioned by my mysticpotency. Who are they? Where did they come from?                               PURPORT   Although appearing like calves, cows and cowherd boys, these were all Visnu.Actually they were visnu-tattva, not jiva-tattva. Brahma was surprised. "Theoriginal cowherd boys and cows," he thought, "are still where I put them lastyear. So who is it that is now keeping company with Krsna exactly as before?Where have they come from?" Brahma was surprised that his mystic power had beenneglected. Without touching the original cows and cowherd boys kept by Brahma,
Krsna had created another assembly of calves and boys, who were all expansionsof visnu-tattva. Thus Brahma's mystic power was superseded.                               TEXT 43                                 TEXT                          evam etesu bhedesu                      ciram dhyatva sa atma-bhuh                        satyah ke katare neti                       jnatum neste kathancana                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this way; etesu bhedesu--between these boys, who were existingseparately; ciram--for a long time; dhyatva--after thinking; sah--he; atma-bhuh--Lord Brahma; satyah--real; ke--who; katare--who; na--are not; iti--thus;jnatum--to understand; na--not; iste--was able; kathancana--in any way at all.                             TRANSLATION   Thus Lord Brahma, thinking and thinking for a long time, tried to distinguishbetween those two sets of boys, who were each separately existing. He tried tounderstand who was real and who was not real, but he couldn't understand at all.                               PURPORT   Brahma was puzzled. "The original boys and calves are still sleeping as Ihave kept them," he thought, "but another set is here playing with Krsna. Howhas this happened?" Brahma could not grasp what was happening. Which boys werereal, and which were not real? Brahma was unable to come to any definiteconclusion. He pondered the matter for a long while. "How can there be two setsof calves and boys at the same time? Have the boys and calves here been createdby Krsna, or has Krsna created the ones lying asleep? Or are both merelycreations of Krsna?" Brahma thought about the subject in many different ways."After I go to the cave and see that the boys and calves are still there, doesKrsna go take them away and put them here so that I come here and see them, anddoes Krsna then take them from here and put them there?" Brahma could not figureout how there could be two sets of calves and cowherd boys exactly alike.Although thinking and thinking, he could not understand at all.                               TEXT 44                                 TEXT                        evam sammohayan visnum                        vimoham visva-mohanam                        svayaiva mayayajo 'pi                         svayam eva vimohitah                               SYNONYMS   evam--in this way; sammohayan--wanting to mystify; visnum--the all-pervadingLord Krsna; vimoham--who can never be mystified; visva-mohanam--but whomystifies the entire universe; svaya--by his (Brahma's) own; eva--indeed;mayaya--by mystic power; ajah--Lord Brahma; api--even; svayam--himself; eva--certainly; vimohitah--was put into bewilderment, became mystified.
                             TRANSLATION   Thus because Lord Brahma wanted to mystify the all-pervading Lord Krsna, whocan never be mystified, but who, on the contrary, mystifies the entire universe,he himself was put into bewilderment by his own mystic power.                               PURPORT   Brahma wanted to bewilder Krsna, who bewilders the entire universe. The wholeuniverse is under Krsna's mystic power (mama maya duratyaya), but Brahma wantedto mystify Him. The result was that Brahma himself was mystified, just as onewho wants to kill another may himself be killed. In other words, Brahma wasdefeated by his own attempt. In a similar position are the scientists andphilosophers who want to overcome the mystic power of Krsna. They challengeKrsna, saying, "What is God? We can do this, and we can do that." But the morethey challenge Krsna in this way, the more they are implicated in suffering. Thelesson here is that we should not try to overcome Krsna. Rather, instead ofendeavoring to surpass Him, we should surrender to Him (sarva-dharman parityajyamam ekam saranam vraja).   Instead of defeating Krsna, Brahma himself was defeated, for he could notunderstand what Krsna was doing. Since Brahma, the chief person within thisuniverse, was so bewildered, what is to be said of so-called scientists andphilosophers? Sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja. We should give upall our tiny efforts to defy the arrangement of Krsna. Instead, whateverarrangements He proposes, we should accept. This is always better, for this willmake us happy. The more we try to defeat the arrangement of Krsna, the more webecome implicated in Krsna's maya (daivi hy esa guna-mayi mama maya duratyaya).But one who has reached the point of surrendering to the instructions of Krsna(mam eva ye prapadyante) is liberated, free from krsna-maya (mayam etam tarantite). The power of Krsna is just like a government that cannot be overcome. Firstof all there are laws, and then there is police power, and beyond that ismilitary power. Therefore, what is the use of trying to overcome the power ofthe government? Similarly, what is the use of trying to challenge Krsna?   From the next verse it is clear that Krsna cannot be defeated by any kind ofmystic power. If one gets even a little power of scientific knowledge, one triesto defy God, but actually no one is able to bewilder Krsna. When Brahma, thechief person within the universe, tried to bewilder Krsna, he himself wasbewildered and astonished. This is the position of the conditioned soul. Brahmawanted to mystify Krsna, but he himself was mystified.   The word visnum is significant in this verse. Visnu pervades the entirematerial world, whereas Brahma merely occupies one subordinate post.                yasyaika-nisvasita-kalam athavalambya                jivanti loma-vila-ja jagadanda-nathah   (Brahma-samhita 5.48)   The word nathah, which refers to Lord Brahma, is plural because there areinnumerable universes and innumerable Brahmas. Brahma is but a tiny force. Thiswas exhibited in Dvaraka when Krsna called for Brahma. One day when Brahma cameto see Krsna at Dvaraka, the doorman, at Lord Krsna's request, asked, "WhichBrahma are you?" Later, when Brahma inquired from Krsna whether this meant thatthere was more than one Brahma, Krsna smiled and at once called for many Brahmasfrom many universes. The four-headed Brahma of this universe then sawinnumerable other Brahmas coming to see Krsna and offer their respects. Some ofthem had ten heads, some had twenty, some had a hundred and some had a millionheads. Upon seeing this wonderful exhibition, the four-headed Brahma became
nervous and began to think of himself as no more than a mosquito in the midst ofmany elephants. Therefore, what can Brahma do to bewilder Krsna?                               TEXT 45                                 TEXT                       tamyam tamovan naiharam                         khadyotarcir ivahani                         mahatitara-mayaisyam                       nihanty atmani yunjatah                               SYNONYMS   tamyam--on a dark night; tamah-vat--just as darkness; naiharam--produced bysnow; khadyota-arcih--the light of a glowworm; iva--just as; ahani--in thedaytime, in the sunlight; mahati--in a great personality; itara-maya--inferiormystic potency; aisyam--the ability; nihanti--destroys; atmani--in his own self;yunjatah--of the person who attempts to use.                             TRANSLATION   As the darkness of snow on a dark night and the light of a glowworm in thelight of day have no value, the mystic power of an inferior person who tries touse it against a person of great power is unable to accomplish anything;instead, the power of that inferior person is diminished.                               PURPORT   When one wants to supersede a superior power, one's own inferior powerbecomes ludicrous. Just as a glowworm in the daytime and snow at night have novalue, Brahma's mystic power became worthless in the presence of Krsna, forgreater mystic power condemns inferior mystic power. On a dark night, thedarkness produced by snow has no meaning. The glowworm appears very important atnight, but in the daytime its glow has no value; whatever little value it has islost. Similarly, Brahma became insignificant in the presence of Krsna's mysticpower. Krsna's maya was not diminished in value, but Brahma's maya wascondemned. Therefore, one should not try to exhibit one's insignificant opulencebefore a greater power.                               TEXT 46                                 TEXT                       tavat sarve vatsa-palah                      pasyato 'jasya tat-ksanat                       vyadrsyanta ghana-syamah                         pita-kauseya-vasasah                               SYNONYMS   tavat--so long; sarve--all; vatsa-palah--both the calves and the boys tendingthem; pasyatah--while he was watching; ajasya--of Lord Brahma; tat-ksanat--immediately; vyadrsyanta--were seen; ghana-syamah--as having a complexionresembling bluish rainclouds; pita-kauseya-vasasah--and dressed in yellow silkgarments.                             TRANSLATION
   Then, while Lord Brahma looked on, all the calves and the boys tending themimmediately appeared to have complexions the color of bluish rainclouds and tobe dressed in yellow silken garments.                               PURPORT   While Brahma was contemplating, all the calves and cowherd boys immediatelytransformed into visnu-murtis, having bluish complexions and wearing yellowgarments. Brahma was contemplating his own power and the immense, unlimitedpower of Krsna, but before he could come to a conclusion, he saw this immediatetransformation.                             TEXTS 47-48                                 TEXT                      catur-bhujah sankha-cakra-                         gada-rajiva-panayah                         kiritinah kundalino                         harino vana-malinah                       srivatsangada-do-ratna-                        kambu-kankana-panayah                       nupuraih katakair bhatah                        kati-sutranguliyakaih                               SYNONYMS   catuh-bhujah--having four arms; sankha-cakra-gada-rajiva-pana-yah--holdingconchshell, disc, club and lotus flower in Their hands; kiritinah--bearinghelmets on Their heads; kundalinah--wearing earrings; harinah--wearing pearlnecklaces; vana-malinah--wearing garlands of forest flowers; srivatsa-angada-do-ratna-kambu-kankana-panayah--bearing the emblem of the goddess of fortune onTheir chests, armlets on Their arms, the Kaustubha gem on Their necks, whichwere marked with three lines like a conchshell, and bracelets on Their hands;nupuraih--with ornaments on the feet; katakaih--with bangles on Their ankles;bhatah--appeared beautiful; kati-sutra-anguli-yakaih--with sacred belts aroundthe waist and with rings on the fingers.                             TRANSLATION   All those personalities had four arms, holding conchshell, disc, mace andlotus flower in Their hands. They wore helmets on Their heads, earrings on Theirears and garlands of forest flowers around Their necks. On the upper portion ofthe right side of Their chests was the emblem of the goddess of fortune.Furthermore, They wore armlets on Their arms, the Kaustubha gem around Theirnecks, which were marked with three lines like a conchshell, and bracelets onTheir wrists. With bangles on Their ankles, ornaments on Their feet, and sacredbelts around Their waists, They all appeared very beautiful.                               PURPORT   All the Visnu forms had four arms, with conchshell and other articles, butthese characteristics are also possessed by those who have attained sarupya-mukti in Vaikuntha and who consequently have forms exactly like the form of theLord. However, these Visnu forms appearing before Lord Brahma also possessed themark of Srivatsa and the Kaustubha gem, which are special characteristics
possessed only by the Supreme Lord Himself. This proves that all these boys andcalves were in fact directly expansions of Visnu, the Personality of Godhead,not merely His associates of Vaikuntha. Visnu Himself is included within Krsna.All the opulences of Visnu are already present in Krsna, and consequently forKrsna to demonstrate so many Visnu forms was actually not very astonishing.   The Srivatsa mark is described by the Vaisnava-tosani as being a curl of fineyellow hair on the upper portion of the right side of Lord Visnu's chest. Thismark is not for ordinary devotees. It is a special mark of Visnu or Krsna.                               TEXT 49                                 TEXT                       anghri-mastakam apurnas                         tulasi-nava-damabhih                        komalaih sarva-gatresu                       bhuri-punyavad-arpitaih                               SYNONYMS   a-anghri-mastakam--from the feet up to the top of the head; apurnah--fullydecorated; tulasi-nava-damabhih--with garlands of fresh tulasi leaves; komalaih--tender, soft; sarva-gatresu--on all the limbs of the body; bhuri-punyavat-arpitaih--which were offered by devotees engaged in the greatest pious activity,worshiping the Supreme Lord by hearing, chanting and so on.                             TRANSLATION   Every part of Their bodies, from Their feet to the top of Their heads, wasfully decorated with fresh, tender garlands of tulasi leaves offered by devoteesengaged in worshiping the Lord by the greatest pious activities, namely hearingand chanting.                               PURPORT   The word bhuri-punyavad-arpitaih is significant in this verse. These forms ofVisnu were worshiped by those who had performed pious activities (sukrtibhih)for many births and who were constantly engaged in devotional service (sravanamkirtanam visnoh). Bhakti, devotional service, is the engagement of those whohave performed highly developed pious activities. The accumulation of piousactivities has already been mentioned elsewhere in the Srimad-Bhagavatam(10.12.11), where Sukadeva Gosvami says,                  ittham satam brahma-sukhanubhutya                    dasyam gatanam para-daivatena                      mayasritanam nara-darakena                   sakam vijahruh krta-punya-punjah   "Those who are engaged in self-realization, appreciating the Brahmaneffulgence of the Lord, and those engaged in devotional service, accepting theSupreme personality of Godhead as master, as well as those who are under theclutches of maya, thinking the Lord an ordinary person, cannot understand thatcertain exalted personalities--after accumulating volumes of pious activities--are now playing with the Lord in friendship as cowherd boys."   In our Krsna-Balarama Temple in Vrndavana, there is a tamala tree that coversan entire corner of the courtyard. Before there was a temple the tree was lyingneglected, but now it has developed very luxuriantly, covering the whole cornerof the courtyard. This is a sign of bhuri-punya.
                               TEXT 50                                 TEXT                       candrika-visada-smeraih                        sarunapanga-viksitaih                       svakarthanam iva rajah-                      sattvabhyam srastr-palakah                               SYNONYMS   candrika-visada-smeraih--by pure smiling like the full, increasing moonlight;sa-aruna-apanga-viksitaih--by the clear glances of Their reddish eyes; svaka-arthanam--of the desires of His own devotees; iva--just as; rajah-sattvabhyam--by the modes of passion and goodness; srastr-palakah--were creators andprotectors.                             TRANSLATION   Those Visnu forms, by Their pure smiling, which resembled the increasinglight of the moon, and by the sidelong glances of Their reddish eyes, createdand protected the desires of Their own devotees, as if by the modes of passionand goodness.                               PURPORT   Those Visnu forms blessed the devotees with Their clear glances and smiles,which resembled the increasingly full light of the moon (sreyah-kairava-candrika-vitaranam). As maintainers, They glanced upon Their devotees, embracingthem and protecting them by smiling. Their smiles resembled the mode ofgoodness, protecting all the desires of the devotees, and the glancing of Theireyes resembled the mode of passion. Actually, in this verse the word rajah meansnot "passion" but "affection." In the material world, rajo-guna is passion, butin the spiritual world it is affection. In the material world, affection iscontaminated by rajo-guna and tamo-guna, but in the suddha-sattva the affectionthat maintains the devotees is transcendental.   The word svakarthanam refers to great desires. As mentioned in this verse,the glance of Lord Visnu creates the desires of the devotees. A pure devotee,however, has no desires. Therefore Sanatana Gosvami comments that because thedesires of devotees whose attention is fixed on Krsna have already beenfulfilled, the Lord's sidelong glances create variegated desires in relation toKrsna and devotional service. In the material world, desire is a product ofrajo-guna and tamo-guna, hilt desire in the spiritual world gives rise to avariety of everlasting transcendental service. Thus the word svakarthanam refersto eagerness to serve Krsna.   In Vrndavana there is a place where there was no temple, but a devoteedesired, "Let there be a temple and seva, devotional service." Therefore, whatwas once an empty corner has now become a place of pilgrimage. Such are thedesires of a devotee.                               TEXT 51                                 TEXT                       atmadi-stamba-paryantair                       murtimadbhis caracaraih                       nrtya-gitady-anekarhaih
                        prthak prthag upasitah                               SYNONYMS   atma-adi-stamba-paryantaih--from Lord Brahma to the insignificant livingentity; murti-madbhih--assuming some form; cara-acaraih--both the moving and thenonmoving; nrtya-gita-adi-aneka-arhaih--by many varied means of worship, such asdancing and singing; prthak prthak--differently; upasitah--who were beingworshiped.                             TRANSLATION   All beings, both moving and nonmoving, from the four-headed Lord Brahma downto the most insignificant living entity, had taken forms and were differentlyworshiping those visnu-murtis, according to their respective capacities, withvarious means of worship, such as dancing and singing.                               PURPORT   Innumerable living entities are engaged in different types of worship of theSupreme, according to their abilities and karma, but everyone is engaged (jivera'svarupa' haya--krsnera 'nitya-dasa'); there is no one who is not serving.Therefore the maha-bhagavata, the topmost devotee, sees everyone as beingengaged in the service of Krsna; only himself does he see as not engaged. Wehave to elevate ourselves from a lower position to a higher position, and thetopmost position is that of direct service in Vrndavana. But everyone is engagedin service. Denial of the service of the Lord is maya.                 ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya               yare yaiche nacaya, se taiche kare nrtya   "Only Krsna is the supreme master, and all others are His servants. As Krsnadesires, everyone dances according to His tune.' (Cc. Adi 5.142)   There are two kinds of living entities--the moving and the nonmoving. Trees,for example, stand in one place, whereas ants move. Brahma saw that all of them,down to the smallest creatures, had assumed different forms and were accordinglyengaged in the service of Lord Visnu.   One receives a form according to the way one worships the Lord. In thematerial world, the body one receives is guided by the demigods. This issometimes referred to as the influence of the stars. As indicated in Bhagavad-gita (3.27) by the words prakrteh kriyamanani, according to the laws of natureone is controlled by the demigods.   All living entities are serving Krsna in different ways, but when they areKrsna conscious, their service is fully manifest. As a flower in the budgradually fructifies and yields its desired aroma and beauty, so when a livingentity comes to the platform of Krsna consciousness, the beauty of his real formcomes into full blossom. That is the ultimate beauty and the ultimatefulfillment of desire.                               TEXT 52                                 TEXT                        animadyair mahimabhir                        ajadyabhir vibhutibhih                      catur-vimsatibhis tattvaih                         parita mahad-adibhih
                               SYNONYMS   anima-adyaih--headed by anima; mahimabhih--by opulences; aja-adyabhih--headedby Aja; vibhutibhih--by potencies; catuh-vimsatibhih--twenty-four in number;tattvaih--by elements for the creation of the material world; paritah--(all thevisnu-murtis) were surrounded; mahat-adibhih--headed by the mahat-tattva.                             TRANSLATION   All the visnu-murtis were surrounded by the opulences, headed by anima-siddhi; by the mystic potencies, headed by Aja; and by the twenty-four elementsfor the creation of the material world, headed by the mahat-tattva.                               PURPORT   In this verse the word mahimabhih means aisvarya, or opulence. The SupremePersonality of Godhead can do whatever He likes. That is His aisvarya. No onecan command Him, but He can command everyone. Sad-aisvarya-purnam. The Lord isfull in six opulences. The yoga-siddhis, the perfections of yoga, such as theability to become smaller than the smallest (anima-siddhi) or bigger than thebiggest (mahima-siddhi), are present in Lord Visnu. Sad-aisvaryaih purno ya ihabhagavan (Cc. Adi 1.3). The word aja means maya, or mystic power. Everythingmysterious is in full existence in Visnu.   The twenty-four elements mentioned are the five working senses (panca-karmendriya), the five senses for obtaining knowledge (panca-jnanendriya), thefive gross material elements (panca-mahabhuta), the five sense objects (panca-tanmatra), the mind (manas), the false ego (ahankara), the mahat-tattva, andmaterial nature (prakrti). All twenty-four of these elements are employed forthe manifestation of this material world. The mahat-tattva is divided intodifferent subtle categories, but originally it is called the mahat-tattva.                               TEXT 53                                 TEXT                       kala-svabhava-samskara-                        kama-karma-gunadibhih                      sva-mahi-dhvasta-mahibhir                        murtimadbhir upasitah                               SYNONYMS   kala--by the time factor; svabhava--own nature; samskara--reformation; kama--desire; karma--fruitive action; guna--the three modes of material nature;adibhih--and by others; sva-mahi-dhvasta-mahibhih--whose own independence wassubordinate to the potency of the Lord; murti-madbhih--possessing form;upasitah--were being worshiped.                             TRANSLATION   Then Lord Brahma saw that kala (the time factor), svabhava (one's own natureby association), samskara (reformation), kama (desire), karma (fruitiveactivity) and the gunas (the three modes of material nature), their ownindependence being completely subordinate to the potency of the Lord, had alltaken forms and were also worshiping those visnu-murtis.                               PURPORT
   No one but Visnu has any independence. If we develop consciousness of thisfact, then we are in actual Krsna consciousness. We should always remember thatKrsna is the only supreme master and that everyone else is His servant (ekaleisvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya). Be one even Narayana or Lord Siva, everyone issubordinate to Krsna (siva-virincinutam). Even Baladeva is subordinate to Krsna.This is a fact.                 ekale isvara krsna, ara saba bhrtya               yare yaiche nacaya, se taiche kare nrtya   (Cc. Adi 5.142>   One should understand that no one is independent, for everything is part andparcel of Krsna and is acting and moving by the supreme desire of Krsna. Thisunderstanding, this consciousness, is Krsna consciousness.                        yas tu narayanam devam                       brahma-rudradi-daivataih                         samatvenaiva vikseta                      sa pasandi bhaved dhruvam   "A person who considers demigods like Brahma and Siva to be on an equal levelwith Narayana must certainly be considered an offender." No one can compare toNarayana, or Krsna. Krsna is Narayana, and Narayana is also Krsna, for Krsna isthe original Narayana. Brahma himself addressed Krsna, narayanas tvam na hisarva-dehinam: "You are also Narayana. Indeed, You are the original Narayana."(Bhag. 10.14.14)   Kala, or the time factor, has many assistants, such as svabhava, samskara,kama, karma and guna. Svabhava, or one's own nature, is formed according to theassociation of the material qualities. Karanam guna-sango 'sya sad-asad-yonijanmasu (Bg. 13.22). Sat and asat-svabhava--one's higher or lower nature--isformed by association with the different qualities, namely sattva-guna, rajo-guna and tamo-guna. We should gradually come to the sattva-guna, so that we mayavoid the two lower gunas. This can be done if we regularly discuss Srimad-Bhagavatam and hear about Krsna's activities. Nasta-prayesv abhadresu nityambhagavata-sevaya (Bhag. 1.2.18). All the activities of Krsna described inSrimad-Bhagavatam, beginning even with the pastimes concerning Putana, aretranscendental. Therefore, by hearing and discussing Srimad-Bhagavatam, therajo-guna and tamo-guna are subdued, so that only sattva-guna remains. Thenrajo-guna and tamo-guna cannot do us any harm.   Varnasrama-dharma, therefore, is essential, for it can bring people tosattva-guna. Tada rajas-tamo-bhavah kama-lobhadayas ca ye (Bhag. 1.2.19). Tamo-guna and rajo-guna increase lust and greed, which implicate a living entity insuch a way that he must exist in this material world in many, many forms. Thatis very dangerous. One should therefore be brought to sattva-guna by theestablishment of varnasrama-dharma and should develop the brahminicalqualifications of being very neat and clean, rising early in the morning andseeing mangala-aratrika, and so on. In this way, one should stay in sattva-guna,and then one cannot be influenced by tamo-guna and rajo-guna.                        tada rajas-tamo-bhavah                        kama-lobhadayas ca ye                        ceta etair anaviddham                       sthitam sattve prasidati   (Bhag. 1.2.19)
   The opportunity for this purification is the special feature of human life;in other lives, this is not possible. Such purification can be achieved veryeasily by radha-krsna-bhajana, devotional service rendered to Radha and Krsna,and therefore Narottama dasa Thakura sings, hari hari viphale janama gonainu,indicating that unless one worships Radha-Krsna, one's human form of life iswasted. Vasudeve bhagavati bhakti-yogah prayojitah. janayaty asu vairagyam(Bhag. 1.2.7). By engagement in the service of Vasudeva, one very quicklyrenounces material life. The members of the Krsna consciousness movement, forexample, being engaged in vasudeva-bhakti, very quickly come to the stage ofbeing nice Vaisnavas, so much so that people are surprised that mlecchas andyavanas are able to come to this stage. This is possible by vasudeva-bhakti. Butif we do not come to the stage of sattva-guna in this human life, then, asNarottama dasa Thakura sings, hari hari viphale janama gonainu--there is noprofit in gaining this human form of life.   Sri Viraraghava Acarya comments that each of the items mentioned in the firsthalf of this verse is a cause for material entanglement. Kala, or the timefactor, agitates the modes of material nature, and svabhava is the result ofassociation with these modes. Therefore Narottama dasa Thakura says, bhakta-sanevasa. If one associates with bhaktas, then one's svabhava, or nature, willchange. Our Krsna consciousness movement is meant to give people goodassociation so that this change may take place, and we actually see that by thismethod people all over the world are gradually becoming devotees.   As for samskara, or reformation, this is possible by good association, for bygood association one develops good habits, and habit becomes second nature.Therefore, bhakta-sane vasa: let people have the chance to live with bhaktas.Then their habits will change. In the human form of life one has this chance,but as Narottama dasa Thakura sings, hari hari viphale janama gonainu: if onefails to take advantage of this opportunity, one's human life is wasted. We aretherefore trying to save human society from degradation and actually elevatepeople to the higher nature.   As for kama and karma--desires and activities--if one engages in devotionalservice, one develops a different nature than if one engages in activities ofsense gratification, and of course the result is also different. According tothe association of different natures, one receives a particular type of body.Karanam guna-sango 'sya sad-asad-yoni janmasu (Bg. 13.22). Therefore we shouldalways seek good association, the association of devotees. Then our life will besuccessful. A man is known by his company. If one has the chance to live in thegood association of devotees, one is able to cultivate knowledge, and naturallyone's character or nature will change for one's eternal benefit.                               TEXT 54                                 TEXT                        satya-jnananantananda-                        matraika-rasa-murtayah                        asprsta-bhuri-mahatmya                        api hy upanisad-drsam                               SYNONYMS   satya--eternal; jnana--having full knowledge; ananta--unlimited; ananda--fully blissful; matra--only; eka-rasa--always existing; murtayah--forms;asprsta-bhuri-mahatmyah--whose great glory is not touched; api--even; hi--because; upanisat-drsam--by those jnanis who are engaged in studying theUpanisads.                             TRANSLATION
   The visnu-murtis all had eternal, unlimited forms, full of knowledge andbliss and existing beyond the influence of time. Their great glory was not evento be touched by the jnanis engaged in studying the Upanisads.                               PURPORT   Mere sastra jnana, or knowledge in the Vedas, does not help anyone understandthe personality of Godhead. Only one who is favored or shown mercy by the Lordcan understand Him. This is also explained in the Upanisads (Mundaka Upanisad3.2.3):                    nayam atma pravacanena labhyo                     na medhasa na bahuna srutena                    yam evaisa vrnute tena labhyas                  tasyaisa atma vivrnute tanum svam   "The Supreme Lord is not obtained by expert explanations, by vastintelligence, or even by much hearing. He is obtained only by one whom HeHimself chooses. To such a person, He manifests His own form."   One description given of Brahman is satyam brahma, ananda-rupam: "Brahman isthe Absolute Truth and complete ananda, or bliss." The forms of Visnu, theSupreme Brahman, were one, but They were manifested differently. The followersof the Upanisads, however, cannot understand the varieties manifested byBrahman. This proves that Brahman and Paramatma can actually he understood onlythrough devotion, as confirmed by the Lord Himself in Srimad-Bhagavatam:bhaktyaham ekaya grahyah (Bhag. 11.14.21). To establish that Brahman indeed hastranscendental form, Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura gives variousquotations from the sastras. In the Svetasvatara Upanisad (3.8), the Supreme isdescribed as aditya-varnam tamasah parastat, "He whose self-manifest form isluminous like the sun and transcendental to the darkness of ignorance." Ananda-matram ajaram puranam ekam santam bahudha drsyamanam: "The Supreme is blissful,with no tinge of unhappiness. Although He is the oldest, He never ages, andalthough one, He is experienced in different forms." Sarve nityah sasvatas cadehas tasya paratmanah: "All the forms of that Supreme Person are eternal."(Maha-varaha purana) The Supreme Person has a form, with hands and legs andother personal features, but His hands and legs are not material. Bhaktas knowthat the form of Krsna, or Brahman, is not at all material. Rather, Brahman hasa transcendental form, and when one is absorbed in it, being fully developed inbhakti, one can understand Him (premanjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena). TheMayavadis, however, cannot understand this transcendental form, for they thinkthat it is material.   Transcendental forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His person areso great that the impersonal followers of the Upanisads cannot reach theplatform of knowledge to understand them. Particularly, the transcendental formsof the Lord are beyond the reach of the impersonalists, who can only understand,through the studies of the Upanisads, that the Absolute Truth is not matter andthat the Absolute Truth is not materially restricted by limited potency.   Yet although Krsna cannot be seen through the Upanisads, in some places it issaid that Krsna can in fact be known in this way. Aupanisadam purusam: "He isknown by the Upanisads." This means that when one is purified by Vedicknowledge, one is then allowed to enter into devotional understanding (mad-bhaktim labhate param).                       tac chraddadhana munayo                        jnana-vairagya-yuktaya                       pasyanty atmani catmanam                        bhaktya sruta-grhitaya
   "The seriously inquisitive student or sage, well equipped with knowledge anddetachment, realizes that Absolute Truth by rendering devotional service interms of what he has heard from the Vedanta-sruti." (Bhag. 1.2.12) The wordsruta-grhitaya refers to Vedanta knowledge, not sentimentality. Sruta-grhita issound knowledge.   Lord Visnu, Brahma thus realized, is the reservoir of all truth, knowledgeand bliss. He is the combination of these three transcendental features, and Heis the object of worship for the followers of the Upanisads. Brahma realizedthat all the different forms of cows, boys and calves transformed into Visnuforms were not transformed by mysticism of the type that a yogi or demigod candisplay by specific powers invested in him. The cows, calves and boystransformed into visnu-murtis, or Visnu forms, were not displays of visnu-maya,or Visnu energy, but were Visnu Himself. The respective qualifications of Visnuand visnu-maya are just like those of fire and heat. In heat there is thequalification of fire, namely warmth; and yet heat is not fire. Themanifestation of the Visnu forms of the boys, cows and calves was not like theheat, but rather like the fire--they were all actually Visnu. Factually, thequalification of Visnu is full truth, full knowledge and full bliss. Anotherexample may be given with material objects, which may be reflected in many, manyforms. For example, the sun is reflected in many waterpots, but the reflectionsof the sun in many pots are not actually the sun. There is no actual heat andlight from the sun in the pot, although it appears as the sun. But each andevery one of the forms Krsna assumed was fully Visnu.   We should discuss Srimad-Bhagavatam daily as much as possible, and theneverything will be clarified, for Bhagavatam is the essence of all Vedicliterature (nigama-kalpa-taror galitam phalam). It was written by Vyasadeva(maha-muni-krte) when he was self-realized. Thus the more we read Srimad-Bhagavatam, the more its knowledge becomes clear. Each and every verse istranscendental.                               TEXT 55                                 TEXT                        evam sakrd dadarsajah                       para-brahmatmano 'khilan                       yasya bhasa sarvam idam                         vibhati sa-caracaram                               SYNONYMS   evam--thus; sakrt--at one time; dadarsa--saw; ajah--Lord Brahma; para-brahma--of the Supreme Absolute Truth; atmanah--expansions; akhilan--all the calves andboys, etc.; yasya--of whom; bhasa--by the manifestation; sarvam--all; idam--this; vibhati--is manifested; sa-cara-acaram--whatever is moving and nonmoving.                             TRANSLATION   Thus Lord Brahma saw the Supreme Brahman, by whose energy this entireuniverse, with its moving and nonmoving living beings, is manifested. He alsosaw at the same time all the calves and boys as the Lord's expansions.                               PURPORT   By this incident, Lord Brahma was able to see how Krsna maintains the entireuniverse in different ways. It is because Krsna manifests everything thateverything is visible.
                               TEXT 56                                 TEXT                        tato 'tikutukodvrtya-                        stimitaikadasendriyah                      tad-dhamnabhud ajas tusnim                       pur-devy-antiva putrika                               SYNONYMS   tatah--then; atikutuka-udvrtya-stimita-ekadasa-indriyah--whose eleven senseshad all been jolted by great astonishment and then stunned by transcendentalbliss; tad-dhamna--by the effulgence of those visnu-murtis; abhut--became; ajah--Lord Brahma; tusnim--silent; puh-devi-anti--in the presence of a village deity(gramya-devata); iva--just as; putrika--a clay doll made by a child.                             TRANSLATION   Then, by the power of the effulgence of those visnu-murtis, Lord Brahma, hiseleven senses jolted by astonishment and stunned by transcendental bliss, becamesilent, just like a child's clay doll in the presence of the village deity.                               PURPORT   Brahma was stunned because of transcendental bliss (muhyanti yat surayah). Inhis astonishment, all his senses were stunned, and he was unable to say or doanything. Brahma had considered himself absolute, thinking himself the onlypowerful deity, but now his pride was subdued, and he again became merely one ofthe demigods--an important demigod, of course, but a demigod nonetheless.Brahma, therefore, cannot be compared to God--Krsna, or Narayana. It isforbidden to compare Narayana even to demigods like Brahma and Siva, what tospeak of others.                        yas tu narayanam devam                       brahma-rudradi-daivataih                         samatvenaiva vikseta                      sa pasandi bhaved dhruvam   "One who considers demigods like Brahma and Siva to be on an equal level withNarayana must certainly be considered an offender." We should not equate thedemigods with Narayana, for even Sankaracarya has forbidden this (narayanahparo'vyaktat). Also, as mentioned in the Vedas, eko narayana asin na brahmanesanah: "In the beginning of creation there was only the Supreme personality,Narayana, and there was no existence of Brahma or Siva." Therefore, one who atthe end of his life remembers Narayana attains the perfection of life (antenarayana-smrtih).                               TEXT 57                                 TEXT             itirese 'tarkye nija-mahimani sva-pramitike            paratrajato 'tan-nirasana-mukha-brahmaka-mitau            anise 'pi drastum kim idam iti va muhyati sati            cacchadajo jnatva sapadi paramo 'ja-javanikam
                               SYNONYMS   iti--thus; ira-ise--Lord Brahma, the lord of Sarasvati (Ira); atarkye--beyond; nija-mahimani--whose own glory; sva-pramitike--self-manifest andblissful; paratra--beyond; ajatah--the material energy (prakrti); atat--irrelevant; nirasana-mukha--by the rejection of that which is irrelevant;brahmaka--by the crest jewels of the Vedas; mitau--in whom there is knowledge;anise--not being able; api--even; drastum--to see; kim--what; idam--is this;iti--thus; va--or; muhyati sati--being mystified; cacchada--removed; ajah--LordSri Krsna; jnatva--after understanding; sapadi--at once; paramah--the greatestof all; aja-javanikam--the curtain of maya.                             TRANSLATION   The Supreme Brahman is beyond mental speculation, He is self-manifest,existing in His own bliss, and He is beyond the material energy. He is known bythe crest jewels of the Vedas by refutation of irrelevant knowledge. Thus inrelation to that Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead, whose glory hadbeen shown by the manifestation of all the four-armed forms of Visnu, LordBrahma, the lord of Sarasvati, was mystified. "What is this?" he thought, andthen he was not even able to see. Lord Krsna, understanding Brahma's position,then at once removed the curtain of His yogamaya.                               PURPORT   Brahma was completely mystified. He could not understand what he was seeing,and then he was not even able to see. Lord Krsna, understanding Brahma'sposition, then removed that yogamaya covering. In this verse, Brahma is referredto as iresa. Ira means Sarasvati, the goddess of learning, and Iresa is herhusband, Lord Brahma. Brahma, therefore, is most intelligent. But even Brahma,the lord of Sarasvati, was bewildered about Krsna. Although he tried, he couldnot understand Lord Krsna. In the beginning the boys, the calves and KrsnaHimself had been covered by yogamaya, which later displayed the second set ofcalves and boys, who were Krsna's expansions, and which then displayed so manyfour-armed forms. Now, seeing Brahma's bewilderment, Lord Krsna caused thedisappearance of that yogamaya. One may think that the maya taken away by LordKrsna was mahamaya, but Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura comments that it wasyogamaya, the potency by which Krsna is sometimes manifest and sometimes notmanifest. The potency which covers the actual reality and displays somethingunreal is mahamaya, but the potency by which the Absolute Truth is sometimesmanifest and sometimes not is yogamaya. Therefore, in this verse the word ajarefers to yogamaya.   Krsna's energy--His maya-sakti, or svarupa-sakti--is one, but it ismanifested in varieties. parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate (SvetasvataraUpanisad 6.8). The difference between Vaisnavas and Mayavadis is that Mayavadissay that this maya is one, whereas Vaisnavas recognize its varieties. There isunity in variety. For example, in one tree, there are varieties of leaves,fruits and flowers. Varieties of energy are required for performing thevarieties of activity within the creation. To give another example, in a machineall the parts may be iron, but the machine includes varied activities. Althoughthe whole machine is iron, one part works in one way, and other parts work inother ways. One who does not know how the machine is working may say that it isall iron; nonetheless, in spite of its being iron, the machine has differentelements, all working differently to accomplish the purpose for which themachine was made. One wheel runs this way, another wheel runs that way,functioning naturally in such a way that the work of the machine goes on.Consequently we give different names to the different parts of the machine,
saying, "This is a wheel," "This is a screw," "This is a spindle," "This is thelubrication," and so on. Similarly, as explained in the Vedas,                  parasya saktir vividhaiva sruyate                    svabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca   Krsna's power is variegated, and thus the same sakti, or potency, works invariegated ways. Vividha means "varieties." There is unity in variety. Thusyogamaya and mahamaya are among the varied individual parts of the same onepotency, and all of these individual potencies work in their own varied ways.The samvit, sandhini and ahladini potencies--Krsna's potency for existence, Hispotency for knowledge and His potency for pleasure--are distinct from yogamaya.Each is an individual potency. The ahladini potency is Radharani. As SvarupaDamodara Gosvami has explained, radha krsna-pranaya-vikrtir hladini saktir asmat(Cc. Adi 1.5). The ahladini-sakti is manifested as Radharani, but Krsna andRadharani are the same, although one is potent and the other is potency.   Brahma was mystified about Krsna's opulence (nija-mahimani) because thisopulence was atarkya, or inconceivable. With one's limited senses, one cannotargue about that which is inconceivable. Therefore the inconceivable is calledacintya, that which is beyond cintya, our thoughts and arguments. Acintya refersto that which we cannot contemplate but have to accept. Srila Jiva Gosvami hassaid that unless we accept acintya in the Supreme, we cannot accommodate theconception of God. This must be understood. Therefore we say that the words ofsastra should be taken as they are, without change, since they are beyond ourarguments. Acintyah khalu ye bhava na tams tarkena yojayet: "That which isacintya cannot be ascertained by argument." People generally argue, but ourprocess is not to argue but to accept the Vedic knowledge as it is. When Krsnasays, "This is superior, and this is inferior," we accept what He says. It isnot that we argue, "Why is this superior and that inferior?" If one argues, forhim the knowledge is lost.   This path of acceptance is called avaroha-pantha The word avaroha is relatedto the word avatara, which means"that which descends." The materialist wants tounderstand everything by the aroha-pantha--by argument and reason--buttranscendental matters cannot be understood in this way. Rather, one must followthe avaroha-pantha, the process of descending knowledge. Therefore one mustaccept the parampara system. And the best parampara is that which extends fromKrsna (evam parampara-praptam). What Krsna says, we should accept (imamrajarsayo viduh). This is called the avaroha-pantha.   Brahma, however, adopted the aroha-pantha. He wanted to understand Krsna'smystic power by his own limited, conceivable power, and therefore he himself wasmystified. Everyone wants to take pleasure in his own knowledge, thinking, "Iknow something." But in the presence of Krsna this conception cannot stand, forone cannot bring Krsna within the limitations of prakrti. One must submit. Thereis no alternative. Na tams tarkena yojayet. This submission marks the differencebetween Krsna-ites and Mayavadis.   The phrase atan-nirasana refers to the discarding of that which isirrelevant. (Atat means "that which is not a fact.") Brahman is sometimesdescribed as asthulam ananv ahrasvam adirgham, "that which is not large and notsmall, not short and not long." (Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad 5.8.8) Neti neti: "Itis not this, it is not that." But what is it? In describing a pencil, one maysay, "It is not this; it is not that," but this does not tell us what it is.This is called definition by negation. In Bhagavad-gita, Krsna also explains thesoul by giving negative definitions. Na jayate mriyate va: "It is not born, nordoes it die. You can hardly understand more than this." But what is it? It iseternal. Ajo nityah sasvato 'yam purano na hanyate hanyamane sarire: "It isunborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying and primeval. It is not slain when thebody is slain." (Bg. 2.20) In the beginning the soul is difficult to understand,and therefore Krsna has given negative definitions:
                      nainam chindanti sastrani                        nainam dahati pavakah                       na cainam kledayanty apo                         na sosayati marutah   "The soul can never be cut into pieces by any weapon, nor can it be burned byfire, nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind." (Bg. 2.23) Krsna says,"It is not burned by fire." Therefore, one has to imagine what it is that is notburned by fire. This is a negative definition.                               TEXT 58                                 TEXT                      tato 'rvak pratilabdhaksah                        kah paretavad utthitah                     krcchrad unmilya vai drstir                         acastedam sahatmana                               SYNONYMS   tatah--then; arvak--externally; pratilabdha-aksah--having revived hisconsciousness; kah--Lord Brahma; pareta-vat--just like a dead man; utthitah--stood up; krcchrat--with great difficulty; unmilya--opening up; vai--indeed;drstih--his eyes; acasta--he saw; idam--this universe; saha-atmana--along withhimself.                             TRANSLATION   Lord Brahma's external consciousness then revived, and he stood up, just likea dead man coming back to life. Opening his eyes with great difficulty, he sawthe universe, along with himself.                               PURPORT   We actually do not die. At death, we are merely kept inert for some time,just as during sleep. At night we sleep, and all our activities stop, but assoon as we arise, our memory immediately returns, and we think, "Oh, where am I?What do I have to do?" This is called suptotthita-nyaya. Suppose we die. "Die"means that we become inert for some time and then again begin our activities.This takes place life after life, according to our karma, or activities, andsvabhava, or nature by association. Now, in the human life, if we prepareourselves by beginning the activity of our spiritual life, we return to our reallife and attain perfection. Otherwise, according to karma, svabhava, prakrti andso on, our varieties of life and activity continue, and so also do our birth anddeath. As explained by Bhaktivinoda Thakura, mayara vase, yaccha bhese', khacchahabudubu bhai: "My dear brothers, why are you being washed away by the waves ofmaya?" One should come to the spiritual platform, and then one's activities willbe permanent. Krta-punya-punjah: this stage is attained after one accumulatesthe results of pious activities for many, many lives. Janma-koti-sukrtair nalabhyate (Cc. Madhya 8.70). The Krsna consciousness movement wants to stop koti-janma, repeated birth and death. In one birth, one should rectify everything andcome to permanent life. This is Krsna consciousness.                               TEXT 59                                 TEXT
                       sapady evabhitah pasyan                      diso 'pasyat purah-sthitam                        vrndavanam janajivya-                       drumakirnam sama-priyam                               SYNONYMS   sapadi--immediately; eva--indeed; abhitah--on all sides; pasyan--looking;disah--in the directions; apasyat--Lord Brahma saw; purah-sthitam--situated infront of him; vrndavanam--Vrndavana; jana-ajivya-druma-akirnam--dense withtrees, which were the means of living for the inhabitants; sama-priyam--andwhich was equally pleasing in all seasons.                             TRANSLATION   Then, looking in all directions, Lord Brahma immediately saw Vrndavana beforehim, filled with trees, which were the means of livelihood for the inhabitantsand which were equally pleasing in all seasons.                               PURPORT   Janajivya-drumakirnam: trees and vegetables are essential, and they givehappiness all year round, in all seasons. That is the arrangement in Vrndavana.It is not that in one season the trees are pleasing and in another season notpleasing; rather, they are equally pleasing throughout the seasonal changes.Trees and vegetables provide the real means of livelihood recommended foreveryone. Sarva-kama-dugha mahi (Bhag. 1.10.4). Trees and vegetables, notindustry, provide the real means of life.                               TEXT 60                                 TEXT                       yatra naisarga-durvairah                         sahasan nr-mrgadayah                          mitranivajitavasa-                        druta-rut-tarsakadikam                               SYNONYMS   yatra--where; naisarga--by nature; durvairah--living in enmity; saha asan--live together; nr--human beings; mrga-adayah--and animals; mitrani--friends;iva--like; ajita--of Lord Sri Krsna; avasa--residence; druta--gone away; rut--anger; tarsaka-adikam--thirst and so on.                             TRANSLATION   Vrndavana is the transcendental abode of the Lord, where there is no hunger,anger or thirst. Though naturally inimical, both human beings and fierce animalslive there together in transcendental friendship.                               PURPORT   The word vana means "forest." We are afraid of the forest and do not wish togo there, but in Vrndavana the forest animals are as good as demigods, for theyhave no envy. Even in this material world, in the forest the animals livetogether, and when they go to drink water they do not attack anyone. Envy
develops because of sense gratification, but in Vrndavana there is no sensegratification, for the only aim is Krsna's satisfaction. Even in this materialworld, the animals in Vrndavana are not envious of the sadhus who live there.The sadhus keep cows and supply milk to the tigers, saying, "Come here and takea little milk." Thus envy and malice are unknown in Vrndavana. That is thedifference between Vrndavana and the ordinary world. We are horrified to hearthe name of vana, the forest, but in Vrndavana there is no such horror. Everyonethere is happy by pleasing Krsna. Krsnotkirtana-gana-nartana-parau. Whether agosvami or a tiger or other ferocious animal, everyone's business is the same--to please Krsna. Even the tigers are also devotees. This is the specificqualification of Vrndavana. In Vrndavana everyone is happy. The calf is happy,the cat is happy, the dog is happy, the man is happy--everyone. Everyone wantsto serve Krsna in a different capacity, and thus there is no envy. One maysometimes think that the monkeys in Vrndavana are envious, because they causemischief and steal food, but in Vrndavana we find that the monkeys are allowedto take butter, which Krsna Himself distributes. Krsna personally demonstratesthat everyone has the right to live. This is Vrndavana life. Why should I liveand you die? No. That is material life. The inhabitants of Vrndavana think,"Whatever is given by Krsna, let us divide it as prasada and eat." Thismentality cannot appear all of a sudden, but it will gradually develop withKrsna consciousness; by sadhana, one can come to this platform.   In the material world one may collect funds all over the world in order todistribute food freely, yet those to whom the food is given may not even feelappreciative. The value of Krsna consciousness, however, will gradually be verymuch appreciated. For instance, in an article about the temple of the Hare Krsnamovement in Durban, South Africa, the Durban Post reported, "All the devoteeshere are very active in the service of Lord Krsna, and the results are obviousto see: happiness, good health, peace of mind, and the development of all goodqualities." This is the nature of Vrndavana. Harav abhaktasya kuto mahad-gunah:without Krsna consciousness, happiness is impossible; one may struggle, but onecannot have happiness. We are therefore trying to give human society theopportunity for a life of happiness, good health, peace of mind and all goodqualities through God consciousness.                               TEXT 61                                 TEXT               tatrodvahat pasupa-vamsa-sisutva-natyam               brahmadvayam param anantam agadha-bodham                vatsan sakhin iva pura parito vicinvad                ekam sa-pani-kavalam paramesthy acasta                               SYNONYMS   tatra--there (in Vrndavana); udvahat--assuming; pasupa-vamsa-sisutva-natyam--the play of being a child in a family of cowherd men (another of Krsna's namesis Gopala, "He who maintains the cows"); brahma--the Absolute Truth; advayam--without a second; param--the Supreme; anantam--unlimited; agadha-bodham--possessing unlimited knowledge; vatsan--the calves; sakhin--and His friends, theboys; iva pura--just as before; paritah--everywhere; vicinvat--searching; ekam--alone, all by Himself; sa-pani-kavalam--with a morsel of food in His hand;paramesthi--Lord Brahma; acasta--saw.                             TRANSLATION   Then Lord Brahma saw the Absolute Truth--who is one without a second, whopossesses full knowledge and who is unlimited--assuming the role of a child in a
family of cowherd men and standing all alone, just as before, with a morsel offood in His hand, searching everywhere for the calves and His cowherd friends.                               PURPORT   The word agadha-bodham, meaning "full of unlimited knowledge," is significantin this verse. The Lord's knowledge is unlimited, and therefore one cannot touchwhere it ends, just as one cannot measure the ocean. What is the extent of ourintelligence in comparison to the vast expanse of water in the ocean? On mypassage to America, how insignificant the ship was, like a matchbox in the midstof the ocean. Krsna's intelligence resembles the ocean, for one cannot imaginehow vast it is. The best course, therefore, is to surrender to Krsna. Don't tryto measure Krsna.   The word advayam, meaning "one without a second," is also significant.Because Brahma was overcast by Krsna's maya, he was thinking himself theSupreme. In the material world, everyone thinks, "I am the best man in thisworld. I know everything." One thinks, "Why should I read Bhagavad-gita? I knoweverything. I have my own interpretation." Brahma, however, was able tounderstand that the Supreme Personality is Krsna. Isvarah paramah krsnah.Another of Krsna's names, therefore, is paramesvara.   Now Brahma saw Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appearing as acowherd boy in Vrndavana, not demonstrating His opulence but standing just likean innocent boy with some food in His hand, loitering with His cowherdboyfriends, calves and cows. Brahma did not see Krsna as catur-bhuja, theopulent Narayana; rather, he simply saw an innocent boy. Nonetheless, he couldunderstand that although Krsna was not demonstrating His power, He was the sameSupreme person. people generally do not appreciate someone unless he showssomething wonderful, but here, although Krsna did not manifest anythingwonderful, Brahma could understand that the same wonderful person was presentlike an ordinary child, although He was the master of the whole creation. ThusBrahma prayed, govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami: "You are the originalperson, the cause of everything. I bow down to You." This was his realization.Tam aham bhajami. This is what is wanted. Vedesu durlabham: one cannot reachKrsna merely by Vedic knowledge. Adurlabham atma-bhaktau: but when one becomes adevotee, then one can realize Him. Brahma, therefore, became a devotee. In thebeginning he was proud of being Brahma, the lord of the universe, but now heunderstood, "Here is the Lord of the universe. I am simply an insignificantagent. Govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami."   Krsna was playing like a dramatic actor. Because Brahma had some falseprestige, thinking that he had some power, Krsna showed him his real position. Asimilar incident occurred when Brahma went to see Krsna in Dvaraka. When Krsna'sdoorman informed Lord Krsna that Lord Brahma had arrived, Krsna responded,"Which Brahma? Ask him which Brahma." The doorman relayed this question, andBrahma was astonished. "Is there another Brahma besides me?" he thought. Whenthe doorman informed Lord Krsna, "It is four-headed Brahma," Lord Krsna said,"Oh, four-headed. Call others. Show him." This is Krsna's position. For Krsnathe four-headed Brahma is insignificant, to say nothing of "four-headedscientists." Materialistic scientists think that although this planet earth isfull of opulence, all others are vacant. Because they simply speculate, this istheir scientific conclusion. But from the Bhagavatam we understand that theentire universe is full of living entities everywhere. Thus it is the folly ofthe scientists that although they do not know anything, they mislead people bypresenting themselves as scientists, philosophers and men of knowledge.                               TEXT 62                                 TEXT
                drstva tvarena nija-dhoranato 'vatirya               prthvyam vapuh kanaka-dandam ivabhipatya             sprstva catur-mukuta-kotibhir anghri-yugmam                natva mud-asru-sujalair akrtabhisekam                               SYNONYMS   drstva--after seeing; tvarena--with great speed, hastily; nija-dhoranatah--from his swan carrier; avatirya--descended; prthvyam--on the ground; vapuh--hisbody; kanaka-dandam iva--like a golden rod; abhipatya--fell down; sprstva--touching; catuh-mukuta-koti-bhih--with the tips of his four crowns; anghri-yugmam--the two lotus feet; natva--making obeisances; mut-asru-su-jalaih--withthe water of his tears of joy; akrta--performed; abhisekam--the ceremony ofbathing His lotus feet.                             TRANSLATION   After seeing this, Lord Brahma hastily got down from his swan carrier, felldown like a golden rod and touched the lotus feet of Lord Krsna with the tips ofthe four crowns on his heads. Offering his obeisances, he bathed the feet ofKrsna with the water of his tears of joy.                               PURPORT   Lord Brahma bowed down like a stick, and because Lord Brahma's complexion isgolden, he appeared to be like a golden stick lying down before Lord Krsna. Whenone falls down before a superior just like a stick, one's offering of obeisancesis called dandavat. Danda means "stick," and vat means "like." It is not thatone should simply say, "dandavat." Rather, one must fall down. Thus Brahma felldown, touching his foreheads to the lotus feet of Krsna, and his crying inecstasy is to be regarded as an abhiseka bathing ceremony of Krsna's lotus feet.   He who appeared before Brahma as a human child was in fact the AbsoluteTruth, Parabrahman (brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti sabdyate). The SupremeLord is narakrti; that is, He resembles a human being. It is not that He isfour-armed (catur-bahu). Narayana is catur-bahu, but the Supreme Personresembles a human being. This is also confirmed in the Bible, where it is saidthat man was made in the image of God.   Lord Brahma saw that Krsna, in His form as a cowherd boy, was Parabrahman,the root cause of everything, but was now appearing as a human child, loiteringin Vrndavana with a morsel of food in His hand. Astonished, Lord Brahma hastilygot down from his swan carrier and let his body fall to the earth. Usually, thedemigods never touch the ground, but Lord Brahma, voluntarily giving up hisprestige as a demigod, bowed down on the ground before Krsna. Although Brahmahas one head in each direction, he voluntarily brought all his heads to theground and touched Krsna's feet with the tips of his four helmets. Although hisintelligence works in every direction, he surrendered everything before the boyKrsna.   It is mentioned that Brahma washed the feet of Krsna with his tears, and herethe word sujalaih indicates that his tears were purified. As soon as bhakti ispresent, everything is purified (sarvopadhi-vinirmuktam). Therefore Brahma'scrying was a form of bhakty-anubhava, a transformation of transcendentalecstatic love.                               TEXT 63                                 TEXT                        utthayotthaya krsnasya
                        cirasya padayoh patan                      aste mahitvam prag-drstam                      smrtva smrtva punah punah                               SYNONYMS   utthaya utthaya--rising repeatedly; krsnasya--of Lord Krsna; cirasya--for along time; padayoh--at the lotus feet; patan--falling down; aste--remained;mahitvam--the greatness; prak-drstam--which he had previously seen; smrtvasmrtva--remembering and remembering; punah punah--again and again.                             TRANSLATION   Rising and falling again and again at the lotus feet of Lord Krsna for a longtime, Lord Brahma remembered over and over the Lord's greatness he had justseen.                               PURPORT   As stated in one prayer,                      srutim apare smrtim itare                 bharatam anye bhajantu bhava-bhitah                        aham iha nandam vande                       yasyalinde param brahma   "Let others study the Vedas, smrti and Mahabharata, fearing materialexistence, but I shall worship Nanda Maharaja, in whose courtyard is crawlingthe Supreme Brahman. Nanda Maharaja is so great that the Parabrahman is crawlingin his yard, and therefore I shall worship him." (Padyavali 126)   Brahma was falling down in ecstasy. Because of the presence of the SupremePersonality of Godhead, who exactly resembled a human child, Brahma wasnaturally astonished. Therefore with a faltering voice he offered prayers,understanding that here was the Supreme Person.                               TEXT 64                                 TEXT                   sanair athotthaya vimrjya locane                 mukundam udviksya vinamra-kandharah                   krtanjalih prasrayavan samahitah                    sa-vepathur gadgadayailatelaya                               SYNONYMS   sanaih--gradually; atha--then; utthaya--rising; vimrjya--wiping; locane--histwo eyes; mukundam--at Mukunda, Lord Sri Krsna; udviksya--looking up; vinamra-kandharah--his neck bent; krta-anjalih--with folded hands; prasraya-van--veryhumble; samahitah--his mind concentrated; sa-vepathuh--his body trembling;gadgadaya--faltering; ailata--Brahma began to offer praise; ilaya--with words.                             TRANSLATION   Then, rising very gradually and wiping his two eyes, Lord Brahma looked up atMukunda. Lord Brahma, his head bent low, his mind concentrated and his bodytrembling, very humbly began, with faltering words, to offer praises to LordKrsna.
                               PURPORT   Brahma, being very joyful, began to shed tears, and he washed the lotus feetof Krsna with his tears. Repeatedly he fell and rose as he recalled thewonderful activities of the Lord. After repeating obeisances for a long time,Brahma stood up and smeared his hands over his eyes. Srila Visvanatha CakravartiThakura comments that the word locane indicates that with his two hands he wipedthe two eyes on each of his four faces. Seeing the Lord before him, Brahma beganto offer prayers with great humility, respect and attention.Thus end the Bhaktivedanta purports of the Tenth Canto, Thirteenth Chapter, ofthe Srimad-Bhagavatam, entitled "The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahma."NOTE FROM THE PUBLISHERS: His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupadapassed away on November 14, 1977. The remaining portion of the tenth canto aswell as cantos 11 and 12 were translated by his disciples.“Srimad-Bhagavatam – Canto Ten” by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta SwamiPrabhupada.Summary: Srimad-Bhagavatam is compared to the ripened fruit of Vedic knowledge.Also known as the Bhagavata Purana, this multi-volume work elaborates on thepastimes of Lord Krishna and His devotees, and includes detailed descriptionsof, among other phenomena, the process of creation and annihilation of theuniverse. His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada considered thetranslation of the Bhagavatam his life’s work.COPYRIGHT NOTICE: This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of thisbook, and is NOT FOR RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only, under the “fair use” guidelines established byinternational copyright laws. You may use this electronic file to evaluate theprinted version of this book, for your own private use, or for short excerptsused in academic works, research, student papers, presentations, and the like.You can distribute this evaluation copy to others over the Internet, so long asyou keep this copyright information intact. You may not reproduce more than tenpercent (10%) of this book in any media without the express written permissionfrom the copyright holders. Reference any excerpts in the following way:“Excerpted from “Srimad-Bhagavatam” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada,courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.Krishna.com.”This book and electronic file is Copyright 1977-2003 Bhaktivedanta Book TrustInternational, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.All rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluatedozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers,www.Krishna.com.
