 
Srimad Bhagavata  
Mahapurana  
Translations by His Divine Grace  
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

2 
 Index  

Catuḥ -ślokī  Bhāgavatam ……………… ………………………..……………….Page  3 
Preface…………………………………………… ………………………..…….Page 4 
Mangalacarana…………………………………… ……………………….…….Page  6 
Srimad  Bhagavata Mahatmya…………………… ……………………...…… ..Page 11  
Srimad Bhagavatam ………… ……………………..…………… .…………… Page 41  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahatmya……………………… …………………….…..Page 919  

Translations from the Srimad Bhagavatam  
and other books, letters, and lectures of  
His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada  
©Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International.  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

3 
 Catuḥ -ślokī  Bhāgavatam  

aham  evāsam  evāgre  
nānyad  yat sad-asat param  
paścād  ahaṁ  yad etac ca 
yo ’vaśiṣyeta  so ’smy  aham  

Brahmā,  it is I, the Personality  of Godhead,  who was existing  before  the creation,  when  there  was 
nothing  but Myself.  Nor was there  the material  nature,  the cause  of this creation.  That which  you see now 
is also I, the Personality  of Godhead,  and after annihilation  what  remains  will also be I, the Personality  of 
Godhead.  

ṛte ’rtha ṁ yat pratīyeta  
na pratīyeta  cātmani  
tad vidyād  ātmano  māyā ṁ 
yathābhāso  yathā  tama ḥ 

 O Brahmā,  whatever  appears  to be of any value,  if it is without  relation  to Me, has no reality.  Know  it 
as My illusory  energy,  that reflection  which  appears  to be in darkness.  
yathā  mahānti  bhūtāni  
bhūte ṣūccāvace ṣv anu 
pravi ṣṭāny apravi ṣṭāni 
tathā  teṣu na teṣv aham  
 O Brahmā,  please  know  that the universal  elements  enter  into the cosmos  and at the same  time do not 
enter  into the cosmos;  similarly,  I Myself  also exist  within  everything  created,  and at the same  time I am 
outside  of everything.  
etāvad  eva jijñāsya ṁ 
tattva -jijñāsunātmana ḥ 
anvaya -vyatirekābhyā ṁ 
yat syāt sarvatra  sarvadā  
A person  who is searching  after the Supreme  Absolute  Truth,  the Personality  of Godhead,  must  cer-
tainly  search  for it up to this, in all circumstances,  in all space  and time,  and both directly  and indirectly.  
 Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam (Bhāgavata Purā ṇa) » Canto 2: The Cosmic Manifestation  » Chapter  9 » Verses:  33 —36 

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

4 
 Preface 
We must know the present need of human society. And what is that need? Human society is no longer 
bounded by geographical limits to parti cular countries or communities. Human society is broader than in 
the Middle Ages, and the world tendency is toward one state or one human society. The ideals of spiritual 
communism, according to  Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam,  are based more or less on the oneness of the entire human 
society, nay, of the entire energy of living beings. The need is felt by great thinkers to make this a success-
ful ideology.  Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam  will fill this need in human society.  It begins, therefore, with an apho-
rism of Vedānta philosophy,  janmādy  asya yataḥ,  to establish the ideal of a common cause.  
Human society, at the present moment, is not in the darkness of oblivion. It has made rapid progress in 
the fields of material comf orts, education and economic development throughout the entire world. But 
there is a pinprick somewhere in the social body at large, and therefore there are large -scale quarrels, even 
over less important issues. There is need of a clue as to how humanity c an become one in peace, friendship 
and prosperity with a common cause.  Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam  will fill this need, for it is a cultural presenta-
tion for the respiritualization of the entire human society.  
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam  should be introduced also in the schools and colleges, for it is recommended by 
the great student -devotee Pra hlāda Mahārāja in order to change the demoniac face of society.  

kaumāra  ācaret  prājño  
dharmān  bhāgavatān  iha 
durlabhaṁ  mānuṣaṁ  janma  
tad apy adhruvam  artha -dam 
(Bhāg.  7.6.1)  
Disparity in human society is due to lack of principles in a godless civilization . There is God, or the 
Almighty One, from whom everything emanates, by whom everything is maintained and in whom every-
thing is merged to rest. Material science has tried to find the ultimate source of creation very insufficiently, 
but it is a fact that the re is one ultimate source of everything that be. This ultimate source is explained 
rationally and authoritatively in the beautiful  Bhāgavatam,  or Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam.  
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam  is the transcendental science not only for knowing the ultimate source of every-
thing but also for knowing our relation with Him and our duty toward perfection of the human society on 
the basis of this per fect knowledge. It is powerful reading matter in the Sanskrit language, and it is now 
rendered into English elaborately so that simply by a careful reading one will know God perfectly well, so 
much so that the reader will be sufficiently educated to defend  himself from the onslaught of atheists. Over 
and above this, the reader will be able to convert others to accepting God as a concrete principle.  
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam  begins with the definition of the ultimate source. It is a bona fide commentary on 
the Vedānta -sūtra  by the same author, Śrīla Vyāsadeva, and gradually it develops into nine cantos up to 
the highest state of God realization. The only qual ification one needs to study this great book of transcen-
dental knowledge is to proceed step by step cautiously and not jump forward haphazardly as with an ordi-
nary book. It should be gone through chapter by chapter, one after another. The reading matter is  so ar-
ranged that one is sure to become a God -realized soul at the end of finishing the first nine cantos.  
The Tenth Canto is distinct from the first nine cantos because it deals directly with the transcendental 
activities of the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One will be unable to capture the effects of the Tenth 
Canto without going through the first nine cantos. The book is complete in twelve cantos, each independ-
ent, but it is good for all to read them in small installments one after another.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

5 
 I must admit my frailties in presenting  Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam,  but still I am hopeful of its good reception 
by the thi nkers and leaders of society on the strength of the following statement of  Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam  (1.5.11):  
tad-vāg-visargo  janatāgha -viplavo  
 yasmin  prati -ślokam  abaddhavaty  api 
nāmāny  anantasya  yaśo ’ṅkitāni  yac 
 chṛṇvanti  gāyanti  gṛṇanti  sādhavaḥ  

“On the ot her hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the transcendental glories of the name, 
fame, form and pastimes of the unlimited Supreme Lord is a transcendental creation meant for bringing 
about a revolution in the impious life of a misdirected  civilization. Such transcendental literature, even 
though irregularly composed, is heard, sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.”  
Oṁ tat sat 
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

6 
 Mangalacarana  

oṁ ajñāna -timirāndhasya  
jñānāñjana -śalākayā  
cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena  
tasmai śrī -gurave namaḥ  
śrī-caitanya -mano -’bhīṣṭaṁ  
sthāpitaṁ yena bhū -tale 
svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ  
dadāti sva -padāntikam  
I was born in the darkest ignorance, and my spiritual master opened my eyes with the torch of 
knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances unto him.  
When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has established within this material world the mission 
to fulﬁll the desir e of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter under his lotus feet?  
vande ’haṁ śrī -guroḥ śrī -yuta-pada -kamalaṁ śrī -gurūn vaiṣṇavāṁś ca  
śrī-rūpaṁ sāgrajātaṁ saha -gaṇa -raghunāthānvitaṁ taṁ sa -jīvam  
sādvaitaṁ sāvadhūtaṁ parijana -sahitaṁ kṛṣṇa -caitanya -devaṁ  
śrī-rādhā -kṛṣṇa-pādān saha -gaṇa -lalitā -śrī-viśākhānvitāṁś ca  

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual master and unto the feet of all Vaiṣṇa-
vas. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī along with his eld er brother 
Sanātana Gosvāmī, as well as Raghunātha Dāsa and Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa and Śrīla Jīva 
Gosvāmī. I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and Lord Nityānanda along with Advaita 
Ācārya, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa and other associa tes. I offer my respectful obeisances to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and 
Śrī Kṛṣṇa along with Their associates Śrī Lalitā and Viśākhā.  
he kṛṣṇa karuṇā -sindho  
dīna-bandho jagat -pate 
gopeśa gopikā -kānta  
rādhā -kānta namo ’stu te  
O my dear Kṛṣṇa, You are the friend of t he distressed and the source of creation. You are the master of 
the gopīsand the lover of Rādhārāṇī. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.  

tapta -kāñcana -gaurāṅgi  
rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari  
vṛṣabhānu -sute devi  
praṇamāmi hari -priye  
I offer my respects to Rād hārāṇī, whose bodily complexion is like molten gold and who is the Queen of 
Vṛndāvana. You are the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, and You are very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa.  
vāñchā -kalpa -tarubhyaś ca  
kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

7 
 patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo  
vaiṣṇavebhyo namo nama ḥ 
I offer my respectful obeisances unto all the Vaiṣṇava devotees of the Lord. They can fulﬁll the desires 
of everyone, just like desire trees, and they are full of compassion for the fallen souls.  
śrī-kṛṣṇa -caitanya prabhu -nityānanda  
śrī-advaita gadādhara  śrīvāsādi -gaura -bhakta -vṛnda  
I offer my obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, Prabhu Nityānanda, Śrī Advaita, Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa and 
all others in the line of devotion.  
yad advaitaṁ brahmopaniṣadi tad apy asya tanu -bhā 
ya ātmāntar -yāmī puruṣa  iti so ’syāṁśa -vibhavaḥ  
ṣaḍ-aiśvaryaiḥ pūrṇo ya  iha bhagavān sa svayam ayaṁ  
na caitanyāt krṣṇāj jagati  para-tattvaṁ param iha  

What the Upaniṣads describe as the impersonal Brahman is but the effulgence of His body, and the Lord 
known as the Supersoul is but His localized  plenary portion. Lord Caitanya is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Kṛṣṇa Himself, full with six opulences. He is the Absolute Truth, and no other truth is greater 
than or equal to Him.  

rādhā kṛṣṇa -praṇaya -vikṛtir  hlādinīśaktir asm ād 
ekātmānāv api bhuv i purā deha -bhedaṁ gatau tau  
caitany ākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhun ā tad-dayaṁ caikyam āptaṁ  
rādhā-bhāva-dyuti -suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa -svarūpam 

The loving affairs of Sri Radha and Krishna are transcendental manifestations of the Lord’s internal 
pleasure giving potenc y. Although Radha and Krishna are one in Their identity, They separated Them-
selves eternally. Now these two transcendental identities have again united in the form of Sri Krishna 
Chaitanya. I bow down to Him, who has manifested Himself with the sentiment a nd complexion of Sri-
mati Radharani although He is Krishna Himself. — Cc. ādi 1.5  
cirād adattaṁ nija -gupta -vittaṁ  
svaprema -nāmāmṛtam atyud āraḥ 
āpāmaraṁ yo vitat āra gauraḥ  
kṛṣṇo janebhyas tam ahaṁ prapadye  

The most munificent Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as Gaurakrishna, distributed to every-
one—even the lowest of men —His own confidential treasury in the form of the nectar of love of Himself 
and the holy name. This was never given to the people at any time before. I therefore offer my respectful 
obeisances unto Him. — Cc. madhya 23.1  
gauraḥ sac -caritāmṛtāmṛta-nidhiḥ  gaura ṁ sadaiva -stuve  
gaureṇa prathitaṁ rahasya -bhajanaṁ gaur āya sarvaṁ dade  
gaurādasti kṛp ālu-ratra na paro gaurasya bhrityo bhavaṁ  
gaure gauravam ācarāmi bhagavan gaura -prabho rakṣa m ām 
I pray to Sriman Gauranga Mahaprabhu whose ecstatic transcendental pastimes  are like a river of nec-
tar. Gaura has given the path of confidential devotional service. I will completely surrender to Gaura. Is 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

8 
 there anyone more merciful than Gaura? I will become a servant of Gaura. I shall preach the glory of 
Gaura. May my Lord Gaura  protect me.  
— Gaur āṅga-virud āvalī by Srila Raghunandan Goswami  
mādhuryyaiḥ -madhubhiḥ sugambhi -bhajana śvarṇambhuj ānāṁ vanam  
kāruṇyāmṛta nirjharai -rupacitah sat -prema hemac ālaḥ 
bhakt āmbodhara dharaṇ ī vijayan ī niskampa samp āvalī 
daivo na kula daivat āṁ vijayat āṁ caitanya -kṛṣṇa -hariḥ  

I worship the golden hued Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Who is absorbed in the enchanting mellows of 
madhurya rasa. May the transcendental love of Krishna that Mahaprabhu is distributing, pour down on this 
earth like a waterfall of nectar. All glories t o that Sri Krishna Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.  
ājānu-lambita -bhujau kanak āva-dātau 
saṅkīrtanaika -pitarau kamal āya-tāksau 
visvambharau dvijavarau yuga -dharma -pālau 
vande jagat priyakarau karuṇ āvatārau 

I worship Their Lordships Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityan anda Prabhu whose long arms extend 
down to Their knees, whose beautiful complexions are radiant yellow like molten gold and whose elongated 
eyes are like red lotuses. They are the topmost br āhmaṇas, the guardians of religious principles for this age, 
the m ost munificent benefactors of all living entities, and the most compassionate incarnations of Godhead. 
They initiated the congregational chanting of the names of Lord Krishna. — Caitanya -bhāgavata ādi 1.1  
anarpita -carīṁ cir āt karuṇay āvatīrṇaḥ kalau  
samarpa yitum unnatojjvala -rasāṁ sva-bhakti -śriyam  
hariḥ puraṭa -sundara -dyuti - kadamba -sandīpitaḥ  
sadā hṛdaya -kandare sphuratu  vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ  

May that Lord, who is known as the son of Srimati Sacidevi, be transcendentally situated in the inner-
most chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of molten gold, He has appeared in the age of 
Kali by His causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever offered before: the most sublime and radi-
ant spiritual knowledge of the mellow taste of His service. — Vidagdha -mādhava 1.2  
The following three verses are from Prema -bhakti -chandrik ā by Srila Narottama Das Thakur section 
10, verses 12 -14. 
śrī-kṛṣṇa -caitanyadeva  rati-mati bhave bhaja  
prema -kalpa -taru-bara-dātā 
śrī-vraja -rāja-nandana  rādhikā-jīvana -dhana  
aparūpa ei sab a kath ā 
O brother, always worship Sri Krishna Caitanyadeva who is the great philanthropist giving away the 
treasure of the desire tree of pure love for Krishna. This Lord Chaitanya is actually Lord Krishna, the 
prince of Vraja and the life of Srimati Radha rani. Descriptions of Him are spiritual sounds. They are not at 
all material. — verse 12  

navadv īpe avatari´  rādhā-bhāva aṅg īkari´  
tāṅra k ānti aṅgera bh ūṣaṇa 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

9 
 tina v āñchā abhil āṣī´ śacī-garbhe parak āśi´ 
saṅge lañ ā pariṣada -gaṇa  

Lord Krishna desired to appe ar in Nabadwip to understand the intense love Srimati Radharani felt for 
Him, and accept Her golden complexion as His bodily ornament. In order to fulfill these three desires, the 
Lord appeared in Sacidevi’s womb. When the Lord appeared like this in the ma terial world, all His associ-
ates followed Him, and also appeared in the world. — verse 13  
gaura -hari avatari  ´premera v ādara kari´  
sādhilā manera tina k āja 
rādhikāra prāṇa-pati kivā bhāve kāṅde niti  
ihā bujhe bhakata -samāja 

The Lord appeared in the golden form of Lord Chaitanya, and preached the message of pure love for 
Krishna. In this way He fulfilled the three desires in His mind. Only the devotees are able to understand in 
what a wonderful way Krishna, who is the Lord of Srimati Radharani’s life, continually cried in ecstatic 
love of God. — verse 14  
uttama adhama kichu na b āchila  yāciyā dilaka kola  
kahe prem ānanda eman a gaur āṅga hṛdaye dhariy ā bola 
bhaja gaur āṅga kaha gaur āṅga laha gaur āṅga n āma (re)  
ye jana gaur āṅga bhaje sei  haya āmāra prāṇa (re)  

Never discriminating who was a fit candidate, elevated or degraded, the son of mother Sachi magnani-
mously accepts one and all onto His lap in a loving embrace crying, “Come to My fold, come to My fold!” 
The poet Premananda Das begs you all to constantly chant the sweet name of Krishna while holding 
tightly to that son of mother Sachi in the innermost core of your heart.  
Worsh ip Gauranga! Speak about Gauranga! Oh please take to gaura -nāma! Whoever worships Gau-
ranga is my life and soul.  
yasyaiva p ādāmbuja -bhakti -lābhyaḥ  
prem ābhidh ānaḥ paramaḥ pum -arthaḥ  
tasmai jagan -maṅgala -maṅgal āya 
caitanya -candr āya namo namas te  

O Lord Chaitanyachandra, by devotedly serving Your lotus feet one can at tain the pure love for Lord 
Krishna that is the ultimate goal of all endeavors. O Lord Chaitanyachandra, O great auspiciousness of the 
world, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. — Srila Prab-
hodhananda Saras wati, Śrī Caitanya -candr āmṛta te xt 9 
ānanda -līlāmaya -vigrah āya 
hemābha-divya -cchavi -sundar āya 
tasmai mah ā-prema -rasa-pradāya 
caitanyacandr āya namo namas te  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

10 
 O Lord Chaitanyachandra, O Lord whose form is full of blissful pastimes, O Lord whose complexion is 
as sp lendid as gold, O Lord who gives in charity the nectar of pure love for Lord Krishna. I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You. I offer my respectful obeisances unto  You. — Śrī Caitanya -candr āmṛta text 
11 
yan n āptaṁ karma -niṣṭhair na ca samadhi -gataṁ yat tapo dhy āna-yogair  
vairāgyais ty āga-tattva -stutibhir api na yat tarkitaṁ c āpi kai ścit 
govinda -prema -bhājām api na ca kalitaṁ yad rahasyaṁ svayaṁ tan  
nāmnaiva pr ādurāsīd avatarati pare yatra taṁ naumi gauram  

Not attainable by the faithful performers of pio us deeds, not understood by those engaged in austerity, 
meditation, and yoga, not guessed by those absorbed in detachment, renunciation of the fruits of work, 
philosophical speculation or recitation of prayers, and unknown even to the devotees full of love  for Lord 
Govinda, the secret of pure devotional service has been revealed by the holy name during Lord Gaura’s 
advent. Let me glorify that Lord Gaura. — Śrī Caitanya -candr āmṛta text 3  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahatmyam  
The Glories of Srimad Bhagavatam  
Introduction  
In the dark age of Kali, bhakti is the only process for getting free from material conditioning. Bhakti is 
achieved only by the holy association of a  pure devotee of the Supreme Lord.  Specifically, one must hear 
kṛṣṇa-kathā from such a devotee.  Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the best source of k ṛṣṇa-kathā.  It presents ques-
tions and answers related to Lord Krishna, His name, form, pastimes, energies, and vario us incarnations.  It 
was compiled by Srila Vyasa, and is the essence of all Vedic Literature.  
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is so potent that it captivated the heart of Sukadeva Goswami, a self realised soul 
completely absorbed in Brahman.  He ran away from home after  his birth, but returned as soon as he heard 
a few verses of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.  Although he renounced everything including even a kaupin, he could  
not give up Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.  he was very fond of forest life (ara ṇya-priya), but after hearing Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam from his father, he became very dear to the devotees (vi ṣṇujana -priya), by reciting the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.  He was so renounced that he did not distinguish between male and female, yet he relished 
narrating the most intimate pastimes of Lord Krish na with the cowherd damsels.  
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the very life and soul of the Vaishnavas, especially the Gaudiya Vaishnavas.  Lord 
Caitanya Mahaprabhu called it spotless (amala Purana).  He would hear it from His dear associate, Sri Gad-
adhara Pandita at Narendra Sarovara in Jagannatha Puri.  In Bhakti -rasamrta sindhu, Srila Rupa Goswami 
lists hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as one of the five essential processes of devotional service.  Indeed, it is 
so wonderful that even impersonalists, who do not consider the  Lord's form or abode transcendental, cannot 
resist studying and commenting upon it.  
Srila Prabhupada carried Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam aboard the Jaladuta to the United States and with this 
weapon he conquered the world.  He blessed many thousands with the wealth  of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.  He 
referred to his Bhaktivedanta purports on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as his "emotional ecstasies".  He made it 
mandatory for his followers to hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam daily.  Wherever he went he spoke on Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, he sometimes reli shed hearing it from his disciples as well.  
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati said that if all the books in the world were destroyed, and only Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam remained, there would be no loss.  It will be clear from this booklet that this is no over state-
ment. 
This translation of six chapters of the Padma Pur āṇa, Uttara -khaṇḍa, entitled Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam -
Māhātmya, the glory of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.  Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the mature fruit of the Vedic tree and 
therefore, can grant all desires.  The process of he aring Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is seven days (Saptaha -Yajna) 
is the means for attaining all desires.  Generally pure devotees of the Lord, being free from all material 
desires, do not engage in such recitation or rituals, but they use the Saptaha process for prea ching to the 
masses.  Therefore, they are not concerned with all the details of the rituals, as the real purpose is to convey 
the importance of hearing the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.  
The Pur āṇas sometimes instruct through the indirect method of story telling. As S ri Narada Muni in-
formed King Pracinbarhi (S.B. 4.28.65), "My dear King, in this way I have indirectly instructed you in the 
science of self -realisation.  The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the creator and controller of the universe, 
is very  much pleased with indirect explanations, parok ṣa-vādā."  This does not mean, however, that this 
narration is a fable. It is factual, but there is a moral to the story.  To give some insight, brief comments are 
given at the end of each chapter.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

12 
 Within these chapters the re is a lucid description and incidental predictions for the modern age.  Unscru-
pulous scholars should not consider them interpolations because even according to modern historians the 
Purāṇas existed prior to the activities narrated herein. This is a confi rmed historical fact. For example, the 
first chapter states that Yavanas will take control of holy places and demolish temples. This is a reference 
to Muslim rulers like Aurangazeb, who destroyed the major temples in Vrndavana, Mathura, and other holy 
places.  There is also an implicit prediction that Srila Prabhupada would preach in the west.  This should 
make atheists, agnostics, and sceptics reconsider their convictions.  
Chapter One  
The Meeting of  
Narada Muni and Bhakti Devi  
We offer our humble obeisance s unto Lord Sri Krishna, whose transcendental form is bliss personified. 
He is the cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of the universe and the destroyer of the three 
types of miseries. We pay our humble obeisances to Sri Sukadeva Goswami who  is like the Supersoul. He 
left home immediately after taking birth, though he had not undergone any sa ṁskāras, or purificatory cere-
monies.  Upon his departure, his father out of separation followed him calling, "O my son! O my son," but 
only the trees res ponded.  
Once in the forest of Naimisaranya, Sri Saunaka Rsi, the best of sages who are expert in tasting k ṛṣṇa-
kathā, put some questions to Suta Goswami after paying obeisances.    
Sri Saunaka said, "O Suta Goswami, your knowledge dispels the darkness of i gnorance like millions of 
suns. Please recite the nectarean pastimes of Lord Krishna, which are like tonic for the ears.  How can one 
increase the discrimination that results from knowledge of devotion and renunciation of the material world? 
How do Vaishna vas get relief from the illusion created by Maya? In Kali -yuga the general populace is 
demonic, please explain, therefore, the best means to purify those who are troubled by various types of 
tribulations. O Suta Goswami, please describe that sadhana, or mo st auspicious purifying process that will 
take one to Krishna. A touch -stone can give only material happiness and the kalpa -vrksa tree can at most 
grant heavenly opulence, however, when the spiritual master is pleased he can give the eternal abode of the 
Lord - the Vaikuntha planet -- which is not achieved even by the yogis."  
Sri Suta Goswami said, "O Saunaka, your heart is full of love for the Personality of Godhead.  After 
proper deliberation, therefore I will give you the essence of all conclusions, whic h will destroy the fear of 
birth and death. It will increase the flow of devotion which is the chief cause of Lord Sri Krishna's happiness.  
Please hear it attentively.   
Sri Sukadeva Goswami recited Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in Kali yuga to absolutely destroy fea r of the snake 
of death.  There is no superior means than this for the purification of the mind. One attains the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, however, only after accumulating pious activities for many life times.  
When Sukadeva Goswami sat among the sages and prepare d to recite Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to Pariksita 
Maharaja, the demigods, who are expert in accomplishing their work, approached him with a pot of nectar.  
They offered humble obeisances and said, 'Please accept this pot of nectar and in exchange give us the nect ar 
of hari -katha. Let King Pariksita drink this, and let us drink the nectar of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.'At that time 
Sri Sukadeva Goswami thought, 'Where is a piece of glass and where is a transcendental gem?  How can 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

13 
 one compare these two?  What is the questio n of comparing this material nectar, though celestial, with the 
transcendental nectar of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam?'  In this way Sukadeva Goswami made fun of the demigods.  
He did not consider them proper recipients of hari -katha, because they are devoid of pure devotional service. 
Hence, hearing the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is rare even among the demigods.  
Lord Brahma was astonished to learn that Pariksita Maharaja became liberated just by hearing Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.  In Satyaloka, he put the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam on one end  of a scale and all other processes for 
obtaining liberation on the other.  Upon seeing the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam tilt the scale, all the sages present 
were struck with wonder.  They asserted that in Kali -yuga only hearing and reciting Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 
which  is non different from the Personality of Godhead, can immediately relieve one from material distress.  
If one hears it according to the proper process (as described in chapter six), it will certainly grant bhakti.  
Previously the most merciful Kumara brot hers recited Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to the sage Narada.   
Although Sri Narada had heard it from lord Brahma, the Kumaras gave him the opportunity to hear it 
according to the recommended process.  
Sri Saunaka asked, "Where did the learned Narada, who is free from material bon dage and constantly 
travels all over the universe, meet those great sages?  How did his interest in hearing hari -katha and in 
knowing the specific rules and regulations for hearing it develop?"  
Suta Goswami replied, "Now I will narrate an episode that is f ull of devotion.  Sri Sukadeva, who con-
siders me his surrendered disciple, told it to me in confidence. Once, the Kumaras went to Visala (Badri-
natha) to get the holy association of saintly people. There they met Narada Muni.”  
"The Kumaras said, 'O brahmana , why do you appear so dejected and full of anxiety?  Where have you 
come from, and where are you going so quickly?  You appear like a person in complete anxiety owing to 
loss of wealth. This is not befitting a person like you, who is completely free from material attachment.  
Please explain the reason for this.'  
"Sri Narada replied, 'I came here considering the earth to be the best of planets.  Although I travelled to 
Puskara, Prayaga, Kasi, Godavari, Haridvara, Kuruksetra, Sriranga and Setubandha, I could  not find peace 
in any of those holy places.  At present, Kali yuga the friend of irreligion, has completely afflicted the whole 
earth.  Now truthfulness, austerity, cleanliness, mercy and charity are nowhere to be seen.  The fallen living 
entities take pl easure in telling lies and are simply engaged in filling their bellies. They are lazy, less intel-
ligent, unfortunate, and always disturbed.  Those who are called saintly are actually pretenders.  Though 
they appear renounced, they accumulate wealth, women,  and paraphernalia for sense pleasure.  Women rule 
the family and the brother -in-law is the consultant. People sell their daughters out of greed, and husbands 
and wives always quarrel.  The holy places, asramas of saintly people, and rivers are under the c ontrol of 
the yavanas, who are against Vedic religion.They have destroyed many temples and therefore yogis, siddhas, 
jnanis and religious people are not to be seen.  The processes of liberation are completely burnt to ashes in 
the fire of Kali -yuga.  
In th is age people sell grains in the market, the brahmanas charge fees to teach and women thrive by 
prostitution. Thus witnessing the defects of Kali -yuga and wandering over the face of the earth, I reached 
the bank of the Yamuna where Lord Krishna had perform ed various pastimes.  
O best of sages, please  hear about the wonder I saw there.  A beautiful woman was sitting in a dejected 
mood Two old men lay unconscious in front of her breathing very quickly.  While trying to bring them to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

14 
 consciousness, the young women would sometimes cry. At times she would look around as if searching for 
her protector, the Supersoul.  She was served by hundreds of women who were fanning and trying to console 
her. I saw this whole scene from afar and out of curiosity went near the m.  Upon seeing me, the young lady 
stood up and spoke very piteously.   
She said: "O saintly person, please stay here for a moment1and dispel my distress.  Your auspicious 
vision destroys the sins of materialistic people.  By your words I will get relief f rom misery and become 
peaceful.  Only by great fortune can one get darsana of a person like you."I inquired, "O virtuous lady, who 
are you and who are these two men lying here?  Who are these ladies serving you?  Please explain the cause 
of your distress i n detail."  
The lady said, "My name is Bhakti, and these two are my sons Jnana and Vairagya. By the influence of 
time they have become old and decrepit. These women are the holy rivers, such as the Ganges.  They have 
come here to serve me.Although I am dire ctly being served by these ladies, still I am not peaceful. O sage, 
whose only wealth is austerity, though it is well known, please hear my story carefully and grant me solace. 
I was born in the land of Dravida, in South India, and I grew up in Karnataka.  I was respected in the state 
of Maharastra, but when I came to Gujarata, I lost my youth.  
Rogues influenced by Kali -yuga broke my limbs and for a long time I remained in that condition and 
thus, along with my sons, I have become very weak and impotent. Up on coming to Vrndavana, I regained 
my youth and beauty. But my two sons, who are lying here, are still old and tired. I will leave this place and 
travel to foreign lands. I feel sad owing to the plight of my sons.  We always remain together, so why is it 
that I am young and they are old? It should be that the sons are young while the mother is old. I am astonished 
by this and so I lament.  You have mystic power and are most intelligent, therefore, please explain this to 
me. 
Narada said, "O chaste lady, from  within my heart I see the cause of your misery, therefore I advise you 
not to lament.  Lord Hari will shower all auspiciousness upon you."  
Suta Goswami said, "The best of sages, Sri Narada, understood the reason in a moment and said. 'O 
beautiful lady, he ar attentively from me.  Because of this ruthless age (Kali -yuga), good behaviour, yoga, 
and austerities have all become lost. People are addicted to cheating, irreligious behaviour, and are like the 
demon Agha, sin personified.At present, saintly people a re unhappy and demonic people are enjoying sense 
gratification.  Under these circumstances, if an intelligent man maintains his fortitude, then he is considered 
a scholar.  By and by the earth is becoming a burden for Lord Sesa.  At present it is not even worth seeing, 
what to speak of touching, and I see no auspiciousness anywhere.  Everyone neglects you and your two 
sons.  Because of worldly attachment to sense gratification, people are blind.   Owing to their negligence, 
you have become decrepit. It is o nly due to the glory of Vrndavana that you have become young again.  This 
land is very auspicious because devotion always dances here. However, your two sons are being neglected 
and thus their health is failing but by the touch of Vrndavana they remain asl eep and breathing.  
Bhakti said, "Why is it that King Pariksita did not kill this sinful Kali -yuga?  Because of Kali -yuga all 
objects have lost their essence.  Why does the most merciful Lord Hari tolerate irreligion?  O sage, please 
remove this doubt.  I f eel pacified by hearing your sweet words."  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

15 
 Narada said, "O auspicious young lady, now that you have asked, please hear me with attention as I 
explain everything and thus relieve your misery. Kali -yuga took control and started obstructing auspicious-
ness the  day Lord Krishna left this planet for His abode.  When King Pariksita travelled on earth, conquering 
all the kings, he met Kali, who fell at his feet and took shelter of him.The king, who understood the essence 
of things just like the bumble bee, decided not to kill him because that goal which is not attainable by 
penance, yoga meditation, or samadhi, is easily attained in Kali -yuga simply by performing hari -kirtana.  
Although the king knew that Kali -yuga was useless, he spotted this one essential good qua lity, and un-
derstanding that this would make the living beings happy, he spared him. Because humanity is engaged in 
irreligious and immoral acts, everything has lost its essence.  All objects, including the seeds of the earth, 
are ineffective.The brahmanas , being greedy for wealth, are performing Bhagavata -katha in peoples houses 
and therefore the essence of katha is lost.Immoral, atheistic, and sinful people have begun to reside in the 
holy places, causing the influence of those places to be lost.   
Those people whose hearts are always filled with lust, greed and anger make a show of performing aus-
terities, thereby causing the essence of penance to be lost. Because people are unable to control their mind, 
they have taken shelter of greed, pretence, and immo rality, and have given up the study of scriptures, causing 
the influence of jnana -yoga to be lost.  Moreover, the pandits, or scholars, are only expert in producing 
children and enjoying sex like buffaloes.  They are no longer expert in the process of libe ration.  
Furthermore, there are hardly any Vaishnavas coming in bonafide sampradayas and there, everywhere 
all objects have become ineffective. This indeed, is due to the influence of Kali and is not the defect of 
anyone else.  Therefore, although the lotus -eyed Lord resides near by, He tolerates this."  
Suta Goswami said, " O Saunaka, hearing these revealing words of Sri Narada Muni, Bhakti was very 
surprised.  
She replied, 'O saintly person, you are very glorious and it is my good fortune to have met you.  Within 
this material world, association with a saintly person is indeed the cause of all perfection.   
Just by once meeting you, Sri Prahlada, the son of Kayadhu, conquered Maya, and by your mercy Dhruva 
Maharaja gained the Dhruva planet.  You are the pers onification of all auspiciousness.  I offer my obeisances 
unto you, the direct son of Lord Brahma.'"  
Comments on Chapter One  
• That discrimination which is not related to Bhakti is useless.  It can only make a person materially 
wise, because it has no supe rior purpose.  Similarly, knowledge and renunciation are useful only when they 
arise from devotion, otherwise they make the heart dry and hard.  
• Pariksita Maharaja was cursed by the son of Samika Rsi to be bitten by a snake called Taksaka and die 
after se ven days.  When the king heard this, he renounced his kingdom and sat on the bank of Ganges 
intending to fast until death.  Upon Sukadeva Gosvami's arrival, Pariksita Maharaja asked him to recite 
Srimad Bhagavatam.  Actually every living entity is cursed t o die within seven days (from Sunday to Sat-
urday).  Death is compared to a snake that will pay everyone a visit.  While everyone fears death, they do 
not use this fear to cultivate detachment.  Rather, owing to ignorance, they become more attached.  This i s 
the difference between Pariksita Maharaja and the common man.  Hearing Srimad Bhagavatam makes a 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

16 
 person free from the fear of death.  That Pariksita Maharaja heard Srimad Bhagavatam for seven days sig-
nifies that we should hear it everyday until our death . 
• Srimad Bhagavatam is the property of the devotees of the Supreme Lord.  Although demigods are also 
devotees, they are selfish and attached to enjoyment.  This disqualifies them from drinking the nectar of 
Srimad Bhagavatam.  When one drinks heavenly ne ctar he loses his piety, but when one hears krsna -katha, 
he is freed from sin and his heart becomes purified, punya sravana kirtana (S.B. 1.2.17).  This is the differ-
ence between heavenly nectar and the nectar of krsna -katha.  
• According to the Second Cant o, Lord Brahma spoke the original four verses of the Srimad Bhagavatam 
to Narada, who in turn instructed them to Sri Vyasa.  The "proper process" refers to hearing the complete 
Srimad Bhagavatam in seven days according to the guidelines given in chapter si x. 
• Visala is another name for Badrinatha.  Lord Nara -Narayana, the presiding deity of Bharata -varsa re-
sides there and this it is visited by many saintly people.  
• Generally a saintly person has no reason to feel either dejected or elated but when he sees  the living 
entities suffering, he feels unhappy for them.  
• This is the prediction for the present age.  
• Yavanas refers to the Muslim rulers who invaded India at various times, beginning from the 11th cen-
tury.  They were inimical to Vedic religion and cu lture.  Some were tolerant, some were atrocious.  Some 
Muslim destroyed temples and even forcibly converted Hindus to Islam.  They even imposed taxes on visi-
tors to the holy places.  
• According to Vedic custom a brahmana should not charge for giving knowle dge.  He is allowed to 
accept donations for his maintenance or send his students to householders for begging food.  This custom 
insured that only those who had interest in teaching would perform this service and unqualified people 
would not be interest.  B ecause students did not pay fees, they remained indebted and obedient to their 
teachers.  This system continued in India up until about 150 years ago when British rulers introduced change.  
Under the present system, good relations between student and teach ers are non -existent and thus the whole 
educational process is degraded.  
• The exact Sanskrit is kaminyah kesasulinyah, which can also mean that women will cut their hair.  
• A saintly person does not speak with women unnecessarily.  
• Jnana and Vairagya are  the natural offspring of devotion to the Lord (S.B.  1.2.7.).  
• "By the influence of time" indicates the age of Kali, in which people lose interest in transcendental 
knowledge and renunciation.  
• All the holy places are subservient to devotional service.  They follow Bhakti.  Therefore wherever a 
devotee goes, that places becomes holy.  
• Transcendental knowledge and detachment from sense gratification naturally follow Bhakti. (S.B. 
11.2.43).  And discrepancy in this principle implies disturbance in devotio nal service.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

17 
 • This briefly describes the history of the Bhakti movement in the age of Kali.  There were many great 
Vaisnavas who appeared in the land of Dravida.  Later on Ramanujacarya organised and propagated Vais-
navism under the banner of the Sri Sampr adaya (S.B. 11.5.38 -40).  Madhvacarya appeared in the state of 
Karnataka and preached very vigorously, nurturing bhakti.  In Maharastra there were some saints such as 
Tukarma in Pandarpura who propagated bhakti.  But in Gujarata the people were more intere sted in accu-
mulating wealth and thus bhakti was neglected.  When one worships the deha (the body), the worship of 
Deva (the Lord), is neglected.  When bhakti is weak then jnana and vairagya are automatically emaciated.  
• Vrndavana is the eternal abode of L ord Krsna and thus Bhakti naturally flourishes there.  But, if one 
neglects hearing krsna -katha, then Jnana and Vairagya remain in a fainted state.  They get covered by Maya.  
As Lord Krsna says in Bhagavad -gita (5.15) ajnanenavrtam jnanam tena muhynati ja ntavah.  
• Idam sthanam parityajya videsam gamyate maya.  This statement hints at Srila Prabhupada's travel to 
the western world from Vrndavana.  It is interesting to note that the Sanskrit proverb used in this sentence 
is in the passive voice (gamyate).  T his signifies that she (Bhakti) will be carried by someone.  Because the 
Puranas are compiled by Srila Vyasa, who is an incarnation of the Lord, it is not impossible for him to make 
such predictive statements.  
• Aghasura was a demon with the body of a pyth on.  He swallowed the innocent cowherd friends of 
Krsna, who later on killed him.  Demonic persons, who trouble innocent people and seize their wealth, are 
like Aghasura.  
• At present in Vrndavana the study of devotional literature such as Srimad Bhagavata m is being ne-
glected and Vairagya is being replaced with cosy life. Yet the land has not lost its power.  
• Sage Karbhajana confirms this (S.B. 11.5.36).  
• The new varieties of grains, fruits and vegetables are hybrids. They yield more produce but are not a s 
nutritious and delicious as the original varieties, which existed since time immemorial.  We have experi-
enced this ourselves because the hybrid seeds were introduced very late in India.  For example chapatis 
made from contemporary wheat flour have less f lavour, and the texture is not as pleasing as those of bygone 
years.  They become dry and hard very quickly and are not as conducive to health as those made of the desi 
grain which is now extinct.  
• The purpose of Hari -katha is not to solve economic proble ms. Its real purpose is to nourish Bhakti 
along with Jnana and Vairagya.  
• All the above predictions can be confirmed by paying a visit to holy places like Vrndavana.  That the 
"essence is lost" means one no longer sees their influence.  If, however, one p erforms these activities as 
prescribed in the scriptures, he will fell the positive influence.  
Chapter Two  
Narada Endeavours to  
Remove Bhakti's Distress  
   Sri Narada said, "O young lady, why are you in so much anxiety?  Don't be melancholy unnecessary.  
Just meditate on the lotus feet of Lord Sri Krsna and by His mercy you will be free from all misery.  Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

18 
 Krsna, who protected Draupadi from the atrocities of the Kauravas and who is the lover of the damsels of 
Vraja, has not gone far away. Besides, you are  Bhakti and more dear to Him than His very life.  On your 
request He even goes t o the house of low born people.   In Satya, Treta and Dvapara -yugas, jnana and vair-
agya were the means of liberation, but in Kali -yuga only bhakti can grant liberation.  Thinkin g in this way, 
Lord Hari, the transcendental personification of knowledge, manifested you.  You are the very dear beloved 
of Lord Krsna.  
   "Once you approached the Lord with folded hands and asked Him what you should do. He said, "Go 
and nourish My devote es".  You accepted this order which pleased Him very much.  To assist you, the Lord 
sent Mukti as your maidservant and Jnana and Vairagya as your sons.3  You directly reside in Vaikuntha 
dhama where you nourish the devotees and you expand yourself on this earthly planet for their nourishment 
as well.4  You came and happily resided on this earth along with Mukti, Jnana and Vairagya from Satya -
yuga to Dvapara -yuga.  But in Kali -yuga, Mukti contracted the disease of irreligious pretence and lan-
guished, and wit h your permission, went back to Vaikuntha.  Now whenever you remember her, she comes 
to this planet briefly and returns to Vaikuntha, but Jnana and Vairagya remain with you always because they 
are like your sons.  Being neglected by the people of Kali -yuga , they have become old and weak, but will 
soon recuperate, so you need not worry.  I will find a solution to rejuvenate their bodies.  
 O beautiful faced one, there  is no other age like Kali -yuga  because you will be established in every 
house as well as  in the heart of every person.  Hear my vow.  If I do not preach your message, subdue all 
other religions and make devotional festivals predominant then I shall not be considered the servant of Lord 
Hari.  In Kali -yuga those people who follow you, even if they are sinful, will attain the abod e of Lord Krsna 
without fear. The people in whose heart you reside become purified and they will not see Yamaraja, the Lord 
of Death, even in their dreams.  Even ghostly beings like pretas, pisacas, raksasas and daityas are n ot able 
to trouble those whose hearts are imbued with devotion.  The Lord cannot be controlled by austerities, study 
of the Vedas. by culture of knowledge, or by the fruitive activities described in the Vedas.  He is controlled 
only by bhakti and the gopis  are th e evidence (pramana) of this. On the strength of pious activities performed 
for hundreds of lives one becomes attracted to bhakti, which is the only essence in Kali -yuga.  On the 
strength of bhakti, Lord Krsna Himself appears to the devotee.  Those people who are envious of devotion 
are always miserable no matter where they go within the three planetary systems.  In the past, the great sage 
Durvasa suffered immense m isery for offending a devotee.  What more can I say?  All vratas, tirthas, yogas, 
sacrifices and talks of knowledge are not needed.  Bhakti alone can grant liberation."  
 Suta Gosvami continued, "Narada's conclusion glorified Bhakti and nurtured her.  Then Bhakti spoke 
as follows. 'O Narada, you are very glorious and have unflinching faith i n me.  Thus I will always reside in 
your heart and never leave.  O saintly person, you are most merciful.  Just in a matter of moments you have 
removed my misery.  But my sons have not yet regained their consciousness.  Please quickly bring them 
back to no rmal.'"  
 Suta Gosvami said, "Upon hearing these words of Bhakti, Narada felt very compassionate and at-
tempted to wake them up by shaking them with his hands.10  He put his mouth to their ears and said, 'O 
Jnana wake up, O Vairagya please arise."11  Then he  chanted Vedic Mantras, the Vedanta Sutras, and the 
Upanisads.  He recited Bhagavad -gita again and again.  With great difficulty, they were revived, but over-
come by lethargy, they yawned and were unable to even open their eyes.12  Their hair was a white as  the 
feathers of ducks and their bodily limbs were emaciated and powerless.  Owing to hunger and thirst they 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

19 
 were weak and sleepy.  Seeing this, Narada fell into anxiety and contemplated further ways to revive them 
from old age and sleep.  O Saunaka, as th e sage Narada, deliberated, meditating on the Supreme Lord, he 
heard a voice emanating from the sky.13  'O Devarsi, do not worry, your endeavour will be successful.  O 
sage you must perform one specific noble act that will be revealed to you by some great saintly person.14  
As soon as you complete that activity, Jnana and Vairagya will be released from the clutches of sleep and 
old age, and bhakti will reign everywhere.'15  These words were heard by everyone."  
 "In astonishment Narada said, 'I cannot unders tand the meaning of this indirect statement.16  The voice 
did not clearly explain the path one must follow in order to achieve perfection.  Nor do I know where to find 
those saintly persons who will explain the process to me.  What must I do to implement t his order?'"  
 Suta Gosvami said, "O Saunaka, bidding farewell to Jnana and Vairagya, Narada Muni travelled to 
various holy places and met with the saintly people residing there.  He asked them to suggest a process by 
which Jnana and Vairagya could be reviv ed.  Some listened carefully but could not give a definite answer.17  
Others stated that it could not be accomplished, while still others remarked that it was not possible to deter-
mined a correct answer.  Upon being asked the question, several simply kept quiet while others wriggled 
away to avoid embarrassment.  They were all surprised to hear this question and none could offer a satis-
factory reply.  They began discussing among themselves as follows, 'My dear friends, if Jnana and Vairagya 
could not be revi ved after the chanting of the Vedas, Vedanta Sutra and recitation of the Bhagavad -gita, 
then what can be the solution?  And if Narada Muni, who is the chief yogi and saint, does not know, then 
who can answer?'"18  
 "In this way, wherever Sri Narada inquired , he got the same answer --that it is very difficult to accom-
plish.  He thus became very worried and decided to go to Badari where he performed penance with the intent 
to find the solution to revive Jnana and Vairagya.  shortly thereafter the Kumaras, heade d by Sanaka, ap-
peared there.19  They were effulgent like a million suns.  Seeing them Sri Narada again enquired, "O saintly 
people, it is by great fortune that I have attained your association.  Please be merciful to me and explain that 
noble process.  You  are the best of yogis, most knowledgeable and scholarly.  Although you appear like five 
year old boys, you are the senior -most saintly persons.  You always reside in Vaikuntha and engage in 
chanting the holy names.  You are always intoxicated with the nec tar of Lord Hari's pastimes, which are 
your only sustenance.20  You are always chanting the mantra harih saranam and therefore old age, which is 
caused by the influence of time, does not approach you.  Previously, just by the flick of your eyebrows, you 
whirled Lord Visnu's gatekeepers, Jaya and Vijaya down to this earth.   Later they were reinstated by your 
mercy.  I am most lowly and I feel most fortunate to have your darsana.  You are very merciful so kindly 
bestow your mercy on me.  Please reveal that pr ocess which the voice in the sky directed me to learn from 
saintly people.  Please explain in detail how to follow that path.  How can Bhakti, Jnana and Vairagya 
become happy?  How can they be established in all classes of men?"  
 The Kumaras replied, "O sa ge, Narada Muni, abandon your anxiety and be happy for the solution is 
simple.  O Narada, glorious crest -jewel among the renunciates, you are the guide of those who walk the path 
of devotion, indeed you are the sun of bhakti -yoga.  It is not very surprisin g that you have undergone this 
great endeavour for the sake of Bhakti.  It is certainly appropriate for a devotee of the Lord  to properly 
establish Bhakti.   Various sages have propagated many paths, but they are all troublesome and generally 
can only eleva te one to the heavenly planets.  Until now, the process by which one can attain the original 
Personality of Godhead has remained concealed, and it is rare to find one who knows this practice.  We 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

20 
 know the procedure the voice in the sky referred to and we w ill explain it to you.   Please hear with an 
attentive mind.  O Narada, sacrifice of material objects, penance, yoga, meditation, study of the Vedas and 
the path of knowledge, generally only lead toward fruitive activities and grant residence in the heavenl y 
planets.  Scholars have said that only jnana -yajna, or the sacrifice of knowledge, is the path of liberation.24  
This constitutes the study of the Srimad Bhagavatam which has been sung by great personalities like 
Sukadeva Gosvami.  Just by hearing the wo rds of Srimad Bhagavatam, Bhakti, Jnana and Vairagya will be 
nourished.  This will relieve the misery of Jnana and Vairagya and will make Bhakti blissful.  As when a 
lion roars, wolves flee in fear, so merely by the sound of Srimad Bhagavatam, all the vici ous qualities of 
Kali-yuga are destroyed.  Bhakti is the flow of love of God and along with Jnana and Vairagya will enter 
every house and dance in the heart of every living being."  
 Sri Narada said.  "I have tried to awaken Jnana and Vairagya by chanting t he Vedas, Upanisads and 
Bhagavad -gita with no success.  How is it possible that they will re revived by hearing Srimad Bha-
gavatam?25  After all Srimad Bhagavatam is nothing more than the essence of the Vedas.  Your darsana 
never goes in vain and you always  protect those who surrender to you, please, therefore, remove  my doubt 
with delay."  
 The Kumaras said: "It is a fact that Srimad Bhagavatam is the essen ce of the Vedas and Upanisads,  but 
it is the fruit of the tree of Vedic literature, it is superior.  T he vital fluid of the tree is spread from the root 
to the tip though it cannot be tasted.  When that same fluid accumulates in the fruit however, it tastes very 
delicious.  Similarly, ghee, which is relishable even to the demigods, is spread throughout cow 's milk, but 
it cannot be savoured until it is extracted.  Sugar also exists throughout the cane, yet when extracted, it 
becomes more succulent.  The same applies to the pastimes depicted in Srimad Bhagavatam, which is equal 
to the Vedas.  Srila Vyasadeva has propagated it to establish bhakti, jnana and vairagya.  Once Srila 
Vyasadeva, who knows the essence of all the Vedas and Upanisads, and is the compiler of the Bhagavad -
gita felt dejected and was drowning in an ocean of confusion.  At that time you spok e the message of the 
Bhagavatam in just four verses.  Upon hearing these verses Vyasa was freed from his lamentation.  So why 
are you doubtful and astonished by this?  Recite Srimad Bhagavatam to Jnana and Vairagya and their lamen-
tation and misery will be destroyed."  
 Narada said, "O saintly people, your darsana immediately shatters all the sins of the living entities and 
brings solace to those being scorched by the fire of material misery.  You are always drinking the nectar of 
Srimad Bhagavatam, which you  heard from Lord Sesa.  I have taken shelter of you for the purpose of 
preaching the message of bhakti, which is characterised by love of God.  Only one who ha s performed 
greatly pious acts  for many millions of lifetimes may achieve the association of sain tly persons like your-
selves and thus get completely free from ignorance caused by material delusion and pride.  He then becomes 
established in proper discrimination."  
Comments on Chapter Two  
 This is the only panacea for anxiety.  When the mind is fixed on Krsna, it cannot experience 
agitation.  That's why devotees are always free from anxiety.  
 Lord Krsna is called patita -pavana, the purifier of the fallen, and Dina -bandhu, the friend of the 
distressed.  He does  not care for haughty people; He is pleased by  humility.  
 The Lord is pleased with His obedient servants.  He grants liberation, knowledge and detachment 
to the surrendered souls even without their asking.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

21 
  Devotional service is the internal potency of the Lord and descends from Him into the material 
world through disciplic succession.  
 Kali means the age of quarrel and hypocrisy, but it also indicates the age in which the Lord is 
readily available --kam krsnam lati dadati iti kalih.  In other yugas people were healthy, intelligent, 
alert, and long lived.  They had a natural inclination for yoga, penance, study of the Vedas, yajnas and 
so on.  They did not pay heed to devotion, considering it too simplistic.  Without bhakti, however, 
liberation cannot be attained.  In previous ages people had to undergo the  rigours of the respective 
processes for many lifetimes in order to realise this fact.  But in Kali -yuga there is natural propensity 
towards bhakti because people in general are not qualified to participate in jnana, yoga, and karma.  
Therefore this age is  glorious.  Moreover, Lord Caitanya appeared in Kali -yuga to directly preach the 
message of bhakti and set the proper example.  
 This statement predicts the appearance of Lord Caitanya who predicted prthivite ache yat nagaradi 
grama / sarvatra pracara hoibe mora nama.  When Narada Muni says that he will establish bhakti, he 
means it will be done through a devotee.  Therefore this verse also hints at the preaching activities of 
Srila Prabhupada who fulfilled the prophecies of Lord Caitanya and Sri Narada Muni.   In fact in Amer-
ica Srila Prabhupada once held a program which very few people attended.  When one disciple re-
marked that not many people had come, Srila Prabhupada said, "That's not true.  The great sage Narada 
Muni was present."  
 Everyone on qualified to  take to the process of bhakti, regardless of birth or caste.  
 In Vedic culture, the Vedas are considered to be the supreme pramana, though here Sri Narada 
asserts that the gopis are.  This is because the gopis are the topmost knowers and lovers of Krsna.  
Besides, among the gopis some are known to be the Vedas personified, hence they are also called 
pramana.  
 This refers to the story of Ambarisa Maharaja from the Ninth Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam.  
 Narada's attempt to wake Jnana and Vairagya by shaking them wi th  his hands indicates that 
knowledge cannot be revived by the process of karma.  
 Narada's placing his mouth next to their ear presents the initiation ceremony in which the guru 
utters mantras into the right ear of the disciple.  Mere initiation, however, cannot make one learned or 
renounced.  
 The lethargy and yawning of Jnana and Vairagya indicate that one can get only a meagre amount 
of knowledge by recitation of the scriptures mentioned.  They do not make one's consciousness crystal 
clear.  
 The Supersoul g uides the sincerely inquisitive person from within.  
 A sincere, inquisitive person should accept the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master.  In this 
way the Lord helps from within and without.  
 This statement predicts the appearance of ISKCON.  
 Personal re alisations which lack  the guidance of a bona fide teacher and the scriptures are unclear 
and insufficient.  
 Most people in the garb of saints do not clearly understand the Absolute Reality.  They follow 
hodge -podge philosophy and lacking realisation cannot  give satisfactory guidance to their disciples.  
 Here the word "Narada" means the giver of knowledge --naram jnanam dadati iti naradah.  
 The Lord appears in the form of the spiritual master to the sincere seeker.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

22 
  These are the characteristics of a bona fide s piritual master.  
 This story is in the Third Canto of Srimad Bhagavatam.  
 This is the duty of every devotee of the Lord.  
 A guru is able to dispel all the doubts of his disciple.  
 Here the term 'knowledge' is non different from devotion.  Knowledge related to the Personality 
of Godhead is one aspect of bhakti.  
 A disciple should present his doubts to his guru submissively.  If he is arrogant a saintly person is 
not obliged to give the treasure of his knowledge to such an unqualified disciple.  
 The Vedas and Itiha sas mainly deal in dharma, artha, kama and moksa, but the Srimad Bha-
gavatam speaks only of pure devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Krsna.  
 The pious acts mentioned here are those related to devotion such as offering charity to a devotee.  
Chapter Three  
Bhakti's Distress is Dispelled  
 Sri Narada said, "To establish bhakti, jnana and vairagya, I will perform a jnana -yajna by reciting the 
Srimad Bhagavatam as was spoken by Sri Sukadeva Gosvami.  Please explain where this yajna should be 
performed.  You are the knower of the Vedas, therefore please explain the glories of the Srimad Bhagavatam 
as spoken by Sri Sukadeva Gosvami.  Also please explain the proper procedure and duration for the recita-
tion."  
 The Kumaras replied, "O Narada, you are very humble and d iscriminate.1  We will explain everything 
to you, so kindly hear from us.  Near Haridvara there is a bathing place or ghata on the bank of Ganges 
called Ananda. Many saintly persons reside there and demigods and perfected beings visit frequently.  The 
place  abounds with various types of trees and creepers and the sand is soft and appealing.  The beautiful 
ghata decorates a solitary point on the river.3  The fragrance of lotus flowers fills the air and lions and tigers 
dwell with  no animosity toward other an imals.4  Go there and effortlessly start this jnana -yajna, for by the 
medium of this katha, a novel rasa will become manifest.  You will see Bhakti appear along with Jnana and 
Vairagya, who have become decrepit.  Wherever there is recitation of Srimad Bhag avatam, bhakti, jnana 
and vairagya automatically become manifest.  By the sound of Bhagavatam they will become young and 
energetic."5  
 Sri Suta Gosvami said, "After saying this, the Kumaras desiring to drink the nectar of Srimad Bha-
gavatam, arrived at the bank of the Ganges, along with Narada.  The news spread all over the earth and 
throughout the three planetary systems.  Those devotees who harboured any taste for hearing the Lord's 
pastimes, came in haste to drink the nectar.  Sage like Bhrgu, Vasistha, C yavana, Gautama, Medhatithi, 
Devala, Devarata, Parasurama, Visvamitra, Sakala, Markandeya, Dattatreya, Pippalada, Vyasa, Parasara, 
Chayasuka, Jajali, Jahnu, and all such great saintly persons arrived there along with their family members 
and disciples.  Be sides them, the Vedas, the Upanisads, Mantra, Tantra, the seventeen Puranas and the six 
philosophical systems came in their personified forms.  Sacred rivers like the Ganges, sacred ponds like 
Puskara, holy ksetras like Kuruksetra, sanctified forests like Dandaka, all the directions, majestic mountains 
like the Himalayas, the demigods, Gandharvas, and even Danavas came there to hear hari -katha.  Those 
who were not inclined to come out of excessive pride, were brought by the great sage Bhrgu who had ex-
pertly  convinced them.  The Kumaras then sat on a beautiful seat offered by Sri Narada and resolved them-
selves to recite Srimad Bhagavatam.  In the front of the audience sat Vaisnavas, renunciants, brahmacaris, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

23 
 and Sri Narada Muni sat in front of them.  On the o ne side sat the sages and on the other the demigods.  One 
place hosted the Vedas and Upanisads, and another the holy places.  In yet another place sat the women, 
while all around could be heard, "All glories!  All glories!" as conches resounded and people decorated each 
other with coloured powder and flowers.  Some demigods alighted from their airplanes and from the sky 
others showered flowers on the audience."  
 Suta Gosvami said, "In this way the worship was performed and then everyone sat with an attentiv e 
mind.  The Kumaras began reciting the glories of Srimad Bhagavatam before the sage Narada.  "Now we 
will describe the glories of Bhagavatam, which by hearing, one attains liberation.  One should always hear 
Srimad Bhagavatam, for just by doing so, the Lo rd sits in one's heart.  Bhagavatam has 18 000 verses in 
twelve cantos and is a dialogue between Sri Sukadeva and King Pariksita.6  The living entity wanders in 
this world owing to ignorance, until he hears the Bhagavatam Sri Sukadeva Gosvami recited.  Ind eed there 
is no need to hear many scriptures and Puranas as this simply causes confusion.  Srimad Bhagavatam alone 
is sufficient to grant liberation.  That house where Bhagavatam is recited daily becomes a holy place and 
those who reside there become free from all sins.  Thousands of horse sacrifices and hundreds Vajapeya 
sacrifices cannot compare to one sixteenth of the benefit of hearing Srimad Bhagavatam.  O sages, sins 
reside in a person's body only until he properly hears Srimad Bhagavatam .  The benef its offered by the 
Ganges, Gaya, Kasi, Puskara, or Prayaga cannot compare to those derived from hearing the Bhagavatam.  
If you at all desire the supreme destination, then you should daily recite at least one half, or even on fourth 
of a Srimad Bhagavatam sloka.  There is no difference between Omkara, Gayatri Mantra, Purusa -sukta, the 
three Vedas, Srimad Bhagavatam, the twelve syllable mantra, the twelve features of the sun god, Prayaga, 
Kala which manifests as a year, brahmana, agnihotra sacrifice, a cow, fasting on ekadasi, Tulasi, spring 
season and the Personality of Godhead, Krsna.  A person who hears Srimad Bhagavatam day and night and 
understands its meaning, becomes free from the sins committed in millions of lives.  There is no doubt about 
it.  The p erson who daily recites even one half or one fourth of a verse of Srimad Bhagavatam gets the 
benefit of performing the Rajasuya sacrifice (horse sacrifice).  Daily recitation of the Bhagavatam, medita-
tion on the Personality of Godhead, the watering of Tula si, and rendering service to the cow, are all consid-
ered equal.  If a person hears a verse from the Srimad Bhagavatam at the time of death, the Lord becomes 
pleased and grants him residence in Vaikuntha.  
 Whoever places the Bhagavatam on a golden throne an d donates it to a devotee certainly attains the 
association of the Personality of Godhead.  A person who does not hear even a part of Srimad Bhagavatam  
during the whole of his life, lives just like a candala or an ass.  The purpose of his birth is only to  give 
delivery pains to his mother.  A person who has not even heard one verse of the Bhagavatam  is very sinful 
and although living, is actually dead.  His life is an utter waste and simply a burden for the earth.  This is 
the statement of Lord Indra, the  chief among the demigods.  Indeed it is not very easy to get an opportunity 
to hear Srimad Bhagavatam.  Only a very pious person gets such an opportunity.  O Narada, you are very 
intelligent and the abode of mysticism.  Hear this katha with attention.  Th ere are no rules restricting the 
time or date for hearing Bhagavatam.7  Considered best is that one should hear Bhagavatam while keeping 
a vow of celibacy and truthfulness.8  But for the people in Kali -yuga this is very difficult.  Therefore, 
Sukadeva Gosv ami explained a special process for hearing that should be known.  In Kali -yuga the minds 
of people are always disturbed and thus it is very difficult for them to perform pious activity and follow 
rules and regulations for a long period.  He has recommende d, therefore, a process of hearing the Bha-
gavatam in seven days, which is called saptaha sravana, or saptaha yajna.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

24 
  Whatever benefit one derives from hearing Bhagavatam during the month of Magha or anytime, 
Sukadeva says, that one gets the same benefit by  the process of Saptaha.  Because people in general are 
short -lived, always sick, and unable to control their minds, the process of hearing Srimad Bhagavatam in 
seven days is offered in Kali -yuga.9  That benefit which is unattainable through penance, yoga and mystic 
trance, can be readily attained by properly hearing the Bhagavatam through the process of Saptaha.  There 
is no greater vrata, penance, sacrifice, service to a holy place, meditation, or knowledge than hearing Bha-
gavatam through the Saptaha Yajn a." 
 Saunaka said, "O Suta Gosvami, you have made very wonderful statements!  Certainly Bhagavatam 
must describe about Lord Krsna, who is the source of Brahma, but how is it possible that this is a better 
process of liberation then even the path of knowled ge?" 
 Suta Gosvami said, "O Saunaka, when Lord Krsna was about to leave this earthly planet to go to His 
own abode, He spoke the eleventh canto to Uddhava.  Upon hearing it, Uddhava asked, "O Govinda You 
have fulfilled Your purpose with respect to Your dev otees and as You prepare to return to Your abode, there 
is one doubt in my mind.  Please hear it and grant me solace.  kali -yuga will begin immediately, and various 
types of vicious qualities will become manifest.  Saintly people will become demonic and th e earth will 
become over burdened.  Then who will give her shelter?  O lotus -eyed Lord, but for You, I do not see anyone 
who can protect the earth.  O Lord, You are very dear to Your devotees and merciful to the saintly persons, 
therefore, please do not le ave.  O Lord, You appeared here only for the benefit of Your devotees, so how 
will Your devotees maintain their lives in your separation?  To meditated on Your impersonal feature is 
very miserable, therefore please do something.10   
 "Hearing these words o f Uddhava at Prabhasa, the Lord devised a solution to give shelter to His devo-
tees.  O Saunaka, He invested all His power in the Srimad Bhagavatam along with Himself in His unmanifest 
form.  We should know, there, that Srimad Bhagavatam is the personificat ion of the Lord in the form of 
sound.  One who serves, hears, or even sees the Srimad Bhagavatam becomes free from all sin.  In Kali -
yuga, therefore, hearing Bhagavata Saptaha is the chief religion and superior to all other means.  In Kali -
yuga this is the  only principle which removes sin and relieves the misery of unfortunate people.  It gives 
them the power to conquer lust, anger, and greed.  It is very difficult for the demigods to get relief from 
Maya, so then, how can mortal beings be expected to becom e free from her?  Hearing Saptaha, therefore, is 
the correct means to be freed from the clutches of Maya."11  
 Suta Gosvami said, "O Saunaka, while the Kumaras were explaining the glory of Saptaha to Narada 
Muni, a very wonderful thing happened in that asse mbly.  Bhakti appeared along with her two sons, who 
had now regained their youth.  She was loudly and repeatedly chanting "Sri Krsna! Govinda! Hare! Murare! 
O Lord Narayana! Vasudeva!  All the assembled people saw that Bhakti had become beautiful by wearin g 
the imports of the Srimad Bhagavatam as ornaments.12  The sages then began discussing how it was that 
Bhakti had manifested herself in the assembly, from where had she come, and so on."  
 The Kumaras then said, "Bhakti has now appeared from the import of the Bhagavata -katha.  Hearing 
this, Bhakti and her two sons humbly submitted.  'In Kali -yuga we were almost lost but now you have 
rejuvenated us.  Please explain where we can reside.'  
 The Kumaras responded, "You award the Personality of Godhead to your de votees, and you sever the 
bonds of this material world, therefore with great patience and fortitude you should reside in the hearts of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

25 
 the devotees of Lord Krsna.  The defects of Kali -yuga may overpower the whole universe but they will not 
be able to so mu ch as glance at you."  
 Upon hearing the words of the Kumaras, Bhakti entered the hearts of the Lord's devotees.  The devotees 
in whose heart Bhakti resides many appear impoverished, but they are most glorious and opulent, because 
abandoning His own abode, the Lord Himself comes to reside in their heart, being tied by the rope of devo-
tion.  The Bhagavatam is the personification of the Lord on earth and its glory cannot be described in words.  
Anyone who hears or recites Bhagavatam becomes an associate of the  Lord, so what is the purpose of 
religious principles without it?"  
Comments on Chapter Three  
 Knowledge comes to a humble and discriminate person.  
 Haridvara means the gateway to Lord Hari, and Ananda means bliss.  Bliss is in the vicinity of 
the Lord.  Goin g to Haridvara means becoming favourable to the Lord and giving up the atheistic 
mentality.  In this mood the Bhagavatam reciter will taste bliss.  
 One should bath one's mind with beautiful thoughts of Lord Hari.  The Ganges  represents the 
flow of transcen dental knowledge.  "Solitary place" means the absence of improper association.  
 When one is in transcendental knowledge he gets free from envy and material attachment.  
 Sound, or sabda pramana, is the only means to acquire transcendental knowledge.  
 Some scho lars propose that Bhagavatam refers to the Devi -bhagavatam, which also has 18 000 
verses and twelve cantos, but this statement soundly defeats their claim because the Devi -bhagavatam 
was not spoke by Sri Sukadeva Gosvami.  
 Bhagavatam is transcendental and s hould be heard whenever one has the opportunity, for a mo-
ment passed, never returns.  
 If one neglects these rules he will not understand the actual message of Srimad Bhagavatam.  
 Something is better than nothing, therefore, at least for seven days one should  follow the rules and 
regulations for hearing Srimad Bhagavatam.  As far as the devotees are concerned however, 'seven 
days' means everyday just as when people say "I do this seven days a week", and what they mean is I 
do this every day of the year.  
 Worshi p of impersonal Brahman is very difficult, and more so for the people of Kali -yuga.  There-
fore, no one should waste valuable and limited life in such a fruitless pursuit.  
 This statement is directed to the common man, for if he is instructed to hear Srimad Bhagavatam 
daily, he will immediately reject the proposal.  But after deliberation he may conclude, "If hearing it 
for only one week has so many wonderful benefits, then why not hear it everyday?"  Therefore, Saptaha 
is a preaching technique for dull peopl e.  Moreover, if one submissively hears Srimad Bhagavatam 
from a pure devotee, he will surely get free from the clutches of Maya.  There is no exaggeration in 
this statement.  
 Just hearing Srimad Bhagavatam is devotional service, but understanding it and me ditating on its 
meaning is like decorating Bhakti.  
nimna -ganam yatha ganga  
devanam acyuto yatha  
vaisnavanam yatha sambhuh  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

26 
 purananam idam tatha  
Just as the Ganga is the greatest of all rivers, Lord Acyuta the supreme among deities and Lord Sambhu 
(Siva) the  greatest of Vaishnavas, so Srimad Bhagavatam is the greatest of all Puranas.  
    (Srimad Bhagavatam 12.13.16)  
Chapter Four  
The Story of Gokarna  
Suta Gosvami continued, "O Saunaka, when the Supreme Lord, who is very dear to His devotees, saw 
transcendental  bhakti manifest within their hearts, He left His abode and appeared in the assembly at 
Ananda.  He wore a garland made of forest flowers, and His bodily hue was just like that of a monsoon 
cloud.  He was dressed in dazzling yellow garments and wore a belt  studded with gems.  A crown decorated 
His head and His earrings moved to and fro.  He stood in a beautiful threefold bending form that stole the 
hearts of everyone.  The Kaustubha gem glittered on His chest and His bodily limbs were anointed with 
sandalwo od pulp.  His exquisite beautify defeated millions of Cupids.  The transcendental Personality of 
Godhead, who held a flute, then entered the hearts of His devotees.  His intimate associates, such as Ud-
dhava, had come there incognito to hear the bhagavata -katha.  As the Lord appeared, in all directions could 
be heard "All glories! All glories!"  There was a wonderful flow of bhakti rasa, the sound of conches, and 
showers of flowers and coloured water.  The entire assembly completely forgot themselves and the ir pos-
sessions and were fully absorbed in hearing the Srimad Bhagavatam."  
 Seeing their deep absorption, Sri Narada said, "O sages, today I have seen the wonderful glory of 
Saptaha.  Even foolish rogues and animals become purified by hearing it.  I have no  doubt, therefore, that 
in Kali -yuga, bhagavata -katha is the most powerful process for purifying the heart.  O most merciful saintly 
persons, only to show kindness upon the suffering living entities in the material world have you revealed 
this wonderful pr ocess.  Now please narrate histories regarding those who have become purified by per-
forming Saptaha Yajna."1  
 The Kumaras said, "Those crooked people who always transgress the rules of the scriptures and engage 
in various types of sinful acts, burning in t he fire of anger, and are always given to lust, will be purified by 
the Saptaha Yajna.  
 Those who are outside the varnasrama system, devoid of truth, and troubled by material desires, who 
always criticise their parents, who are envious, hypocritical and be nt on giving misery to others, will be 
purified by the Saptaha Yajna.  
 Those who steal gold, drink liquor, kill brahmanas, and who have sex with the wife of their spiritual 
master, who are very cruel, merciless, treacherous, immoral, demonic, always prone to cheating and live off 
the wealth of brahmanas, will be purified by the Saptaha Yajna.  
 Those who are very obstinate and thus always engage in sinful activities with their body, mind and 
speech, who always live on the wealth of others, and whose hearts a re very impure will get purified by the 
Saptaha Yajna.  
 O Narada, in this context, I will recite a history which simply by hearing one will become free from 
sin. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

27 
  Once there was a beautiful settlement on the bank of the Tungabhadra.  The people of that cit y were 
truthful, religious and dedicated to executing their prescribed duties.  In that city lived a brahmana named 
Atma Deva, who was expert in studying the Vedas and performing karma -kanda activities.  He was brilliant 
like the sun  and although rich, he  lived by begging.  He had a beautiful wife named Dhundhuli, who came 
from a good family, but was very obstinate.  By nature she was very cruel, talkative and took great pleasure 
in gossiping with others.  although expert in household duties, she was miser ly and quarrelsome.2  This 
brahmana and his wife lived together lovingly, owning ample wealth and objects for sense enjoyment.  
Though their house was very beautiful, they were not happy because they had no son.3  As old age crept up 
on Atma Deva, he engag ed in various pious activities for getting a son.  He distributed charity to the poor 
and donated cows, land, gold, cloth and so on.  In this way he spent half of his wealth on religious activities.  
Still he could not get a child and thus he was filled wi th anxiety.  
 "One day, feeling very disheartened, he left home and went to the forest.  As the sun reached its zenith 
he was thirsty and approached a pond.  Owing to lack of progeny he was depressed, weak and tired,4 and 
after drinking he sat down to rest. 5  By and by a sannyasi came there to drink.  The brahmana approached 
him and fell at his feet breathing heavily.  The sannyasi asked, "O brahmana, why are you crying so anx-
iously?  Tell me what is your problem?"  
 The brahmana said, "O Maharaja, I am suffe ring from sins committed in my past life.  Even my fore-
fathers are in such anxiety that when I offer oblations of water, they accept, but remain full of worry.  The 
demigods and brahmanas do not happily accept my offerings of food.  I am so miserable for w ant of children 
that my life appears wasted.  I have come here to give up my useless life, as I have no son.  A house without 
children is like a forest, and wealth loses all value.  Indeed a family without children is very inauspicious.  
O Maharaja, even t he cows I acquire become barren!  When I plant a tree, it yields no fruits or flowers.  And 
when I bring fruit to my home, it spoils very quickly.  I am most unfortunate because I have no son, therefore 
my life has no purpose."  
 Saying this, the brahmana b egan crying piteously and the saint's heart became filled with compassion.6 
He was a perfected yogi and by seeing the lines on the brahmana's forehead, he could understand everything 
about his life.  
 The sannyasi said, "O brahmana, give up your attachment and desire for children, for Fate is very 
powerful.  Take shelter of discrimination and give up attachment to this world.  O brahmana, I can under-
stand your fate and am certain that you will have no son for the next seven lives.  Previously, King Sagara 
and King Anga had to suffer repeated miseries because of not having a son.  Therefore, brahmana, give up 
all hope for success in family life.  Happiness is only in the life of renunciation."  
 The brahmana said, "O Swamiji, what is the value of such discrimin ation?  There is simply no spice in 
sannyasa life.  Somehow or another give me a son, otherwise, I will plunge into lamentation and give up my 
life.  One who does not experience the happiness of wife and children lives in a desert.  Happiness exists 
only w hen the house is filled with wife, sons, and grandsons.7  
 Seeing Atma Deva's great attachment, the saint said, "O brahmana, King Citraketu had to suffer exces-
sively because he wanted to undo his fate.8  Providence is very powerful, hence none of your endea vours 
will be successful.  For this reason you will not get the happiness of a son, but I see that you are very 
obstinate, and since you have approached me desiring a son, what can I say in these circumstances?"  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

28 
  Understanding the brahmana's determination the saint offered him a fruit and said, "Your wife will 
surely get pregnant and bear you a son upon her eating this fruit.  She should follow a vow of truthfulness, 
cleanliness, mercy, and charity and eat only one meal a day for one year.  By doing so, she  will have a son 
who will be pious and righteous."  
 After saying this the sannyasi disappeared and the brahmana joyfully returned to his house.  He gave 
the fruit to his wife and left for another place.  His wife, whose nature was crooked, began crying and  spoke 
to her associate: "My dear friend, I am in great anxiety!  My husband  has brought a fruit which has the 
potency to give me a son.  If I eat it, I will become pregnant,, my womb will grow, and not being able to eat 
properly I will become weak and una ble to perform my household duties.  If by ill fortune dacoits attack, I 
will not be able to run in my pregnant condition.  And if during the time of delivery, the child gets stuck in 
the birth canal, I will lose my life.  Or if he remains in my womb for a n extended period, like Sukadeva how 
much will I have to suffer.  I am very tender by nature, how will I be able to tolerate all this?  During the 
pregnancy I will be weak, then my sister -in-law is sure to come and pilfer all my wealth.  Moreover, I will 
have to follow so many rules and regulations which will create difficulty.  Child -bearing is very painful, and 
upbringing more painful still.9  I think only barren women and widows live happily."  
 Thinking in this way she did not eat the fruit.  Yet when he r husband  asked her, she deceitfully said, 
"Yes, I have eaten it."10  
 One day her sister visited and Dhundhuli confided the whole story to her, revealing her distress.  
Dhundhuli said, "O dead sister, owing to anxiety, day by day I am becoming weaker.  Ple ase tell me what I 
should do?"  
 Her sister replied:  "I am now pregnant so when I deliver this child, I will secretly give him to you.  
Meanwhile you pose yourself as pregnant and offer some wealth to my husband , thus he will not mind 
giving his child to y ou.  Somehow or another we will arrange for everyone to think that I suffered a miscar-
riage after six months.  Later I will arrange to nourish the baby at your house.11  Now, to test this fruit, let 
us give it to this cow."  
 Dhundhuli fed the fruit to a co w and in due course her sister gave birth to a son.  The child's father 
quietly delivered it to Dhundhuli who informed Atma Deva that she had delivered a son.  hearing this Atma 
Deva became very jubilant.  he performed the birth ceremony along with various  other auspicious activities, 
gave charity to the brahmanas, and arranged musicians to celebrate the birth of his son.  
 Dhundhuli said to her husband , "There is no milk in my breast and I think it is not possible to feed 
cow's milk to the child yet.  What shall I do?  My sister's child was still -born so if you call her, she can 
breast -feed my son."  
 Atma Deva took her suggestion, and Dhundhuli named the boy Dhundhukari.  After three more months 
the cow that ate the fruit also delivered a beautiful human chi ld.  He was peaceful and divine looking and 
his face was very brilliant.  Seeing this, the brahmana became very ecstatic.12  He performed all the appro-
priate ceremonies for this new baby.  Hearing this, all the people were astonished and all came to see th e 
baby born of the cow.  They started talking among themselves, "Just see how fortunate Atma Deva has 
become.  Even his cow has borne him a son!"  
 By the will of the Divine  no one could understand the secret behind the intrigue.  Atma Deva named 
the cow's  son Gokarna because his ears resembled those of a cow.  In time both boys grew up.  Gokarna 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

29 
 was intelligent and scholarly, while Dhundhukari was a rogue.  He would not perform any brahmanical 
duties or follow the rules of cleanliness.  he used no discrimi nation when eating and was irate.  He would 
accumulate useless articles and would even eat food touched by a dead body.  He was expert in stealing and 
envious of others.  Sometimes he would quietly go and set fire to another's house, or he would abduct a b aby 
and throw it in a well.  He took pleasure in violent activities and always carried weapons.  He happily 
troubled blind and handicapped people and kept special friendships with candalas.  He also kept a pack of 
dogs and would often go hunting.  He was a ttached to prostitutes and thus he wasted all his father's wealth.  
One day he severely beat his parents, took all the pots and utensils in the house and sold them.  In this way, 
all of Atma Deva's property was lost.  he began lamenting, "Alas! alas! I was  better off when my wife was 
barren!  Oh! to have a rascal son is worse than having no son at all.  Where shall I go?  What shall I do?  
Who will help me in this unfavourable situation?  O misery!  I am being tormented by my own son and I'm 
prepared to giv e up my life!13  
 While he lamented in this way, Gokarna arrived and began instructing him:14  "O father, this world is 
full of delusion and misery, and is useless.  You should deliberate upon who is the real owner of sons and 
wealth.  Those who are attache d to material things burn day and night like a ghee lamp.  Neither Lord Indra 
nor the emperor of the whole universe can find happiness.  Only those who are renounced and live in a 
solitary place have peace.  Therefore give up this ignorance, thinking that this is your wife, this is your son, 
and so on.  Owing to such delusion one goes to hell.  This body will one day be lost, therefore, go and live 
in the forest."  
 Hearing the words of Gokarna, Atma Deva decided to go to the forest.  He asked, "My dear son,  please 
explain what I should do in the forest.  I am very foolish and very much attached to karma -kanda activities.  
Now I have lost everything and am bound in this well of household life.  You are very merciful - please 
deliver me."  
 Gokarna said, "O fat her, this body is nothing but a combination of bones, fat, blood, and flesh.  There-
fore, do not consider that you are this body and that this wife and children are yours.  Day and night meditate 
on the ephemeral nature of this material world and thus do no t become attached to anything.  Become re-
nounced and perform devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead.  Devotion is the greatest religion, 
therefore take shelter of it, and give up all other material religious principles.  Render service to saint ly 
people and give up all thoughts of sense gratification and greed for wealth.  Do not meditate on the defects 
of others, fully engage in the service of the Lord, and always drink the nectar of His holy pastimes."  
 Influenced by the preaching of his son, Atma Deva left home and though he was sixty years old went 
to the forest with great determination.  Day and night he remained engaged in the service of the Lord.15  He 
regularly recited the tenth canto of Srimad Bhagavatam until finally he attained the lot us feet of Lord Sri 
Krsna.  
Comments on Chapter Four  
 After explaining a particular philosophical conclusion, (siddhanta), it is customary to corroborate 
it with an example.  This strengthens the faith of the audience.  
 While this is a true story, it has a ph ilosophical interpretation.  Atma Deva (lit. divine soul) is the 
living entity.  Tungabhadra (very auspicious) signifies the material body.  In Bhagavad -gita (5.13) the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

30 
 material body is compared to a city of nine gates which hosts the living entity.  This city is very auspi-
cious, because it gives facility to understand the scriptures and thus attain the lotus feet of the Lord.  
Although it is temporary, it can award permanent benefits, adhruva -marthadam (S.B. 7.6.1).  
o Karma -kanda activities signify all endea vours for sense gratification.  Some people work 
hard to enjoy in this life, and others to enjoy in the next.  A person is rich because he can elevate 
himself to spiritual life.  but one is called krpana or miserly, if he uses his intelligence and energy 
for sense pleasure, which is available even to dogs and hogs.  
o Dhundhuli (lit. unclear) represents the intelligence which should work under the guidance of 
the soul.  However, if she henpecks her husband , the living entity, he becomes like her slave.  
Contam inated intelligence takes pleasure in material thoughts which are compared to gossiping.  
Hatred and envy are compared to cruelty and quarrelling.  Material intelligence is expertly used 
in material affairs (household duties).  
 Happiness does not depend on wealth.  Everyone remains dissatisfied despite his high or low 
material standards.  
 A materialistic person is always full of stress and anxiety running after sense pleasure, like a deer 
running after the water in a mirage.  
 Drinking water and relaxing repres ents temporarily stopping material pursuits.  This is compared 
to shifting a heavy load from one shoulder to the other, it gives only a momentary feeling of relief.  
 The sannyasi signifies the spiritual master.  
 Generally a materialistic person approaches a guru to satisfy his own material desires.  The intel-
ligence develops discrimination only through holy association, but when the intelligence is overly at-
tached to sense pleasure, one cannot understand the value of detachment or transcendental knowledge.  
Such people consider devotional life extremely miserable.  
 Unless one takes to spiritual life he  must suffer or enjoy the fruits of his past karma.  
 The general tendency of the human being is to enjoy the fruits of labour without undergoing any 
endeavour.  T his is compared to a woman desiring to bear a son without labour pains.  
 Material intelligence always cheats the living entity.  
 The sister signifies the mind.  The mind and intelligence conspire against the conditioned soul.  
 A materialistic person feels ela ted with material success, but it does not last very long.  
 In the Bhagavad -gita Lord Krsna explains that happiness in the mode of passion is like a nectar in 
the beginning and poison at the end; it always ends in misery.  
 Gokarna was born from the fruit giv en by the sannyasi, thus the association of a saint never goes 
in vain.  Even if one approaches a devotee or Krsna with vested interest, he will benefit spiritually in 
due course of time.  
 Practice with determination and enthusiasm is the key to success.  
yasyam vai sruyamanayam  
krsne parama -puruse  
bhaktir utpadyate pumsah  
soka-moha -bhayapaha  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

31 
 Simply by giving aural reception to this Vedic literature, the feeling for loving devotional service to Lord 
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sprouts up at onc e to extinguish the fire of lamentation, illusion 
and fearfulness.  
    Srimad Bhagavatam 1.7.7  
Chapter Five  
Dhundhukari gets a ghostly body and is delivered by Gokarna  
Suta Gosvami said, "O Saunaka, one day, after Atma Deva went to the forest, Dhundhukari beat his 
mother severely, demanded her wealth and threatened to burn her.  Being overly troubled and afraid of her 
son, one  night Dhundhuli stole out of the house, threw herself into a well and drowned.  The saintly Go-
karna, who was not troubled by happin ess or distress and did not consider anyone his friend or enemy, left 
to go on pilgrimage.  
 Dhundhukari remained living in their house with five prostitutes and constantly worried how to accu-
mulate wealth for sense gratification.1  Owing to this he lost al l his intelligence and thus engaged in cruel 
and heinous activities.2   
 One day the prostitutes requested that he give them various ornaments.  Dhundhukari completely 
blinded by lust and forgetful of death, left to fulfil their desire by hook or crook.  I n his attempt to please 
them, he stole some wealth and used it to buy beautiful clothes and ornaments.  After receiving the stolen 
goods, one night the prostitutes began to consider, "Dhundhukari is always plundering others and in time 
will surely get caug ht by the king, who will confiscate his wealth and hang him.  We might as well kill him 
ourselves, take his wealth and move to a distant place."  Thinking in this way, one night while Dhundhukari 
was sleeping, they tied him with ropes, put a noose around h is neck and tried to strangle him.  he would not 
die easily and this worried the prostitutes.3  They then brought burning wood, shoved it into his mouth.  The 
wood burned him to death and they buries his dead body.  Indeed women are very courageous and it is 
difficult to understand their mind.  No one could understand what happened to Dhundhukari.  When asked, 
the prostitutes said he had gone far away to collect some wealth and would return after a year.  
 An intelligent person should never believe an unchas te woman.  Any foolish man who  puts his faith 
in such women will suffer like Dhundhukari.  The voice of an unchaste woman appears as sweet as nectar 
to a lusty man.  Actually her heart is as sharp as a razor.  Unchaste women have no love for anyone - they 
only value wealth.  The prostitutes, who had experienced many lovers, thus took all Dhundhukari's wealth 
and disappeared.  
 Owing to his misdeeds Dhundhukari attained a ghost body,4 and remaining within a whirlwind wan-
dered here and there suffering from hu nger and thirst, and lamenting his misfortune.  He could find no 
shelter anywhere.  After some time the news of Dhundukari's death reached Gokarna, so he went to Gaya 
to perform sraddha, considering his brother destitute.  Later, while travelling to the ho ly places, Gokarna 
reached his home town and hiding from everyone, went to his former house to pass the night.  Dhundhukari's 
ghost observed Gokarna return so he assumed very fierce forms and appeared before him.  sometimes he 
took the form of a dreadful s heep, then an elephant, or a buffalo, or like Indra sometimes like fire.5  Finally 
he appeared as a human being.  Seeing this, Gokarna realised that a ghost must be making this display.  With 
courage and patience he spoke, "Who are you?  Why are you exhibi ting all these fearsome forms?  How did 
you fall into this condition?  Tell me clearly are you a ghost, goblin, or a demon?"  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

32 
  Suta Gosvami said, "When Gokarna questioned him, the ghost started crying loudly.  He did not have 
the power to speak, so he gestu red with his hands.  Gokarna sprinkled some water on the ghost.  This relieved 
him of enough sinful reactions that he was able to speak.  "I am your brother Dhundhukari," the ghost said.  
"Because of my misdeeds I have fallen from my respectable birth as a  brahmana.  Owing to complete igno-
rance I killed many people.  It is not possible to count my sins.  I was addicted to five prostitutes who finally 
killed me, and as a result I am suffering the reactions for my ill activities and have thus gotten this ghos t 
body.  Somehow, by the will of the Lord, I am now surviving only on air.  My dear brother, you are an ocean 
of mercy.  Please somehow deliver me from this ghostly form."  
 Gokarna replied, "Dear brother, I am very surprised.  I duly performed oblations fo r you in Gaya and 
it is a wonder that you still have not been relieved from this ghostly form.  If you cannot be delivered by 
performing sacrifice in Gaya, then I do not know what to do.  Tell me what is the solution?"  
 The ghost said, "I cannot be relieve d of this condition even by the performance of hundreds of sraddhas 
at Gaya.  You must think of some more powerful practice."  
 Gokarna, astonished to hear this, said, "If you cannot be delivered by hundreds of sraddhas in Gaya, 
then your liberation is prac tically impossible.  anyway, do not fear.  Stay here and I will think of some 
procedure to deliver you."  
 The ghost left and Gokarna passed the night in deep thought but did not discover a solution.  The next 
morning many people including scholars, savants , knowers of the Vedas, and yogis came to see him and he 
explained the incident which had occurred the previous night.  They all consulted their particular scriptures 
but could not suggest a suitable means to deliver Dhundhukari.  They finally decided to f ollow whatever 
Surya -narayana, the sun -god would order.  By the power of his accumulated penance, Gokarna checked the 
movements of the sun -god and prayed, "O Lord, you are the witness of the whole universe, I offer my 
obeisances unto you.  Please be mercif ul and tell me the process to deliver Dhundhukari."  
 The sun -god replied, "Only one thing can be done to deliver him - recitation of Srimad Bhagavatam 
for one week."  
 The assembly heard this statement of the sun -god and agreed that this simple process shou ld be exe-
cuted.  Thus the news spread that Gokarna would perform the Saptaha Yajna.  From the nearby villages 
many people came who were lame, blind, aged and less intelligent, all had the desire to become free from 
their sins.  Such a crowd assembled that even the demigods were surprised.6  Gokarna took his seat on the 
vyasasana and began reciting the pastimes of Lord Krsna as described in the Bhagavatam.  At that time the 
ghost also came and searched for a place to sit.  Because he had an airy body he coul d not sit outside, so he 
entered a bamboo rod which had seven knots and thus began hearing Srimad Bhagavatam.  
 After Gokarna appointed one Vaisnava brahmana as the chief of the assembly, in a clear sweet voice 
he started reciting Srimad Bhagavatam from the  first canto.  That evening during a pause in the katha, a 
wonderful incident occurred.  The people in the assemble noticed that one of the knots in the bamboo 
cracked and burst.  In this way, at the end of each day, a knot would burst and on the seventh d ay, when the 
recitation was complete, all the knots were cracked.  Dhundhukari was delivered from his ghostly form.7  
He attained a divine body, which was blackish like rain clouds.  He was clad in yellow garments, a Tulasi 
garland around his neck, a crown  adorning his head and beautiful earrings dangling from his ears.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

33 
  He immediately offered obeisances to Gokarna and said, "My dear brother, by your mercy I have been 
released from the ghostly body.  This ceremony of Saptaha is so glorious that it can destr oy ghostly forms 
and elevate one to the abode of Lord Krsna.  When a person starts hearing the Saptaha, sins tremble in fear 
anticipating that the bhagavatam -katha will burn them to ashes.  In the same way that fire burns a twig or a 
tree so, this Saptaha burns all big or small sins, performed with the body, mind and speech.  Scholars in the 
assembly of demigods have said that the lives of those Indians who do not hear Srimad Bhagavatam are an 
utter waste.  What is the value of making this temporary body st out and strong?  If one does not hear Srimad 
Bhagavatam, then there is no gain from this so -called beautiful body?  This body is supported by bones, 
which are like pillars and tied together with the ropes of nerves and veins.  It is covered with skin and i s 
filled with flesh and every part reeks being nothing more than a pot of stool and urine.  In old age it is the 
cause of lamentation and misery.  Indeed it is a residence of ailments and to maintain it is a great burden.  It 
is continuously troubled by de sires that can never be satisfied.  Every pore is full of defects and it can be 
destroyed within a moment.  When buried, it is eaten by worms; if thrown out, it is eaten by vultures and 
transformed into stool; and if burned, it turns to ashes.  Indeed thes e are the only destinations of this body.  
who is that sane person who will not utilise this temporary body to gain permanent benefit?  Food which is 
cooked in the morning is putrid by evening, so how can this body be considered eternal, since it is nouris hed 
by elements that decompose?  
 In this material world people can very quickly attain the lotus feet of the Lord by hearing Bhagavata 
Saptaha.  This is the only means to get rid of the defects of human birth.  Those people who do not hear 
bhagavata -katha are just like bubbles in water, or like mosquitoes, who take birth only to die uselessly.  If 
this bhagavata -katha can burst the knots of bamboo, then why can it not burst those in the heart?  By hearing 
Srimad Bhagavatam, one's doubts are removed, the kar ma is slackened and one becomes relieved of the 
knots in the heart.  Bhagavata -katha is like a tirtha that cleanses one from all impurities.  Scholars say that 
when the Bhagavatam becomes fixed in the heart, one's liberation is definite."  
 When Dhundhukari  was speaking in this way, the sky became effulgent and a Vaikuntha airplane ap-
peared carrying associates of the Lord.8  In front of the whole assembly, Dhundhukari boarded the airplane.  
 Gokarna posed a question, "O dear associates of the Lord, in this as sembly there are many pure heart 
people and all of them heard the Bhagavata Saptaha.  Why is it that this airplane has come exclusively for 
Dhundhukari?  Why are the others not getting the same result?"  
 The servants of the Lord spoke, "O Gokarna, the diff erence lies in the quality of their hearing.  Although 
it is true that everyone heard the katha, everyone did not meditate on it equally.  For this reason the results 
of performing bhajana or devotional service are different.9  The ghost fasted for seven d ays and heard Bha-
gavatam with a completely fixed and attentive mind.  That knowledge which is not stable is useless.  In the 
same way, if one does not hear attentively or if one harbours doubts or lets his mind wander here and there, 
then he will not get t he benefit of chanting his mantra.  Land devoid of Vaisnavas, Sraddha offered to 
unqualified persons, charity given to ill behaved brahmanas who do not know the Vedas, are all useless.  
Faith in the words of the spiritual master, humility, control of the m ind's defects and attentive hearing of 
bhagavata -katha all grant the full result.  If one hears the Bhagavatam attentively he certainly attains Vaikun-
tha.  O Gokarna, as far as you are concerned, the Lord Himself will come to take you to Goloka."  Thereaft er 
the associates of the Lord, performing hari -kirtana ascended to the Vaikuntha.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

34 
  In the month of Sravana Gokarna again performed the Saptaha Yajna of Srimad Bhagavatam and those 
people listened to it.  
 O Narada, please listen what happened at the end of that Saptaha.  The Lord appeared in a plane filled 
with devotees.  From all quarters could be heard, "All glories! All glories!" and people were paying obei-
sances.  The Lord blew His conch shell named Pancajanya and embraced Gokarna.  In a moment He grante d 
everyone who listened to the Srimad Bhagavatam a body just like His own.  They all acquired a blackish 
body and wore yellow garments, helmets and earrings.  By the mercy of Gokarna all the living entities in 
that village, including dogs and even the dog -eaters, ascended in that airship.  They were carried to the place 
where only devotees go --the abode of the Lord.  
 In this way, Lord Krsna being very pleased by His katha took Gokarna with Him to Goloka Dhama, 
which is most dear to the cowherd people.  In t he past Lord Ramacandra took all the residents of Ayodhya 
to His abode, Saketa.10  In the same way, Lord Krsna took everyone to Goloka Dhama, which is not attained 
even by great yogis,, the Sun God, Moon God, or even perfected beings, but is attained only by hearing 
Srimad Bhagavatam.  O Narada, what can we say about the wonderful result which one attains by hearing 
Bhagavata -Saptaha?  Even those who have heard a fraction of the history of Gokarna do not take birth again.  
That destination which can not be attained by those who live on air, water or dry leaves, executing extended 
penance or the practice of yoga, is easily attained simply by hearing Bhagavata -Saptaha.  The great sage 
Sandilya, who is always absorbed in transcendental bliss, engages in recitin g this pious history at 
Citrakuta.11  This story is so purifying that anyone who hears it even once becomes free from all sin.  If it 
is recited during the Sraddha ceremony, the forefathers are very pleased.  Anyone who recites Srimad Bha-
gavatam daily atta ins liberation.  
Comments on Chapter Five :  
 Dhundhukari represents the materialistic man.  The five prostitutes indicate the five senses which 
always demand their respective objects and cause the living entity to work hard for their satisfaction.  
 When a per son is attached to sense gratification he is almost crazy and loses all sense of morality.  
 Demoniac people do not die easily.  They suffer immense pain even in their sojourn to Yamaloka.  
 A sinful person is like a ghost while living and becomes a ghost afte r death.  
 Human beings have an unstable mind in a stable body, but ghosts have an unstable mind in an 
unstable body.  
 The demigods were surprised, because they had not seen such gatherings even in big sacrifices 
that were considered highly religious.  
 The bam boo with seven knots represents the material body comprised of five gross material ele-
ments and the mind and false ego, all of which cover and bind the living entity.  it can also represent 
the material body which is seven vitasti in height.  A vitasti is the distance between tip of the little 
finger and the tip of the thumb on an outstretched hand.  Every normal person's body is the length of 
seven vitasti of his own had.  The even knots can also refer to ignorance, lust, anger, greed, delusion, 
pride and envy.  
 This narration should not be considered as a fable or exaggerated.  Even in modern times such 
effects of hearing Srimad Bhagavatam have been witnessed.  
 Consciousness is the most important factor in devotional service.  
 This story is narrated in the Va lmiki Ramayana.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

35 
  This is sadhu pramana.  
Chapter Six  
The Process of Saptaha Yajna  
The Kumaras said, "O Narada, now we will explain the process of performing Saptaha.  Generally this 
process requires wealth and the assistance of others.1  First one should det ermine an auspicious times with 
the help of a good astrologer.  If the Saptaha begins in the months of Bhadra, Asvina, Kartika, Margasirsa, 
Asadha or Sravana, the audience will get liberation.2  Even during these months, however, inauspicious 
periods such as Bhadra vyatipata should be avoided.  
 With the help of enthusiastic people, one should acquire as much wealth as needed to perform a mar-
riage ceremony.  he should then graciously invite various families, including women and sudras, to hear 
Hari-katha.3  One should publicly announce the event and send written invitations to Vaisnavas and other 
lovers of Hari -kirtana.  
 One should announce in writing that for seven day the rare opportunity to hear the transcendental mes-
sage of Srimad Bhagavatam and to associ ate with saintly persons is being  made available.  it should be 
explained that if one is unable to attend for the entire period, he should come for at least one day to give 
blessings.  In this way one should humbly send invitations to Vaisnavas and make p roper arrangements for 
their board and lodging.  
 The recitation of Bhagavatam should be done either in a holy place, a forest, or in one's house.  It 
should be performed on an open ground that is properly cleaned and decorated.  if performed in one's house , 
all household articles should be removed from the room used for the recitation.  
 One should start making arrangements five days in advance.  A nice podium should be arranged and 
decorated with fruits, leaves, flowers, banana trees, and so forth.  On the stage one should imagine the seven 
planetary systems.  Proper seats should be offered to saintly persons and there should be a nice vyasasana 
for the speaker.  
 It is the opinion of scholars that if the speaker faces north, the audience should face eastward s; if the 
speaker faces east, the audience should face  north; or both can face the east.  
 The speaker should be learned, expert, and able to explain the essence of Vedic literature and give 
proper examples.  He should be a renounced brahmana, a devotee of  the Lord and free from material desires.  
Those who are cheaters, attached to women, and who do not know the essence of religion, should not be 
invited to speak on Srimad Bhagavatam.  The speaker may have a learned assistant to remove doubts when-
ever nece ssary.  
 One day before the recitation the speaker should shave his head.  He should take morning bath, chant 
Gayatri, perform other morning duties and then worship Ganesa for removing any obstacles in the Saptaha 
Yajna.  He should offer oblations to the fo refathers, perform prayascitta, and establish Lord Hari on the 
Mandala.  Thereafter, he should worship Lord Krsna by chanting proper mantras and offer sixteen articles 
of worship.  He should circumambulate the Lord and beseech Him in the following way, "O most merciful 
Lord, I am drowning in the ocean of this material world.  I am very fallen and caught in the network of 
karma, which is like a crocodile.  Please deliver me from this world."  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

36 
  Following the procedure, he should then worship Srimad Bhagavatam with incense, ghee lamp, and so 
on.  He should place one coconut in front of the book, pay obeisances, and offer the following prayer:  "O 
Lord Krsna, You are directly the Srimad Bhagavatam.  I take shelter of You so I can free myself from this 
world.  Ple ase remove all obstacles so this ceremony may be successfully completed.  O Lord Kesava, I am 
your servant."  
 Thereafter, the host should worship the speaker, give him nice cloth, and offer the following prayer, 
"You are the personification of Sukadeva and  are expert in explaining the meaning of Srimad Bhagavatam.  
Please reveal this knowledge to us and dispel our ignorance.  
 Then in a blissful mood, one should take a vow for his own good and maintain it for seven days without 
fail.4  To dispel all obstacle s in the katha, five brahmanas should be selected to daily chant the twelve 
syllable mantra composed of names of Lord Hari.  After this, the host should worship the brahmanas, the 
devotees, and give charity to the kirtana performers.  He should offer them obeisances and with their per-
mission, be seated.  
 Those who hear the katha attentively, with great faith and a pure mind, who have give up attachment 
to home, wealth, family, and so on, will receive the highest benefit.  
 The intelligent speaker will start the katha at sunrise and continue for nine hours.  He should recite in 
a sweet medium tone and observe a one hour lapse at noon.  During this interim the Vaisnavas should glorify 
the various names of Lord Hari associated with the particular history being n arrated and there should be no 
idle talk.  To avoid passing stool and urine during the time of katha, one should consume only light food.  If 
possible, one should fast for seven days, or subsist only on ghee, or milk and happily listen to the Bha-
gavatam.  Alternatively one can eat once a day or subsist only on fruit.  One should observe a procedure that 
can be followed without much difficulty.  I consider eating better than fasting if it helps one concentrate and 
hear properly.  If fasting disturbs one's he aring, then he should avoid it.  
 O Narada, now listen to the principles to be observed while hearing Saptaha.  A person who is not 
initiated into Vaisnava mantra is not qualified to hear it.  A person who wants to properly hear the Saptaha 
should observe c elibacy and sleep on the floor.  After the recitation he should eat food served on leaves.  He 
should not eat dhal, honey, oil, heavy, stale, or contaminated food.  
 He should completely avoid lust, pride, greed, envy, anger, illusion, hypocrisy and so on.  He should 
also avoid criticising or hearing criticism of the Vedas, Vaisnavas, brahmanas, the guru, women, the king, 
great personalities, or those who render service to the cow.  
 He should also avoid contacting women during menstruation, a mleccha, a fall en person, a brahmana 
who is not initiated into Gayatri mantra, those who are antagonistic toward brahmanas, and those who do 
not accept the Vedas.  He should always be clean, truthful, silent, simple, humble, merciful and generous.  
 Even those who are poo r, sick, unfortunate, childless, and desirous of liberation, are qualified to hear 
this katha.  Women who are barren, who have only one child, whose child had died, who have reached 
menopause, or who always suffer miscarriages, should also hear this katha.   If they hear attentively, they 
will attain imperishable benefit.  The recitation of Bhagavatam gives the highest benefit to the human being.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

37 
  After observing these rules, one should perform the concluding ceremony of the Saptaha.  Those who 
desire specia l benefit should observe this just like the Janmastami celebration.  However, it is not necessary 
for renunciates to observe it.5  They are purified just by hearing the Saptaha.  
 When the Saptaha Yajna is over, the audience should worship the book and the speaker with great 
devotion.  The speaker should distribute prasada, Tulasi leaves, and the offered garlands to the audience.  
Everyone should perform kirtana with mrdanga and karatalas and sing with beautiful voices.  The Jaya 
Dhvani should be chanted, ob eisances should be offered, conches should be blown, and food and charity 
should be distributed to the brahmanas and beggars.  
 On the following day a renounced person from the audience should recite Bhagavad -gita to create 
peace and remove all improprietie s.  If one is a householder, he should perform a sacrifice, recite slokas 
from the tenth canto, and offer oblations to the fire.  Or he should chant Gayatri mantra with a concentrated 
mind and perform sacrifice.  In reality, Srimad Bhagavatam is the person ification of the Gayatri mantra.  
 A person who does not have the means to perform sacrifice, should give charity to the brahmanas and 
recite Visnu sahasranama, to remove all deficiencies.  This will bring him all success.  Thereafter he should 
fee twelve b rahmanas with sweet rice, honey, and delicious foodstuffs.  He should give cows and gold in 
charity.  If he has the means, he should place the Srimad Bhagavatam on a throne made of thirty -six grams 
of gold and donate it to the spiritual master.  By this he  will become free from the cycle of birth and death.  
 This process of performing Saptaha removes all sins.  If performed properly, the most auspicious Bha-
gavatam will bestow whatever one desires, be it dharma, artha, kama or moksa.6  There is no doubt abou t 
it." 
 The Kumaras continued, "O Narada, in this way I have explained hearing Bhagavatam -Saptaha.  The 
Srimad Bhagavatam can deliver both bhoga and moksa.  What more do you want to know?"  
 Suta Gosvami said, "O Saunaka, after saying this, the Kumaras reci ted Srimad Bhagavatam for one 
week.  This is most pure, dispels all sins, and is capable of granting sense enjoyment as well as liberation.  
While they observed all the rules and regulations, the assembly listened attentively.  After this, they wor-
shipped the Personality of Godhead according to the scriptural injunctions.  After recitation, Jnana, Vair-
agya, and Bhakti were rejuvenated.  Being young and enthusiastic, they attracted the hearts of all living 
entities.7  Seeing his desire fulfilled, Narada Muni  was completely absorbed in bliss and his hairs stood up 
in ecstasy.  
 Narada, who is very dear to the Lord, spoke to the Kumaras in a sweet loving voice with folded hands, 
"Indeed I am very fortunate to get your mercy.  Today I have attained Lord Hari who is the dispeller of sins.  
O austere sages, hearing this Bhagavatam is the best religious act, as by doing so, one attains Lord Krsna, 
who always resides in Goloka."  
 Suta Gosvami said, "O Saunaka, while the topmost Vaisnava, Narada, was speaking in this w ay, 
Sukadeva Gosvami, the best of the yogis appeared there.  He was completely satisfied within himself and 
looked just like a sixteen year old youth.  He appeared like a full moon to bring tide in the ocean of 
knowledge.  He was blissfully reciting Bhagav atam in a very low voice.  Upon seeing Sukadeva Gosvami, 
the entire assembly stood up and offered him an elevated seat.  Then Sri Narada Muni worshipped him with 
love and affection."  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

38 
  When Sukadeva Gosvami was comfortably seated, he said, "Dear ones, pleas e hear my words.  O 
devotees who taste devotional mellows, Srimad Bhagavatam is the mature fruit of the wish fulfilling tree of 
the Vedas.  It has come from my mouth and is full of nectar.  This fruit has no skin or stone -- it is pure 
nectar and is easily  available only on earth.8  Therefore, as long as you are conscious, please drink it again 
and again.  
 "The great sage Vyasa compiled this Maha Purana which describes the highest religious process, and 
is free from all cheating propensities.  It explains t he absolute reality and is meant for those whose hearts 
are pure.  It relieves one of the three miseries.  If one takes shelter of the Srimad Bhagavatam, there is no 
need for any other scripture or process.  Whenever a pious soul desires to hear it, the Pe rsonality of Godhead 
immediately appears within his heart.  
 Srimad Bhagavatam is the crest -jewel among the Puranas and the wealth of the Vaisnavas.  It describes 
that pure knowledge is dear to the paramahamsas and illuminates the path of detachment along w ith Bhakti, 
Jnana and Vairagya.9  Those who hear, read, or meditate on its meaning, are liberated.  This nectar is not 
available in heaven, Satya -loka, Kailasa, or Vaikuntha.  Therefore, O fortunate listeners, please drink it 
again and again and never leav e it."  
 Suta Gosvami said, "While Sri Sukadeva spoke in the midst of that assembly, Lord Hari appeared along 
with Prahlada, Bali, Uddhava, Arjuna and other associates.10  Sri Narada then worshipped the Lord along 
with His devotees.  Seeing the Lord in a bl issful mood, Narada Muni gave Him a nice seat and then everyone 
performed kirtana.  Lord Siva, Parvati, and Lord Brahma came there to listen.  Prahlada, who is very swift, 
played the karatalas and Uddhava played big cymbals.  Narada Muni played his vina an d Arjuna, who is 
adept in ragas, sang melodiously.  Indra played the mrdanga, and the Kumaras shouted Jaya! Jaya!  Sri 
Sukadeva Gosvami moved his limbs in an ecstatic trance.  In the midst of everyone, Bhakti, Jnana and 
Vairagya danced like expert actors."  
 Observing this, the Lord said, "I am very pleased with this recitation and kirtana.  all of you have 
controlled Me by your love and affection therefore you may ask some boon from Me."  
 Everyone was pleased to hear this and with love -laden hearts they req uested, "O Lord, we desire that 
whenever and wherever there is recitation of the Saptaha, You kindly appear along with your associates."  
 The Lord said, "Let it be so", and then disappeared.  After that Narada Muni paid obeisances in the 
direction which th e Lord and His devotees departed.  He offered obeisances to Sukadeva Gosvami and the 
assembled saints.  Everyone was in ecstasy after drinking the nectar of Srimad Bhagavatam and were free 
from delusion.  Thereafter, everyone returned to their respective p laces.  
 At that time Sri Sukadeva Gosvami established Bhakti and her two sons in the Srimad Bhagavatam.  
By rendering service to the Bhagavatam Lord Hari becomes fixed in. he heart of the Vaisnavas.  The Srimad 
Bhagavatam bestows auspiciousness to those bu rning in misery, troubled by Maya, or drowning in an ocean 
of nescience.  
 Saunaka asked, "O Suta Gosvami, when did Sukadeva recite the Bhagavatam to Pariksita, Gokarna to 
Dhundhukari, and the Kumaras to Narada Muni?"  
 Suta Gosvami replied, "About thirty ye ars after Lord Krsna's departure to His abode,11 on the ninth 
day of the bright fortnight in the month of Bhadra, Sukadeva recited Bhagavatam to Pariksita.  Two hundred 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

39 
 years later in the month of Asadha, on the ninth day of the bright fortnight Gokarna re cited Bhagavatam to 
Dhundhukari.  Thirty years later, in the month of Kartika on the ninth day of the bright fortnight, the Ku-
maras recited it to Narada Muni.  
 "O sinless Saunaka, I have replied to everything you have asked.  Bhagavata -katha is the panacea  for 
all problems in Kali -yuga.  All of you are saintly, therefore, please drink it.  Bhagavatam destroys all sins 
and is very dear to Lord Krsna.  It increases one's devotion and is the only means to attain liberation.  What 
is the value of serving the ho ly places or engaging in other processes of liberation?  
 When the Yamadutas are sent to arrest someone with ropes Yamaraja instructs them, 'Don't approach 
those who are maddened by hearing the pastimes of Lord Hari.  I do not have the power to chastise the m, 
for Vaisnavas are beyond my jurisdiction.'  
 "The nectar which came from the mouth of Sukadeva Gosvami brings all auspciousness to those who 
are attached to the poison of sense gratification.  My dear friends, why wander in the forest of sense enjoy-
ment and hear useless talks?  As soon as this katha enters the ears, one is liberated.  The proof is Pariksita 
Maharaja.  
 Sri Sukadeva Gosvami spoke the Bhagavatam while in ecstasy.  anyone who recites the Bhagavatam 
is qualified to go to Vaikuntha.  O Saunaka,  after studying the various scriptures, I have revealed this secret 
to you.  This is the essence of all scriptures.  There is nothing superior to this Bhagavatam which was spoken 
by Sukadeva Gosvami.  
 For the attainment of transcendental bliss, you should always drink the Bhagavatam which is composed 
of twelve cantos.  anyone who hears the Bhagavatam from the lips of a devotee, with faith, and a pure heart, 
or recites it to the devotees, will attain the supreme goal.  In the three worlds there is nothing un attainable 
for them.  
Comments on Chapter Six  
 Generally karma -kanda activities and spiritual festivals require the assistance and co -operation of 
other people.  
 An auspicious time is not required for performing pure devotional service, but sometimes devotees  
follow such rules to set a good example.  
 Women and sudras are not allowed to hear the Vedas, but there is no such restriction for Srimad 
Bhagavatam, although it is considered the mature fruit of the Vedas.  In the same way there are re-
strictions for chant ing Vedic mantras, but none for chanting the holy name of the Lord, which is the 
essence of Vedic mantras.  
 Vows help one to control the flickering mind.  
 The concluding ceremony requires great wealth, which renunciates cannot afford, therefore, it is 
not co mpulsory for him."  
 Because Srimad Bhagavatam is the personification of Lord Krsna, it can fulfil ones material as 
well as spiritual desires.  
 It means that after hearing Srimad Bhagavatam, one develops a taste for Bhakti, Jnana and Vair-
agya.  
 Srimad Bhagavat am is like a very juicy fruit.  Though it is a fruit, it has no skin or stone.  And 
though it is only juice, it is a fruit.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

40 
  Detachment without bhakti is worthless.  
 The Lord is omnipresent and manifests Himself wherever His devotees sing His glories.  
 Lord S ri Krsna left the earth 5 091 years ago.  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

41 
 Canto  1: Creation  
SB 1.1: Questions by the Sages  
O my Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, son of Vasudeva, O 
all pervading Personality of God head, I offer 
my respectful obeisances unto You. I meditate 
upon Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa because He is the Abso-
lute Truth and the primeval cause of all causes 
of the creation, sustenance and destruction of 
the manifested universes. He is directly and in-
directly conscious of all manifestations, and He 
is independent because there is no other cause 
beyond Him. It is He only who first imparted 
the Vedic knowledge unto the heart of 
Brahmājī, the original living being. By Him 
even the great sages and demigods are placed 
into illusion, as one is bewildered by the illu-
sory representations of water seen in fire, or 
land seen on water. Only because of Him do the 
material universes, tempor arily manifested by 
the reactions of the three modes of nature, ap-
pear factual, although they are unreal. I there-
fore meditate upon Him, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who 
is eternal ly existent in the transcendental 
abode, which is forever free from the illusory 
representations of the material world. I medi-
tate upon Him, for He is the Absolute Truth.  (1) 
Completely rejecting all religious activities 
which are materially motivated, thi s Bhāgavata  
Purāṇa propounds the highest truth, which is 
understandable by those devotees who are fully 
pure in heart. The highest truth is reality distin-
guished from illusion for the welfare of all. 
Such truth uproots the threefold miseries. This 
beautiful Bhāgavatam , compiled by the great 
sage Vyāsadeva [in his maturity], is sufficient 
in itself for God realization. What is the need of 
any other scripture? As soo n as one attentively 
and submissively hears the message of 
Bhāgavatam , by this culture of knowledge the 
Supreme Lord is established within his 
heart. (2) 
O expert and thoughtful men, relish Śrīmad  
Bhāgavatam , the mature fruit of the desire tree 
of Vedic literatures. It emanated from the lips 
of Śrī Śukadeva  Gosvāmī. Therefore this fruit 
has become even more tasteful, although its 
nectarean juice was already relishable for all, 
including liberated souls. (3) Once, in a holy place in the forest of 
Naimi ṣāraṇya, great sages headed by  the sage 
Śaunaka  assembled to perform a great thousand  
year sacrifice for the satisfaction of the Lord 
and His devotees. (4) One day, after finishing 
their morning duties by burning a sacrificial 
fire and offer ing a seat of esteem to Śrīla  Sūta 
Gosvāmī, the great sages made inquiries, with 
great respect, about the following matters. (5) 
The sages said:  Respected Sūta Gosvāmī, 
you are completely free from all vice. You are 
well versed in all the scriptures famous for re-
ligious life, and in the Purā ṇas and the histories 
as well, for you have gone through them under 
proper guidance and ha ve also explained 
them. (6)Being the eldest learned Vedāntist, O 
Sūta Gosvāmī, you are acquainted with the 
knowledge of Vyāsadeva, who is the incarna-
tion of Godhead, and you also know other sages 
who are fully vers ed in all kinds of physical and 
metaphysical knowledge. (7)And because you 
are submissive, your spiritual masters have en-
dowed you with all the favors bestowed upon a 
gentle disciple. Therefore you can tell us all 
that you have scientifically learned from 
them. (8)Please, therefore, being blessed with 
many years, explain to us, in an easily under-
standable way, what you have ascertained to be 
the absolute and ultimate good for the people in 
general. (9)O learned one, in this iron age of 
Kali men have but short lives. They are quar-
relsome, lazy, misguided, unlucky and, above 
all, always disturbed. (10)There are many vari-
eties of scriptures, and in all of them there are 
many  prescribed duties, which can be learned 
only after many years of study in their various 
divisions. Therefore, O sage, please select the 
essence of all these scriptures and explain it for 
the good of all living beings, that by such in-
struction their hearts  may be fully satisfied. (11) 
All blessings upon you, O Sūta Gosvāmī. You 
know for what purpose the Personality of God-
head appeared in the womb of Devakī  as the 
son of Vasudeva .(12) 
O Sūta Gosvāmī, we are eager to learn about 
the Personality of Godhead and His incarna-
tions. Please explain to us those teachings im-
parted by previous masters [ācāryas], for one is 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

42 
 uplifted both by speaking them and by hearing 
them. (13) Living beings  who are entangled in 
the complicated meshes of birth and death can 
be freed immediately by even unconsciously 
chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, which is 
feared by fear personified. (14) O Sūta, those 
great sages who have completely taken shelter 
of the lotus feet of the Lord can at once sanctify 
those who come in touch with them, whereas 
the waters of the Ganges can sanct ify only after 
prolonged use. (15) Who is there, desiring de-
liverance from the vices of the age of quarrel, 
who is not willing to hear the virtuous glories 
of the Lord?  (16) His transcendental acts are 
magnificent and gracious, and great learned 
sages like Nārada  sing of them. Please, there-
fore, speak to us, who are eager to hear about 
the adventures He performs in His various in-
carnations.  (17) 
O wise Sūta, please n arrate to us the tran-
scendental pastimes of the Supreme Godhead's 
multiincarnations. Such auspicious adventures 
and pastimes of the Lord, the supreme control-
ler, are performed by His internal powers. (18) 
We never tire of hearing the transcendental pas-
times of the Personality of Godhead, who is 
glorified by hymns and prayers. Those who 
have developed a taste for transcendental rela-
tionships with Him relish hearing of His pas-
times at every moment. (19) Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the 
Personality of Godhead, along with Balarāma , 
played like a human being, and so masked He 
performed many superhuman acts.(20) Know-
ing well that the age of Kali has already begun, 
we are assembled here in this holy place to hear 
at great length the transcendental message of 
Godhea d and in this way perform sacrifice. (21) 
We think that we have met Your Goodness by 
the will of providence, just so that we may ac-
cept you as captain of the ship for those who 
desire to cross the difficult o cean of Kali, which 
deteriorates all the good qualities of a human 
being. (22) Since Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Absolute Truth, 
the master of all mystic powers, has departed 
for His own abode, please tell us to whom the 
religious principles have now gone for shel-
ter(23) 
 SB 1.2: Divinity and Di vine Service  
Ugraśravā [Sūta Gosvāmī], the son of 
Romaharṣaṇa, being fully satisfied by the per-
fect questions of the brāhmaṇas, thanked them 
and thus attempted to reply. (1) 
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Let me offer my 
respectful obeisances unto that great sage  
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī] who can enter the hearts 
of all. When he went away to take up the re-
nounced order of life [sannyāsa], leaving home 
without undergoing reformation by the sacred 
thread or the ceremonies observed by the 
higher castes, his father, Vyāsadev a, fearing 
separation from him, cried out, “O my son!” In-
deed, only the trees, which were absorbed in the 
same feelings of separation, echoed in re sponse 
to the begrieved father.(2)  
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto 
him [Śuka], the spiritual maste r of all sages, the 
son of Vyāsadeva, who, out of his great com-
passion for those gross materialists who strug-
gle to cross over the darkest regions of material 
existence, spoke this most confidential supple-
ment to the cream of Vedic knowledge, after 
having personally assimilated it by experi-
ence. (3) Before reciting this Śrīmad  
Bhāgavatam, which is the very means of con-
quest, one should offer respectful obeisances 
unto the Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, 
unto Naranārāyaṇa Ṛṣi, the supermost human 
being, unt o mother Sarasvatī, the goddess of 
learning, and unto Śrīla Vyāsadeva, the au-
thor.(4) 
O sages, I have been justly questioned by 
you. Your questions are worthy because they 
relate to Lord Kṛṣṇa and so are of relevance to 
the world’s welfare. Only questions of this sort 
are capable of completely satisfying the self. (5) 
The supreme occupation [dharma] for all hu-
manity is that by which men can attain to loving 
devotional service unto the transcendent Lord. 
Such devotional service must be unmotivated 
and uninter rupted to completely satisfy the self. 
(6) By rendering devotional service unto the 
Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one imme-
diately acquires causeless knowledge and de-
tachment from the world. (7) The occupational 
activities a man performs according to his own 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

43 
 position are only so much useless l abor if they 
do not provoke attraction for the message of the 
Personality of Godhead. (8) All occupational 
engagements are certainly meant for ultimate 
liberation. They should never be performed for 
material gain. Furthermore, according to sages, 
one who i s engaged in the ultimate occupa-
tional service should never use material gain to 
cultivate sense gratification. (9) Life’s desires 
should never be directed toward sense gratifi-
cation. One should desire only a healthy life, or 
self preservation, since a hum an being is meant 
for inquiry about the Absolute Truth. Nothing 
else should be the goal of one’s works. (10) 
Learned transcendentalists who know the Ab-
solute Truth call this nondual substance Brah-
man, Paramātmā or Bhagavān. (11) 
The seriously inquisitive s tudent or sage, 
well equipped with knowledge and detach-
ment, realizes that Absolute Truth by rendering 
devotional service in terms of what he has 
heard from the Vedānta  śruti. (12) O best among 
the twiceborn,  it is therefore concluded that the 
highest perfection one can achieve by discharg-
ing the duties prescribed for one’s own occupa-
tion according to caste divisions and orders of 
life is to please the Personality of Godhead. (13) 
Therefore, with one  pointed attention, one 
should constantly hear about, glorify, remem-
ber and worship the Personality of Godhead, 
who is the protector of the devotees. (14)  With 
sword in  hand, intelligent men cut through the 
binding knots of reactionary work [karma] by 
remembering the Personality of Godhead. 
Therefore, who will not pay attention to His 
message? (15) 
O twiceborn sages, by ser ving those devo-
tees who are completely freed from all vice, 
great service is done. By such service, one 
gains affinity for hearing the messages of 
Vāsudeva. (16)Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of 
Godhead, who is the Paramātmā [Supersoul] in 
everyone’s heart and the benefactor of the 
truthful devotee, cleanses desire for material 
enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who 
has developed the urge to hear His messages, 
which are in themselves virtuous when 
properly heard and chanted. (17) By regular at-
tendance in classes on the Bhāgavatam and by rendering of service to the pure devotee, all that 
is troublesome to the heart is almost completely 
destroyed, and loving service unto the Person-
ality of Godhead, who is praised with transcen-
dental songs, is established as an irrevocable 
fact. (18) As soon as irrevocable loving service 
is established in the heart, the effects of na-
ture’s modes of passion and ignorance, such as 
lust, desire and hankerin g, disappear from the 
heart. Then the devotee is established in good-
ness, and he becomes completely happy. (19) 
Thus established in the mode of unalloyed 
goodness, the man whose mind has been enliv-
ened by co ntact with devotional service to the 
Lord gains positive scientific knowledge of the 
Personality of Godhead in the stage of libera-
tion from all material association. (20) Thus the 
knot in the heart is pierced , and all misgivings 
are cut to pieces. The chain of fruitive actions 
is terminated when one sees the self as mas-
ter.(21) Certainly, therefore, since time imme-
morial, all transcendentalists have been render-
ing devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Per-
sonality of Godhead, with great delight, be-
cause such devotional service is enlivening to 
the self. (22) 
The transcendental Personality of Godhead 
is indirectly as sociated with the three modes of 
material nature, namely passion, goodness and 
ignorance, and just for the material world’s cre-
ation, maintenance and destruction He accepts 
the three qualitative forms of Brahmā, Viṣṇu 
and Śiva. Of these three, all human be ings can 
derive ultimate benefit from Viṣṇu, the form of 
the quality of goodness. (23) Firewood is a 
transformation of earth, but smoke is better 
than the raw wood. And fire is still better, for 
by fire we ca n derive the benefits of superior 
knowledge [through Vedic sacrifices]. Simi-
larly, passion [rajas] is better than ignorance 
[tamas], but goodness [sattva] is best because 
by goodness one can come to realize the Abso-
lute Truth. (24) Previously all the great sages 
rendered service unto the Personality of God-
head due to His existence above the three 
modes of material nature. They worshiped Him 
to become free from material conditions and 
thus derive the ultimate b enefit. Whoever fol-
lows such great authorities is also eligible for 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

44 
 liberation from the material world. (25) Those 
who are serious about liberation are certainly 
nonenvious, and they respect all. Yet they re-
ject the horrible and ghastly forms of the dem-
igods and worship only the all  blissful forms of 
Lord Viṣṇu and His plenary  portions. (26) 
Those who are in the modes of passion and ig-
norance worship those in the same category  
namely the forefathers, other living beings and 
the demigods  who are in charge of cosmic ac-
tivities  for they are urged by a desire to be ma-
terially benefited with women, wealth, power 
and progeny. (27)  In the revealed scriptures, 
the ultimate object of knowledge is  Śrī Kṛṣṇa, 
the Personality of Godhead. The purpose of 
performing sacrifice is to please Him. Yoga is 
for realizing Him. All fruitive activities are ul-
timately rewarded by Him only. He is supreme 
knowledge, and all severe austerities are per-
formed to know Him. Religion [dharma] is ren-
dering loving service unto Him. He is the su-
preme goal of life. (28-29) In the beginning of 
the material creation, that Absolute Personality 
of Godhead [Vāsudeva], in His tran scendental 
position, created the energies of cause and ef-
fect by His own internal energy.  (30) 
After creating the material substance, the 
Lord [Vāsudeva] expands Himself and enters 
into it. And although He i s within the material 
modes of nature and appears to be one of the 
created beings, He is always fully enlightened 
in His transcendental position. (31)The Lord, as 
Supersoul, pervades all things, just as fire per-
meates wood, and so He appears to be of many 
varieties, though He is the absolute one without 
a second. (32) The Supersoul enters into the 
bodies of the created beings who are influenced 
by the modes of material nature and causes 
them to enjoy the effec ts of these modes by the 
subtle mind. (33) Thus the Lord of the universes 
maintains all planets inhabited by demigods, 
men and lower animals. Assuming the roles of 
incarnations, He performs pastimes to reclai m 
those in the mode of pure goodness. (34) 

SB 1.3: Kṛṣṇa Is the Source of All Incar-
nations  

Sūta said:  In the beginning of the creation, the Lord first expanded Himself in the univer-
sal form of the puruṣa incarnation and mani-
fested all the ingredients for the material crea-
tion. And thus at first there  was the creation of 
the sixteen principles of material action. This 
was for the purpose of creating the material uni-
verses(1). A part of the puruṣa lies down within 
the water of the universe, from the navel lake 
of His body sprouts a lotus stem, and from the 
lotus flower atop this stem, Brahmā, the master 
of all engineers in  the universe, becomes man-
ifest(2). It is believed that all the universal plan-
etary systems are situated on the extensive 
body of the puruṣa, but He has nothing to do 
with the created m aterial ingredients. His body 
is eternally in spiritual e xistence par excellence 
(3). The devotees, with their perfect eyes, see 
the transcendental form of the puruṣa who has 
thousands of legs, thighs, arms and faces  all 
extraordinary. In that body there are thousands 
of heads, ears, eyes and noses. They are deco-
rated with thousands of helmets and glowing 
earrings and are adorned with garlands  (4). This 
form [the second manifestation of the puruṣa] 
is the source and indestructible seed of multi-
farious inca rnations within the universe. From 
the particles and portions of this form, different 
living entities, like demigods, men and others, 
are created  (5).  
First of all, in the beginning of creation, 
there were the four unmarried sons of Brahmā 
[the Kumāras], who, being situated in a vow of 
celibacy, underwent severe austerities for real-
ization of the Absolute Truth  (6). The supreme 
enjoyer of all sacrifices accepted the incarna-
tion of a boar [the second incarnation], and for 
the welfare of the earth He lifted the earth from 
the n ether regions of the universe. (7)In the mil-
lennium of the ṛṣis, the Personality of Godhead 
accepted the third empowered incarnation in 
the form of Devarṣi Nārada, who is a great sage 
among the demigods. He collected expositions 
of the Vedas which deal with devotional ser-
vice and which ins pire nonfruitive action  (8). In 
the fourth incarnation, the Lord became Nara 
and Nārāyaṇa, the twin sons of the wife of King 
Dharma. Thus He undertook severe and exem-
plary penances to control the senses  (9). The 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

45 
 fifth incarnation, named Lord Kapila, is for e-
most among perfected beings. He gave an ex-
position of the creative elements and metaphys-
ics to Āsuri Brāhmaṇa, for in course of time this 
knowledge had been lost  (10). The sixth incar-
nation of the puruṣa was the son of the sage 
Atri. He was born from the womb of Anasūyā, 
who prayed for an incarnation. He spoke on the 
subject of transcendence to Alarka, Prahlāda 
and others [Yadu, Haihaya, etc.]  (11). The sev-
enth incarnation was Yajña, the son of Prajāpati 
Ruci and his wife Ākūti. He controlled the pe-
riod du ring the change of the Svāyambhuva 
Manu and was assisted by demigods such as 
His son Yāma  (12). The eighth incarnation was 
King Ṛṣabha, son of King Nābhi and his wife 
Merudevī. In this incarnation the Lord showed 
the path of perfection, which is followed b y 
those who have fully controlled their senses 
and who are honored by all orders of life  (13). 
O brāhmaṇas, in the ninth incarnation, the 
Lord, prayed for by sages, accepted the body of 
a king [Pṛthu] who cultivated the land to yield 
various produce, and f or that reason the earth 
was beautiful and attractive  (14). When there 
was a complete inundation after the period of 
the Cākṣuṣa Manu and the whole world was 
deep within water, the Lord accepted the form 
of a fish and protected Vaivasvata Manu, keep-
ing him  up on a boat  (15). The eleventh incar-
nation of the Lord took the form of a tortoise 
whose shell served as a pivot for the Man-
darācala Hill, which was being used as a churn-
ing rod by the theists and atheists of the uni-
verse  (16). In the twelfth incarnation , the Lord 
appeared as Dhanvantari, and in the thirteenth 
He allured the atheists by the charming beauty 
of a woman and gave nectar to the demigods to 
drink  (17). In the fourteenth incarnation, the 
Lord appeared as Nṛsiṁha and bifurcated the 
strong body of  the atheist Hiraṇyakaśipu with 
His nails, just as a carpenter pierces cane  (18). 
In the fifteenth incarnation, the Lord assumed 
the form of a dwarf brāhmaṇa [Vāmana] and 
visited the arena of sacrifice arranged by 
Mahārāja Bali. Although at heart He was wi ll-
ing to regain the kingdom of the three planetary 
systems, He simply asked for a donation of three steps of land  (19). In the sixteenth incar-
nation of the Godhead, the Lord [as Bhṛgupati] 
annihilated the administrative class [kṣatriyas] 
twentyone times, b eing angry with them be-
cause of their rebellion against the brāhmaṇas 
[the intelligent class]  (20). Thereafter, in the 
seventeenth incarnation of Godhead, Śrī 
Vyāsadeva appeared in the womb of Satyavatī 
through Parāśara Muni, and he divided the one 
Veda in to several branches and subbranches, 
seeing that the people in general were less in-
telligent  (21). In the eighteenth incarnation, the 
Lord appeared as King Rāma. In order to per-
form some pleasing work for the demigods, He 
exhibited superhuman powers by con trolling 
the Indian Ocean and then killing the atheist 
King Rāvaṇa, who was on the other side of the 
sea (22).  
In the nineteenth and twentieth incarnations, 
the Lord advented Himself as Lord Balarāma 
and Lord Kṛṣṇa in the family of Vṛṣṇi [the 
Yadu dynasty ], and by so doing He removed 
the burden of the world  (23). Then, in the be-
ginning of Kaliyuga, the Lord will appear as 
Lord Buddha, the son of Añjanā, in the prov-
ince of Gayā, just for the purpose of deluding 
those who are envious of the faithful theist  (24). 
Thereafter, at the conjunction of two yugas, the 
Lord of the creation will take His birth as the 
Kalki incarnation and become the son of Viṣṇu 
Yaśā. At this time almost all the rulers of the 
earth will have degenerated into plunderers  
(25).  
O brāhmaṇ as, the incarnations of the Lord 
are innumerable, like rivulets flowing from in-
exhaustible sources of water  (26). All the ṛṣis, 
Manus, demigods and descendants of Manu, 
who are especially powerful, are plenary por-
tions or portions of the plenary portions o f the 
Lord. This also includes the Prajāpatis  (27). All 
of the above  mentioned incarnations are either 
plenary portions or portions of the plenary por-
tions of the Lord, but Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the orig-
inal Personality of Godhead. All of them appear 
on planet s whenever there is a disturbance cre-
ated by the atheists. The Lord incarnates to pro-
tect the theists  (28). Whoever carefully recites 
the mysterious appearances of the Lord, with 
devotion in the morning and in the evening, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

46 
 gets relief from all miseries of life (29).  
The conception of the virāṭ universal form 
of the Lord, as appearing in the material world, 
is imaginary. It is to enable the less intelligent 
[and neophytes] to adjust to the idea of the 
Lord’s having form. But factually the Lord has 
no material form  (30). Clouds and dust are car-
ried by the air, but less intelligent persons say 
that the sky is cloudy and the air is dirty. Simi-
larly, they also implant material bodily concep-
tions on the spirit self  (31). Beyond this gross 
conception of form is another, subtl e concep-
tion of form which is without formal shape and 
is unseen, unheard and unmanifest. The living 
being has his form beyond this subtlety, other-
wise he could not have repeated births  (32). 
Whenever a person experiences, by self  reali-
zation, that both th e gross and subtle bodies 
have nothing to do with the pure self, at that 
time he sees himself as well as the Lord  (33). If 
the illusory energy subsides and the living en-
tity becomes fully enriched with knowledge by 
the grace of the Lord, then he becomes at  once 
enlightened with selfrealization and thus be-
comes situated in his own glory  (34).Thus 
learned men describe the births and activities of 
the unborn and inactive, which is undiscovera-
ble even in the Vedic literatures. He is the Lord 
of the heart  (35).  
The Lord, whose activities are always spot-
less, is the master of the six senses and is fully 
omnipotent with six opulences. He creates the 
manifested universes, maintains them and an-
nihilates them without being in the least af-
fected. He is within every li ving being and is 
always independent  (36). The foolish with a 
poor fund of knowledge cannot know the tran-
scendental nature of the forms, names and ac-
tivities of the Lord, who is playing like an actor 
in a drama. Nor can they express such things, 
neither in  their speculations nor in their words  
(37). Only those who render unreserved, unin-
terrupted, favorable service unto the lotus feet 
of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who carries the wheel of the 
chariot in His hand, can know the creator of the 
universe in His full glory, pow er and transcend-
ence (38). Only by making such inquiries in 
this world can one be successful and perfectly cognizant, for such inquiries invoke transcen-
dental ecstatic love unto the Personality of 
Godhead, who is the proprietor of all the uni-
verses, and gu arantee centpercent immunity 
from the dreadful repetition of birth and death  
(39).  
This Śrīmad  Bhāgavatam is the literary in-
carnation of God, and it is compiled by Śrīla 
Vyāsadeva, the incarnation of God. It is meant 
for the ultimate good of all people, and it is all-
successful, all  blissful and all  perfect  (40).Śrī 
Vyāsadeva delivered it  to his son, who is the 
most respected among the self  realized, after 
extracting the cream of all Vedic literatures and 
histories of the universe  (41). Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva, in his turn de-
livered the Bhāgavatam to the great Emperor 
Parīkṣ it, who sat surrounded by sages on the 
bank of the Ganges, awaiting death without tak-
ing food or drink  (42). This Bhāgavata Purāṇa 
is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen just 
after the departure of Lord Kṛṣṇa to His own 
abode, accompanied by religio n, knowledge, 
etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to 
the dense darkness of ignorance in the Age of 
Kali shall get light from this Purāṇa . O learned 
brāhmaṇas, when Śukadeva Gosvāmī recited 
Bhāgavatam there [in the presence of Emperor 
Parīkṣit], I h eard him with rapt attention, and 
thus, by his mercy, I learned the Bhāgavatam 
from that great and powerful sage. Now I shall 
try to make you hear the very same thing as I 
learned it from him and as I have realized it  (43-
44).  

SB 1.4: The Appearance of Ś rī Nārada  

Vyāsadeva said:  On hearing Sūta Gosvāmī 
speak thus, Śaunaka Muni, who was the el-
derly, learned leader of all the ṛṣis engaged in 
that prolonged sacrificial ceremony, congratu-
lated Sūta Gosvāmī by addressing him as fol-
lows  (1).  
Śaunaka said:  O Sūta Gosvāmī, you are the 
most fortunate and respected of all those who 
can speak and recite. Please relate the pious 
message of Śrīmad  Bhāgavatam, which was 
spoken by the great and powerful sage 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī  (2). In what period and at 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

47 
 what place was th is first begun, and why was 
this taken up? From where did Kṛṣṇa  
dvaipāyana Vyāsa, the great sage, get the inspi-
ration to compile this literature? (3)His 
[Vyāsadeva’s] son was a great devotee, an 
equibalanced monist, whose mind was always 
concentrated in mo nism. He was transcenden-
tal to mundane activities, but being unexposed, 
he appeared like an ignorant person  (4). While 
Śrī Vyāsadeva was following his son, beautiful 
young damsels who were bathing naked cov-
ered their bodies with cloth, although Śrī 
Vyāsade va himself was not naked. But they had 
not done so when his son had passed. The sage 
inquired about this, and the young ladies re-
plied that his son was purified and when look-
ing at them made no distinction between male 
and female. But the sage made such di stinctions  
(5). How was he [Śrīla Śukadeva, the son of 
Vyāsa] recognized by the citizens when he en-
tered the city of Hastināpura [now Delhi], after 
wandering in the provinces of Kuru and 
Jāṅgala, appearing like a madman, dumb and 
retarded? (6)How did it so  happen that King 
Parīkṣit met this great sage, making it possible 
for this great transcendental essence of the Ve-
das [Bhāgavatam] to be sung to him? (7)He 
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī] was accustomed to stay at 
the door of a householder only long enough for 
a cow to  be milked. And he did this just to sanc-
tify the residence  (8). It is said that Mahārāja 
Parīkṣit is a great first  class devotee of the Lord 
and that his birth and activities are all wonder-
ful. Please tell us about him  (9). He was a great 
emperor and posse ssed all the opulences of his 
acquired kingdom. He was so exalted that he 
was increasing the prestige of the Pāṇḍu dyn-
asty. Why did he give up everything to sit down 
on the bank of the Ganges and fast until death? 
(10)He was such a great emperor that all h is en-
emies would come and bow down at his feet 
and surrender all their wealth for their own ben-
efit. He was full of youth and strength, and he 
possessed kingly opulences that were difficult 
to give up. Why did he want to give up every-
thing, including his l ife? (11)Those who are de-
voted to the cause of the Personality of God-
head live only for the welfare, develo pment and 
happiness of others. They do not live for any selfish interest. So even though the Emperor 
[Parīkṣit] was free from all attachment to 
worldly possessions, how could he give up his 
mortal body, which was the shelter for others? 
(12) We know that y ou are expert in the mean-
ing of all subjects, except some portions of the 
Vedas, and thus you can clearly explain the an-
swers to all the questions we have just put to 
you (13).  
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  When the second mil-
lennium overlapped the third, the great sage 
[Vyāsadeva] was born to Parāśara in the womb 
of Satyavatī, the daughter of Vasu  (14). Once 
upon a time he [Vyāsadeva], as the sun rose, 
took his morning ablution in the waters of the 
Sarasvatī and sat alone to concentrate  (15). The 
great sage Vyāsadev a saw anomalies in the du-
ties of the millennium. This happens on the 
earth in different ages, due to the unseen force 
of time  (16). The great sage, who was fully 
equipped in knowledge, could see through his 
transcendental vision the deterioration of eve-
rything material due to the influence of the age. 
He could also see that the faithless people in 
general would be reduced in duration of life and 
would be impatient due to lack of goodness. 
Thus he contemplated for the welfare of men in 
all statuses and order s of life  (17-18). He saw 
that the sacrifices mentioned in the Vedas were 
means by which the people’s occupations could 
be purified. And to simplify the process he di-
vided the one Veda into four, in order to expand 
them among men  (19). The four divisions o f the 
original sources of knowledge [the Vedas] were 
made separately. But the historical facts and au-
thentic stories mentioned in the Purāṇas are 
called the fifth Veda  (20). After the Vedas were 
divided into four divisions, Paila Ṛṣi became 
the professor o f the Ṛg Veda, Jaimini the pro-
fessor of the Sāma Veda, and Vaiśampāyana 
alone became glorified by the Yajur Veda  (21). 
The Sumantu Muni Aṅgirā, who was very de-
votedly engaged, was entrusted with the 
Atharva Veda. And my father, Romaharṣaṇa, 
was entrusted w ith the Purāṇas and historical 
records  (22). All these learned scholars, in their 
turn, rendered their entrusted Vedas unto their 
many disciples, grand  disciples and great  
granddisciples, and thus the respective 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

48 
 branches of the followers of the Vedas came 
into being  (23). Thus the great sage Vyāsadeva, 
who is very kind to the ignorant masses, edited 
the Vedas so they might be assimilated by less 
intellectual men  (24).  
Out of compassion, the great sage thought it 
wise that this would enable men to achieve t he 
ultimate goal of life. Thus he compiled the 
great historical narration called the 
Mahābhārata for women, laborers and friends 
of the twiceborn  (25). O twiceborn brāhmaṇas, 
still his mind was not satisfied, although he en-
gaged himself in working for the total welfare 
of all people  (26). Thus the sage, being dissat-
isfied at heart, at once began to reflect, because 
he knew the essence of religion, and he said 
within himself  (27) 
I have, under strict disciplinary vows, unpre-
tentiously worshiped the Vedas, th e spiritual 
masters and the altar of sacrifice. I have also 
abided by the rulings and have shown the im-
port of disciplic succession through the expla-
nation of the Mahābhārata, by which even 
women, śūdras and others [friends of the twice-
born] can see the pa th of religion  (28-29). I am 
feeling incomplete, though I myself am fully 
equipped with everything required by the Ve-
das (30). This may be because I did not specif-
ically point out the devotional service of the 
Lord, which is dear both to perfect beings and  
to the infallible Lord  (31). As mentioned be-
fore, Nārada reached the cottage of Kṛṣṇa  
dvaipāyana Vyāsa on the banks of the Sarasvatī 
just as Vyāsadeva was regretting his defects  
(32). At the auspicious arrival of Śrī Nārada, Śrī 
Vyāsadeva got up respectfully and worshiped 
him, giving him veneration equal to that given 
to Brahmājī , the creator (33)  

SB 1.5: Nārada’s Instructions on 
ŚrīmadBhāgavatam for Vyāsadeva  
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thus the sage amongst 
the gods [Nārada], comfortably seated and ap-
parently smiling, addressed the ṛṣi among st the 
brāhmaṇas [Vedavyāsa]  (1).  
Addressing Vyāsadeva, the son of 
Parāśara, Nārada inquired : Are you satisfied 
by identifying with the body or the mind as ob-
jects of selfrealization? (2) Your inquiries were full and your studies were also well fulfilled,  
and there is no doubt that you have prepared a 
great and wonderful work, the Mahābhārata, 
which is full of all kinds of Vedic sequences 
elaborately explained  (3).You have fully delin-
eated the subject of impersonal Brahman as 
well as the knowledge derived therefrom. Why 
should you be despondent in spite of all this, 
thinking that you are undone, my dear prabhu? 
(4) 
Śrī Vyāsadeva said:  All you have said 
about me is perfectly correct. Despite all this, I 
am not pacified. I therefore question you about 
the roo t cause of my dissatisfaction, for you are 
a man of unlimited knowledge due to your be-
ing the offspring of one [Brahmā] who is self-
born [without mundane father and mother]  
(5).My lord! Everything that is mysterious is 
known to you because you worship the c reator 
and destroyer of the material world and the 
maintainer of the spiritual world, the original 
Personality of Godhead, who is transcendental 
to the three modes of material nature  (6). Like 
the sun, Your Goodness can travel everywhere 
in the three world s, and like the air you can pen-
etrate the internal region of everyone. As such, 
you are as good as the all  pervasive Supersoul. 
Please, therefore, find out the deficiency in me, 
despite my being absorbed in transcendence 
under disciplinary regulations and vows  (7).  
Śrī Nārada said:  You have not actually 
broadcast the sublime and spotless glories of 
the Personality of Godhead. That philosophy 
which does not satisfy the transcendental 
senses of the Lord is considered worthless  (8). 
Although, great sage, you have very broadly 
described the four principles beginning with re-
ligious performances, you have not described 
the glories of the Supreme Personality, 
Vāsudeva  (9).Those words which do not de-
scribe the glories of the Lord, who alone can 
sanctify the atmosph ere of the whole universe, 
are considered by saintly persons to be like unto 
a place of pilgrimage for crows. Since the all  
perfect persons are inhabitants of the transcen-
dental abode, they do not derive any pleasure 
there  (10). On the other hand, that lit erature 
which is full of descriptions of the transcenden-
tal glories of the n ame, fame, forms, pastimes, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

49 
 etc, of the unlimited Supreme Lord is a differ-
ent creation, full of transcendental words di-
rected toward bringing about a revolution in the 
impious live s of this world’s misdirected civi-
lization. Such transcendental literatures, even 
though imperfectly composed, are heard, sung 
and accepted by purified men who are thor-
oughly honest  (11). Knowledge of self  realiza-
tion, even though free from all material af finity, 
does not look well if devoid of a conception of 
the Infallible [God]. What, then, is the use of 
fruitive activities, which are naturally painful 
from the very beginning and transient by na-
ture, if they are not utilized for the devotional 
service of  the Lord? (12) O Vyāsadeva, your 
vision is completely perfect. Your good fame is 
spotless. You are firm in vow and situated in 
truthfulness. And thus you can think of the pas-
times of the Lord in trance for the liberation of 
the people in general from all material bondage  
(13). Whatever you desire to describe that is 
separate in vision from the Lord simply reacts, 
with different forms, names and results, to agi-
tate the mind, as the wind agitates a boat which 
has no resting place  (14).The people in general 
are naturally inclined to enjoy, and you have 
encouraged them in that way in the name of re-
ligion. This is verily condemned and is quite 
unreasonable. Because they are guided under 
your instructions, they will accept such activi-
ties in the name of religion and will hardly care 
for prohibitions  (15). The Supreme Lord is un-
limited. Only a very expert personality, retired 
from the activities of material happiness, de-
serves to understand this knowledge of spiritual 
values. Therefore those who are not so well sit-
uated, due to material attachment, should be 
shown the ways of transcendental realization, 
by Your Goodness, through descriptions of the 
transcendental activities of the Supreme Lord  
(16). One who has forsaken his material occu-
pations to engage in the devo tional service of 
the Lord may sometimes fall down while in an 
immature stage, yet there is no danger of his 
being unsuccessful. On the other hand, a non-
devotee, though fully engaged in occupational 
duties, does not gain anything  (17).Persons 
who are actua lly intelligent and philosophically inclined should endeavor only for that purpose-
ful end which is not obtainable even by wan-
dering from the topmost planet [Brahmaloka] 
down to the lowest planet [Pātāla]. As far as 
happiness derived from sense enjoyment is  
concerned, it can be obtained automatically in 
course of time, just as in course of time we ob-
tain miseries even though we do not desire 
them  (18).My dear Vyāsa, even though a devo-
tee of Lord Kṛṣṇa sometimes falls down some-
how or other, he certainly does not undergo ma-
terial existence like others [fruitive workers, 
etc.] because a person who has once relished 
the taste of the lotus feet of the Lord can do 
nothing but remember that ecstasy again and 
again  (19). The Supreme Lord Personality of 
Godhead is Him self this cosmos, and still He is 
aloof from it. From Him only has this cosmic 
manifestation emanated, in Him it rests, and 
unto Him it enters after annihilation. Your good 
self knows all about this. I have given only a 
synopsis (20).Your Goodness has perfe ct vi-
sion. You yourself can know the Supersoul Per-
sonality of Godhead because you are present as 
the plenary portion of the Lord. Although you 
are birthless, you have appeared on this earth 
for the wellbeing of all people. Please, there-
fore, describe the t ranscendental pastimes of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa 
more vividly  (21).  Learned circles have posi-
tively concluded that the infallible purpose of 
the advancement of knowledge, namely auster-
ities, study of the Vedas, sacrifice, chanting o f 
hymns and charity, culminates in the transcen-
dental descriptions of the Lord, who is defined 
in choice poetry  (22).  
O Muni, in the last millennium I was born as 
the son of a certain maidservant engaged in the 
service of brāhmaṇas who were following the 
principles of Vedānta. When they were living 
together during the four months of the rainy 
season, I was engaged in their personal service  
(23).  Although they were impartial by nature, 
those followers of the Vedānta blessed me with 
their causeless mercy. A s far as I was con-
cerned, I was self  controlled and had no attach-
ment for sports, even though I was a boy. In ad-
dition, I was not naughty, and I did not speak 
more than required  (24).  Once only, by their 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

50 
 permission, I took the remnants of their food, 
and by so doing all my sins were at once eradi-
cated. Thus being engaged, I became purified 
in heart, and at that time the very nature of the 
transcendentalist became attractive to me  (25). 
O Vyāsadeva, in that association and by the 
mercy of those great Vedāntists, I could hear 
them describe the attractive activities of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. And thus listening attentively, my taste 
for hearing of the Personality of Godhead in-
creased at every step  (26). O great sage, as soon 
as I got a taste of the Personality of Godhead, 
my attention to hear of the Lord was unflinch-
ing. And as my taste developed, I could realize 
that it was only in my ignorance that I had ac-
cepted gross and subtle coverings, for both t he 
Lord and I are transcendental  (27).  Thus during 
two seasons  the rainy season and autumn  I had 
the opportunity to hear these greatsouled sages 
constantly chant the unadulterated glories of 
the Lord Hari. As the flow of my devotional 
service began, the  coverings of the modes of 
passion and ignorance vanished  (28). I was 
very much attached to those sages. I was gentle 
in behavior, and all my sins were eradicated in 
their service. In my heart I had strong faith in 
them. I had subjugated the senses, and I was 
strictly following them with body and mind  
(29).  As they were leaving, those bhak-
tivedāntas, who are very kind to poorhearted 
souls, instructed me in that most confidential 
subject which is instructed by the Personality 
of Godhead Himself  (30). By that confidential 
knowledge, I could understand clearl y the in-
fluence of the energy of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the cre-
ator, maintainer and annihilator of everything. 
By knowing that, one can return to Him and 
personally meet Him  (31).  

O Brāhmaṇa Vyāsadeva, it is decided by the 
learned that the best remedial measure  for re-
moving all troubles and miseries is to dedicate 
one’s activities to the service of the Supreme 
Lord Personality of Godhead [Śrī Kṛṣṇa]  (32). 
O good soul, does not a thing, applied therapeu-
tically, cure a disease which was caused by that 
very same th ing? (33)  Thus when all a man’s 
activities are dedicated to the service of the 
Lord, those very activities which caused his perpetual bondage become the destroyer of the 
tree of work  (34).  Whatever work is done here 
in this life for the satisfaction of t he mission of 
the Lord is called bhaktiyoga, or transcendental 
loving service to the Lord, and what is called 
knowledge becomes a concomitant factor  
(35).While performing duties according to the 
order of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, one constantly remembers Him, His 
names and His qualities  (36). Let us all chant 
the glories of Vāsudeva along with His plenary 
expansions Pradyumna, Aniruddh a and 
Saṅkarṣaṇa  (37). Thus he is the actual seer who 
worships, in the form of transcendental sound 
representation, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Viṣṇu, who has no material form  
(38). O brāhmaṇa, thus by the Supreme Lord 
Kṛṣṇa I was endowed first wit h the transcen-
dental knowledge of the Lord as inculcated in 
the confidential parts of the Vedas, then with 
the spiritual opulences, and then with His inti-
mate loving service  (39). Please, therefore, de-
scribe the almighty Lord’s activities which you 
have le arned by your vast knowledge of the Ve-
das, for that will satisfy the hankerings of great 
learned men and at the same time mitigate the 
miseries of the masses of common people who 
are always suffering from material pangs. In-
deed, there is no other way to ge t out of such 
miseries  (40).  

SB 1.6: Conversation Between Nārada 
and Vyāsadeva  

Sūta said:  O brāhmaṇas, thus hearing all 
about Śrī Nārada’s birth and activities, 
Vyāsadeva, the incarnation of God and son of 
Satyavatī, inquired as follows  (1).  
Śrī Vyāsad eva said : What did you [Nārada] 
do after the departure of the great sages who 
had instructed you in scientific transcendental 
knowledge before the beginning of your pre-
sent birth? (2) O son of Brahmā, how did you 
pass your life after initiation, and how di d you 
attain this body, having quit your old one in due 
course? (3) O great sage, time annihilates eve-
rything in due course, so how is it that this sub-
ject matter, which happened prior to this day of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

51 
 Brahmā, is still fresh in your memory, undis-
turbed by ti me?(4) 
Śrī Nārada said:  The great sages, who had 
imparted scientific knowledge of transcend-
ence to me, departed for other places, and I had 
to pass my life in this way  (5). I was the only 
son of my mother, who was not only a simple 
woman but a maidservant as well. Since I was 
her only offspring, she had no other alternative 
for protection: she bound me with the tie of af-
fection (6). She wanted to look after my mainte-
nance properly, but because she was not inde-
pendent, she was not able to do anything for 
me. The world is under the full control of the 
Supreme Lord; therefore everyone is like a 
wooden doll in the hands of a puppet master  
(7). When I was a mere child of five years, I 
lived in a brāhmaṇa school. I was dependent on 
my mother’s affection and had no experience 
of different lands  (8).  Once upon a time, my 
poor mother, when going out one night to milk 
a cow, was bitten on the leg b y a serpent, influ-
enced by supreme time  (9).  I took this as the 
special mercy of the Lord, who always desires 
benediction for His devotees, and so thinking, I 
started for the north  (10).  
After my departure, I passed through many 
flourishing metropolises,  towns, villages, ani-
mal farms, mines, agricultural lands, valleys, 
flower gardens, nursery gardens and natural 
forests. I passed through hills and mountains 
full of reservoirs of various minerals like gold, 
silver and copper, and through tracts of land 
with reservoirs of water filled with beautiful lo-
tus flowers, fit for the denizens of heaven, dec-
orated with bewildered bees and singing birds.I 
then passed alone through many forests of 
rushes, bamboo, reeds, sharp grass, weeds and 
caves, which were very di fficult to go through 
alone. I visited deep, dark and dangerously 
fearful forests, which were the play yards of 
snakes, owls and jackals  (11-14).Thus travel-
ing, I felt tired, both bodily and mentally, and I 
was both thirsty and hungry. So I took a bath in 
a river lake and also drank water. By contacting 
water, I got relief from my exhaustion  (15). Af-
ter that, under the shadow of a banyan tree in 
an uninhabited forest I began to meditate upon the Supersoul situated within, using my intelli-
gence, as I had lea rned from liberated souls  
(16). As soon as I began to meditate upon the 
lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead with 
my mind transformed in transcendental l ove, 
tears rolled down my eyes, and without delay 
the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, ap-
peared on the lotus of my heart  (17). O 
Vyāsadeva, at that time, being exceedingly 
overpowered by feelings of happiness, every 
part of my body became separately enli vened. 
Being absorbed in an ocean of ecstasy, I could 
not see both myself and the Lord  (18). The tran-
scendental form of the Lord, as it is, satisfies 
the mind’s desire and at once erases all mental 
incongruities. Upon losing that form, I sud-
denly got up, b eing perturbed, as is usual when 
one loses that which is desirable  (19).  

I desired to see again that transcendental 
form of the Lord, but despite my attempts to 
concentrate upon the heart with eagerness to 
view the form again, I could not see Him any 
more, and thus dissatisfied, I was very much 
aggrieved  (20). Seeing my attempts in that 
lonely place, the Personality of Godhead, who 
is transcendental to all mundane description, 
spoke to me with gravity and pleasing words, 
just to mitigate my grief  (21). O Nārada [the 
Lord spoke], I regret that during this lifetime 
you will not be able to see Me anymore. Those 
who are incomplete in service and who are not 
completely free from all material taints can 
hardly see Me  (22).O virtuous one, you have 
only once seen My person, and this is just to 
increase your desire for Me, because the more 
you hanker for Me, the more you will be freed 
from all material desires  (23).By service of the 
Absolute Truth, even for a few days, a devotee 
attains firm and fixed intelligence i n Me. Con-
sequently he goes on to become My associate 
in the transcendental world after giving up the 
present deplorable material worlds  (24). Intel-
ligence engaged in My devotion cannot be 
thwarted at any time. Even at the time of crea-
tion, as well as at th e time of annihilation, your 
remembrance will continue by My mercy  (25). 
Then that supreme authority, personified by 
sound and unseen by eyes, but most wonderful, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

52 
 stopped speaking. Feeling a sense of gratitude, 
I offered my obeisances unto Him, bowing my 
head (26).  Thus I began chanting the holy 
name and fame of the Lord by repeated recita-
tion, ignoring all the formalities of the material 
world. Such chanting and remembering of the 
transcendental pastimes of the Lord are bene-
dictory. So doing, I traveled a ll over the earth, 
fully satisfied, humble and unenvious  (27).   
And so, O Brāhmaṇa Vyāsadeva, in due 
course of time I, who was fully absorbed in 
thinking of Kṛṣṇa and who therefore had no at-
tachments, being completely freed from all ma-
terial taints, met w ith death, as lightning and il-
lumination occur simultaneously  (28). Having 
been awarded a transcendental body befitting 
an associate of the Personality of Godhead, I 
quit the body made of five material elements, 
and thus all acquired fruitive results of wo rk 
[karma] stopped  (29).At the end of the millen-
nium, when the Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Nārāyaṇa, lay down within the water of devas-
tation, Brahmā began to enter into Him along 
with all creative elements, and I also entered 
through His breathing  (30). After 
4,300,000,000 sol ar years, when Brahmā 
awoke to create again by the will of the Lord, 
all the ṛṣis like Marīci, Aṅgirā, Atri and so on 
were created from the transcendental body of 
the Lord, and I also appeared along with them  
(31).  Since then, by the grace of the almighty  
Viṣṇu, I travel everywhere without restriction 
both in the transcendental world and in the 
three divisions of the material world. This is be-
cause I am fixed in unbroken devotional service 
of the Lord (32).  And thus I travel, constantly 
singing the transce ndental message of the glo-
ries of the Lord, vibrating this instrument called 
a vīṇā, which is charged with transcendental 
sound and which was given to me by Lord 
Kṛṣṇa  (33). The Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, 
whose glories and activities are pleasing to 
hear, at once appears on the seat of my heart, as 
if called for, as soon as I begin to chant His holy 
activities  (34). It is personally experienced by 
me that those who are always full of cares and 
anxieties due to desiring contact of the senses 
with their objects can cross the ocean of nesci-
ence on a most suitable boat  the constant chanting of the transcendental activities of the 
Personality of Godhead  (35).  It is true that by 
practicing restraint of the senses by the yoga 
system one can get relief from the distu rbances 
of desire and lust, but this is not sufficient to 
give satisfaction to the soul, for this [satisfac-
tion] is derived from devotional service to the 
Personality of Godhead  (36). O Vyāsadeva, 
you are freed from all sins. Thus I have ex-
plained my birth  and activities for self  realiza-
tion, as you asked. All this will be conducive 
for your personal satisfaction also  (37). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thus addressing 
Vyāsadeva, Śrīla Nārada Muni took leave of 
him, and vibrating on his vīṇā instrument, he 
left to wan der at his free will  (38).  All glory 
and success to Śrīla Nārada Muni because he 
glorifies the activities of the Personality of 
Godhead, and so doing he himself takes pleas-
ure and also enlivens all the distressed souls of 
the universe  (39).  

SB 1.7: The Son of Droṇa Punished  

Ṛṣi Śaunaka asked:  O Sūta, the great and 
transcendentally powerful Vyāsadeva heard 
everything from Śrī Nārada Muni. So after 
Nārada’s departure, what did Vyāsadeva do? 
(1) 
Śrī Sūta said:  On the western bank of the 
river Sarasvatī, wh ich is intimately related with 
the Vedas, there is a cottage for meditation at 
Śamyāprāsa which enlivens the transcendental 
activities of the sages  (2).  In that place, Śrīla 
Vyāsadeva, in his own āśrama, which was sur-
rounded by berry trees, sat down to me ditate af-
ter touching water for purification  (3).  Thus he 
fixed his mind, perfectly engaging it by linking 
it in devotional service [bhaktiyoga] without 
any tinge of materialism, and thus he saw the 
Absolute Personality of Godhead along with 
His external energy, which was under full con-
trol (4). Due to this external energy, the living 
entity, although transcendental to the three 
modes of material nature, thinks of himself as a 
material product and thus undergoes the reac-
tions of material miseries  (5).  The  material 
miseries of the living entity, which are super-
fluous to him, can be directly mitigated by the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

53 
 linking process of devotional service. But the 
mass of people do not know this, and therefore 
the learned Vyāsadeva compiled this Vedic lit-
erature, whic h is in relation to the Supreme 
Truth  (6). Simply by giving aural reception to 
this Vedic literature, the feeling for loving de-
votional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, sprouts up at once to 
extinguish the fire of lamentation, ill usion and 
fearfulness  (7). The great sage Vyāsadeva, after 
compiling the ŚrīmadBhāgavatam and revising 
it, taught it to his own son, ŚrīŚukadeva 
Gosvāmī, who was already engaged in selfreal-
ization  (8).  

ŚrīŚaunaka asked  Sūta Gosvāmī: 
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī w as already on the path 
of selfrealization, and thus he was pleased with 
his own self. So why did he take the trouble to 
undergo the study of such a vast literature? (9)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said: All different varieties of 
ātmārāmas [those who take pleasure in t he 
ātmā, or spirit self], especially those estab-
lished on the path of selfrealization, though 
freed from all kinds of material bondage, desire 
to render unalloyed devotional service unto the 
Personality of Godhead. This means that the 
Lord possesses transc endental qualities and 
therefore can attract everyone, including liber-
ated souls  (10). Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, son 
of Śrīla Vyāsadeva, was not only transcenden-
tally powerful. He was also very dear to the 
devotees of the Lord. Thus he underwent the 
study of  this great narration 
[ŚrīmadBhāgavatam]  (11).  

Sūta Gosvāmī  thus addressed the ṛṣis 
headed by Śaunaka: Now I shall begin the tran-
scendental narration of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and 
topics of the birth, activities and deliverance of 
King Parīkṣit, the sage amo ngst kings, as well 
as topics of the renunciation of the worldly or-
der by the sons of Pāṇḍu  (12). When the respec-
tive warriors of both camps, namely the Kaura-
vas and the Pāṇḍavas, were killed on the Bat-
tlefield of Kurukṣetra and the dead warriors ob-
tained their deserved destinations, and when 
the son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra fell down lamenting, his spine broken, being beaten by the club of 
Bhīmasena, the son of Droṇācārya [Aśvat-
thāmā] beheaded the five sleeping sons of 
Draupadī and delivered the heads as a prize to 
his master, foolishly thinking that he would be 
pleased. Duryodhana, however, disapproved of 
the heinous act, and he was not pleased in the 
least (13-14). Draupadī, the mother of the five 
children of the Pāṇḍavas, after hearing of the 
massacre of her sons,  began to cry in distress 
with eyes full of tears. Trying to pacify her in 
her great loss, Arjuna spoke to her thus  (15): O 
gentle lady, when I present you with the head 
of that brāhmaṇa, after beheading him with ar-
rows from my Gāṇḍīva bow, I shall then wi pe 
the tears from your eyes and pacify you. Then, 
after burning your sons’ bodies, you can take 
your bath standing on his head  (16).  Arjuna, 
who is guided by the infallible Lord as friend 
and driver, thus satisfied the dear lady by such 
statements. Then h e dressed in armor and 
armed himself with furious weapons, and get-
ting into his chariot, he set out to follow Aśvat-
thāmā, the son of his martial teacher  (17).  
Aśvatthāmā, the murderer of the princes, seeing 
from a great distance Arjuna coming at him 
with great speed, fled in his chariot, panic 
stricken, just to save his life, as Brahmā fled in 
fear from Śiva  (18).  When the son of the 
brāhmaṇa [Aśvatthāmā] saw that his horses 
were tired, he considered that there was no al-
ternative for protection outside of  his using the 
ultimate weapon, the brahmāstra [nuclear 
weapon]  (19).  Since his life was in danger, he 
touched water in sanctity and concentrated 
upon the chanting of the hymns for throwing 
nuclear weapons, although he did not know 
how to withdraw such we apons  (20).  There-
upon a glaring light spread in all directions. It 
was so fierce that Arjuna thought his own life 
in danger, and so he began to address Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa  (21).  

Arjuna said:  O my Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You are 
the almighty Personality of Godhead. T here is 
no limit to Your different energies. Therefore 
only You are competent to instill fearlessness 
in the hearts of Your devotees. Everyone in the 
flames of material miseries can find the path of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

54 
 liberation in You only  (22).  You are the origi-
nal Person ality of Godhead who expands Him-
self all over the creations and is transcendental 
to material energy. You have cast away the ef-
fects of the material energy by dint of Your 
spiritual potency. You are always situated in 
eternal bliss and transcendental knowl edge  
(23).  And yet, though You are beyond the pur-
view of the material energy, You execute the 
four principles of liberation characterized by 
religion and so on for the ultimate good of the 
conditioned souls  (24).  Thus You descend as 
an incarnation to rem ove the burden of the 
world and to benefit Your friends, especially 
those who are Your exclusive devotees and are 
constantly rapt in meditation upon You  (25).  O 
Lord of lords, how is it that this dangerous ef-
fulgence is spreading all around? Where does it  
come from? I do not understand it  (26).  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: Know from Me that this is the act of the 
son of Droṇa. He has thrown the hymns of nu-
clear energy [brahmāstra], and he does not 
know how to retract the glare. He has helplessly 
done this, being afraid of imminent death  (27).  
O Arjuna, only another brahmā stra can coun-
teract this weapon. Since you are expert in the 
military science, subdue this weapon’s glare 
with the power of your own weapon  (28).  

Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said : Hearing this from 
the Personality of Godhead, Arjuna touched 
water for purification, and after circumambu-
lating Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he cast his brahmāstra 
weapon to counteract the other one  (29). When 
the rays of the two brahmāstras combined, a 
great circle of fire, like the disc of the sun, cov-
ered all outer space and the whole firmament of 
planets  (30).  All the population of the three 
worlds was scorched by the combined heat of 
the weapons. Everyone was reminded of the 
sāṁvartaka fire which takes place at the time of 
annihilation  (31).Thus seeing the disturbance 
of the general populace and t he imminent de-
struction of the planets, Arjuna at once re-
tracted both brahmāstra weapons, as Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa desired  (32).  Arjuna, his eyes blazing in 
anger like two red balls of copper, dexterously arrested the son of Gautamī and bound him 
with ropes like  an animal  (33). After binding 
Aśvatthāmā, Arjuna wanted to take him to the 
military camp. The Personality of Godhead Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, looking on with His lotus eyes, spoke to 
Arjuna in an angry mood  (34).  Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa 
said: O Arjuna, you should not show merc y by 
releasing this relative of a brāhmaṇa [brah-
mabandhu], for he has killed innocent boys in 
their sleep (35). A person who knows the prin-
ciples of religion does not kill an enemy who is 
careless, intoxicated, insane, asleep, afraid or 
devoid of his chario t. Nor does he kill a boy, a 
woman, a foolish creature or a surrendered soul  
(36).  A cruel and wretched person who main-
tains his existence at the cost of others’ lives 
deserves to be killed for his own wellbeing, 
otherwise he will go down by his own actio ns 
(37).Furthermore, I have personally heard you 
promise Draupadī that you would bring forth 
the head of the killer of her sons  (38). This man 
is an assassin and murderer of your own family 
members. Not only that, but he has also dissat-
isfied his master. He is bu t the burnt remnants 
of his family. Kill him immediately  (39). Sūta 
Gosvāmī said: Although Kṛṣṇa, who was ex-
amining Arjuna in religion, encouraged Arjuna 
to kill the son of Droṇācārya, Arjuna, a great 
soul, did not like the idea of killing him, alt-
hough Aś vatthāmā was a heinous murderer of 
Arjuna’s family members  (40).  

After reaching his own camp, Arjuna, along 
with his dear friend and charioteer [Śrī Kṛṣṇa], 
entrusted the murderer unto his dear wife, who 
was lamenting for her murdered sons  (41). Śrī 
Sūta Gosvāmī said: Draupadī then saw Aśvat-
thāmā, who was bound with ropes like an ani-
mal and silent for having enacted the most in-
glorious murder. Due to her female nature, and 
due to her being naturally good and wellbe-
haved, she showed him due respects as a 
brāhmaṇa  (42).  She could not tolerate Aśvat-
thāmā’s being bound by ropes, and being a de-
voted lady, she said: Release him, release him, 
for he is a brāhmaṇa, our spiritual master  (43).  
It was by Droṇācārya’s mercy that you learned 
the military art of throw ing arrows and the con-
fidential art of controlling weapons  (44). He 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

55 
 [Droṇācārya] is certainly still existing, being 
represented by his son. His wife Kṛpī did not 
undergo a satī with him because she had a son  
(45).O most fortunate one who know the prin-
ciple s of religion, it is not good for you to cause 
grief to glorious family members who are al-
ways respectable and worshipful  (46).  My 
lord, do not make the wife of Droṇācārya cry 
like me. I am aggrieved for the death of my 
sons. She need not cry constantly l ike me  (47).  
If the kingly administrative order, being unre-
stricted in sense control, offends the brāhmaṇa 
order and enrages them, then the fire of that 
rage burns up the whole body of the royal fam-
ily and brings grief upon them all  (48).  

Sūta Gosvāmī s aid: O brāhmaṇas, King 
Yudhiṣṭhira fully supported the statements of 
the Queen, which were in accordance with the 
principles of religion and were justified, glori-
ous, full of mercy and equity, and without du-
plicity  (49).  Nakula and Sahadeva [the younger 
brothers of the King] and also Sātyaki, Arjuna, 
the Personality of Godhead Lord Sri Kṛṣṇa, son 
of Devakī, and the ladies and others all unani-
mously agreed with the King  (50). Bhīma, 
however, angrily disagreed with them and rec-
ommended killing this culprit, who had mur-
dered sleeping children for no purpose and for 
neither his nor his master’s interest  (51).  Ca-
turbhuja [the fourarmed one], or the Personality 
of Godhead, after hearing the words of Bhīma, 
Draupadī and others, saw the face of His dear 
friend Arj una, and He began to speak as if smil-
ing (52).  

The Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa 
said:  A friend of a brāhmaṇa is not to be killed, 
but if he is an aggressor he must be killed  (54). 
All these rulings are in the scriptures, and you 
should act according ly. You have to fulfill your 
promise to your wife, and you must also act to 
the satisfaction of Bhīmasena and Me  (54). 

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Just then Arjuna could 
understand the motive of the Lord by His 
equivocal orders, and thus with his sword he 
severed both hair and jewel from the head of Aśvatthāmā  (55).  He [Aśvatthāmā] had al-
ready lost his bodily luster due to infanticide, 
and now, moreover, having lost the jewel from 
his head, he lost even more strength. Thus he 
was unbound and driven out of the camp  (56). 
Cutting the hair from his head, depriving him 
of his wealth and driving him from his resi-
dence are the prescribed punishments for the 
relative of a brāhmaṇa. There is no injunction 
for killing the body  (57).  Thereafter, the sons 
of Pāṇḍu, and Draup adī, overwhelmed with 
grief, performed the proper rituals for the dead 
bodies of their relatives  (58).  

SB 1.8: Prayers by Queen Kuntī and 
Parīkṣit Saved  
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thereafter the Pā ṇḍa-
vas, desiring to deliver water to the dead rela-
tives who had d esired it, went to the Ganges 
with Draupadī. The ladies walked in front  
(1).Having lamented over them and sufficiently 
offered Ganges water, they bathed in the Gan-
ges, whose water is sanctified due to being 
mixed with the dust of the lotus feet of the Lord  
(2).There sat the King of the Kurus, Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, along with his younger brothers 
and Dh ṛtarāṣṭra, Gāndhārī, Kuntī and 
Draupadī, all overwhelmed with grief. Lord 
Kṛṣṇa was also there.Citing the stringent laws 
of the Almighty and their reactions u pon living 
beings, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa and the munis began to 
pacify those who were shocked and affected  (3-
4). 
The clever Duryodhana and his party cun-
ningly usurped the kingdom of Yudhi ṣṭhira, 
who had no enemy. By the grace of the Lord, 
the recovery was execut ed, and the unscrupu-
lous kings who joined with Duryodhana were 
killed by Him. Others also died, their duration 
of life having decreased for their rough han-
dling of the hair of Queen Draupadī  (5).Lord 
Śrī K ṛṣṇa caused three wellperformed aśva-
medhayajñas [ho rse sacrifices] to be conducted 
by Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira and thus caused his 
virtuous fame to be glorified in all directions, 
like that of Indra, who had performed one hun-
dred such sacrifices  (6).Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa then 
prepared for His departure. He invited th e sons 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

56 
 of Pā ṇḍu, after having been worshiped by the 
brāhma ṇas, headed by Śrīla Vyāsadeva. The 
Lord also reciprocated greetings.As soon as He 
seated Himself on the chariot to start for 
Dvārakā, He saw Uttarā hurrying toward Him 
in fear  (7-8). 
Uttarā said:  O Lord of lords, Lord of the 
universe! You are the greatest of mystics. 
Please protect me, protect me, for there is no 
one else who can save me from the clutches of 
death in this world of duality  (9).O my Lord, 
You are allpowerful. A fiery iron arrow is com-
ing towards me fast. My Lord, let it burn me 
personally, if You so desire, but please do not 
let it burn and abort my embryo. Please do me 
this favor, my Lord  (10). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Having patiently heard 
her words, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, who is always very 
affectionate to His devotees, could at once un-
derstand that Aśvatthāmā, the son of 
Droṇācārya, had thrown the brahmāstra to fin-
ish the last life in the Pā ṇḍava family  (11).O 
foremost among the great thinkers [munis] 
[Śaunaka], seeing the glaring brahmāstra pro-
ceeding towards them, the Pā ṇḍavas took up 
their five respective weapons  (12).The al-
mighty Personality of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, hav-
ing observed that a great danger wa s befalling 
His unalloyed devotees, who were fully surren-
dered souls, at once took up His Sudarśana disc 
to protect them  (13).The Lord of supreme mys-
ticism, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, resides within everyone’s 
heart as the Paramātmā. As such, just to protect 
the progeny o f the Kuru dynasty, He covered 
the embryo of Uttarā by His personal energy  
(14).O Śaunaka, glory of Bh ṛgu’s family, alt-
hough the supreme brahmāstra weapon re-
leased by Aśvatthāmā was irresistible and with-
out check or counteraction, it was neutralized 
and fo iled when confronted by the strength of 
Viṣṇu [Lord K ṛṣṇa] (15).O brāhma ṇas, do not 
think this to be especially wonderful in the ac-
tivities of the mysterious and infallible Person-
ality of Godhead. By His own transcendental 
energy He creates, maintains and annihilates all 
material things, although He Himself is unborn  
(16).Thus saved from the radiation of the 
brahmāstra, Kuntī, the chaste devotee of the Lord, and her five sons and Draupadī addressed 
Lord K ṛṣṇa as He started for home  (17). 
Śrīmatī Kuntī said:  O Kṛṣṇa, I offer my 
obeisances unto You because You are the orig-
inal personality and are unaffected by the qual-
ities of the material world. You are existing 
both within and without everything, yet You 
are invisible to all  (18).Being beyond the range 
of limited sense perception, You are the eter-
nally irreproachable factor covered by the cur-
tain of deluding energy. You are invisible to the 
foolish observer, exactly as an actor dressed as 
a player is not recognized  (19).You Yourself 
descend to propagate the t ranscendental sci-
ence of devotional service unto the hearts of the 
advanced transcendentalists and mental specu-
lators, who are purified by being able to dis-
criminate between matter and spirit. How then 
can we women know You perfectly?  (20)Let 
me therefore offer my respectful obeisances 
unto the Lord, who has become the son of 
Vasudeva, the pleasure of Devakī, the boy of 
Nanda and the other cowherd men of 
Vṛndāvana, and the enlivener of the cows and 
the senses  (21).My respectful obeisances are 
unto You, O Lo rd, whose abdomen is marked 
with a depression like a lotus flower, who are 
always decorated with garlands of lotus flow-
ers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus and 
whose feet are engraved with lotuses  (22).O 
Hṛṣīkeśa, master of the senses and Lord of 
lords, You have released Your mother, Devakī, 
who was long imprisoned and distressed by the 
envious King Ka ṁsa, and me and my children 
from a series of constant dangers  (23).My dear 
Kṛṣṇa, Your Lordship has protected us from a 
poisoned cake, from a great fire,  from canni-
bals, from the vicious assembly, from suffer-
ings during our exile in the forest and from the 
battle where great generals fought. And now 
You have saved us from the weapon of Aśvat-
thāmā  (24).I wish that all those calamities 
would happen again and  again so that we could 
see You again and again, for seeing You means 
that we will no longer see repeated births and 
deaths  (25).My Lord, Your Lordship can easily 
be approached, but only by those who are ma-
terially exhausted. One who is on the path of 
[material] progress, trying to improve himself 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

57 
 with respectable parentage, great opulence, 
high education and bodily beauty, cannot ap-
proach You with sincere feeling  (26).My obei-
sances are unto You, who are the property of 
the materially impoverished. You have  nothing 
to do with the actions and reactions of the ma-
terial modes of nature. You are selfsatisfied, 
and therefore You are the most gentle and are 
master of the monists  (27). 
My Lord, I consider Your Lordship to be 
eternal time, the supreme controller, wi thout 
beginning and end, the allpervasive one. In dis-
tributing Your mercy, You are equal to every-
one. The dissensions between living beings are 
due to social intercourse  (28).O Lord, no one 
can understand Your transcendental pastimes, 
which appear to be hu man and so are mislead-
ing. You have no specific object of favor, nor 
do You have any object of envy. People only 
imagine that You are partial  (29).Of course it is 
bewildering, O soul of the universe, that You 
work, though You are inactive, and that You 
take birth, though You are the vital force and 
the unborn. You Yourself descend amongst an-
imals, men, sages and aquatics. Verily, this is 
bewildering  (30).My dear K ṛṣṇa, Yaśodā took 
up a rope to bind You when You committed an 
offense, and Your perturbed eyes overflooded 
with tears, which washed the mascara from 
Your eyes. And You were afraid, though fear 
personified is afraid of You. This sight is be-
wilderi ng to me  (31).Some say that the Unborn 
is born for the glorification of pious kings, and 
others say that He is born to please King Yadu, 
one of Your dearest devotees. You appear in his 
family as sandalwood appears in the Malaya 
hills (32).Others say that s ince both Vasudeva 
and Devakī prayed for You, You have taken 
Your birth as their son. Undoubtedly You are 
unborn, yet You take Your birth for their wel-
fare and to kill those who are envious of the 
demigods  (33).Others say that the world, being 
overburdened  like a boat at sea, is much ag-
grieved, and that Brahmā, who is Your son, 
prayed for You, and so You have appeared to 
diminish the trouble  (34).And yet others say 
that You appeared for the sake of rejuvenating 
the devotional service of hearing, remember-ing, worshiping and so on in order that the con-
ditioned souls suffering from material pangs 
might take advantage and gain liberation  
(35).O K ṛṣṇa, those who continuously hear, 
chant and repeat Your transcendental activities, 
or take pleasure in others’ doing so, certainly 
see Your lotus feet, which alone can stop the 
repetition of birth and death (36). 
O my Lord, You have executed all duties 
Yourself. Are you leaving us today, though we 
are completely dependent on Your mercy and 
have no one else to protect us, now when all 
kings are at enmity with us? (37)As the name 
and fame of a particular body is finished with 
the disappearance of the living spirit, similarly 
if You do not look upon us, all our fame and 
activities, along with the Pā ṇḍavas and Yadus, 
will end at once  (38).O Gadādhara [K ṛṣṇa], our 
kingdom is now being marked by the impres-
sions of Your feet, and therefore it appears 
beautiful. But when You leave, it will no longer 
be so  (39).All these cities and villages are flour-
ishing in all respects because the herbs and 
grains are in abundance, the trees  are full of 
fruits, the rivers are flowing, the hills are full of 
minerals and the oceans full of wealth. And this 
is all due to Your glancing over them  (40).O 
Lord of the universe, soul of the universe, O 
personality of the form of the universe, please, 
therefore, sever my tie of affection for my kins-
men, the Pā ṇḍavas and the V ṛṣṇis (41).O Lord 
of Madhu, as the Ganges forever flows to the 
sea without hindrance, let my attraction be con-
stantly drawn unto You without being diverted 
to anyone else  (42).O K ṛṣṇa, O friend of Ar-
juna, O chief amongst the descendants of V ṛṣṇi, 
You are the destroyer of those political parties 
which are disturbing elements on this earth. 
Your prowess never deteriorates. You are the 
proprietor of the transcendental abode, and You 
descend to relieve the distresses of the cows, 
the brāhma ṇas and the devotees. You possess 
all mystic powers, and You are the preceptor of 
the entire universe. You are the almighty God, 
and I offer You my respectful obeisances  (43). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  The Lor d, thus hearing 
the prayers of Kuntīdevī, composed in choice 
words for His glorification, mildly smiled. That 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

58 
 smile was as enchanting as His mystic power  
(44).Thus accepting the prayers of Śrīmatī 
Kuntīdevī, the Lord subsequently informed 
other ladies of H is departure by entering the 
palace of Hastināpura. But upon preparing to 
leave, He was stopped by King Yudhi ṣṭhira, 
who implored Him lovingly  (45).King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, who was much aggrieved, could 
not be convinced, despite instructions by great 
sages headed  by Vyāsa and the Lord K ṛṣṇa 
Himself, the performer of superhuman feats, 
and despite all historical evidence  (46).King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, son of Dharma, overwhelmed by 
the death of his friends, was aggrieved just like 
a common, materialistic man. O sages, thus d e-
luded by affection, he began to speak.King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira said: O my lot! I am the most sinful 
man! Just see my heart, which is full of igno-
rance! This body, which is ultimately meant for 
others, has killed many, many phalanxes of 
men (47-48).I have killed m any boys, 
brāhma ṇas, wellwishers, friends, parents, pre-
ceptors and brothers. Though I live millions of 
years, I will not be relieved from the hell that 
awaits me for all these sins  (49).There is no sin 
for a king who kills for the right cause, who is 
engag ed in maintaining his citizens. But this in-
junction is not applicable to me  (50).I have 
killed many friends of women, and I have thus 
caused enmity to such an extent that it is not 
possible to undo it by material welfare work  
(51).As it is not possible to filter muddy water 
through mud, or purify a winestained pot with 
wine, it is not possible to counteract the killing 
of men by sacrificing animals  (52). 
SB 1.9: The Passing Away of Bhīṣmadeva 
in the Presence of Lord Kṛṣṇa  
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Being afraid for having 
killed so many subjects on the Battlefield of 
Kuruk ṣetra, Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira went to the 
scene of the massacre. There, Bhī ṣmadeva was 
lying on a bed of arrows, about to pass away  
(1).At that time all his brothers followed him 
on beautiful chariots drawn by firstclass horses 
decorated with gold ornaments. With them 
were Vyāsa and ṛṣis like Dhaumya [the learned 
priest of the Pā ṇḍavas] and others  (2).O sage 
amongst the brāhma ṇas, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, also followed, seated 
on a chariot with Arjuna. Thus King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira appeared very aristocratic, like 
Kuvera surrounded by his companions [the 
Guhyakas]  (3).Seeing him [Bhī ṣma] lyin g on 
the ground, like a demigod fallen from the sky, 
the Pā ṇḍava King Yudhi ṣṭhira, along with his 
younger brothers and Lord K ṛṣṇa, bowed down 
before him  (4).Just to see the chief of the de-
scendants of King Bharata [Bhī ṣma], all the 
great souls in the unive rse, namely the ṛṣis 
amongst the demigods, brāhma ṇas and kings, 
all situated in the quality of goodness, were as-
sembled there  (5).All the sages like Parvata 
Muni, Nārada, Dhaumya, Vyāsa the incarna-
tion of God, B ṛhadaśva, Bharadvāja and 
Paraśurāma and disci ples, Vasi ṣṭha, In-
drapramada, Trita, G ṛtsamada, Asita, 
Kakṣīvān, Gautama, Atri, Kauśika and Sudar-
śana were present  (6-7).And many others like 
Śukadeva Gosvāmīand other purified souls, 
Kaśyapa and Ā ṅgirasa and others, all accompa-
nied by their respective dis ciples, arrived there  
(8).Bhīṣmadeva, who was the best amongst the 
eight Vasus, received and welcomed all the 
great and powerful ṛṣis who were assembled 
there, for he knew perfectly all the religious 
principles according to time and place  (9).Lord 
Śrī K ṛṣṇa is situated in everyone’s heart, yet He 
manifests His transcendental form by His inter-
nal potency. This very Lord was sitting before 
Bhīṣmadeva, and since Bhī ṣmadeva knew of 
His glories, he worshiped Him duly  (10). 
The sons of Mahārāja Pā ṇḍu were sitting  si-
lently nearby, overtaken with affection for their 
dying grandfather. Seeing this, Bhī ṣmadeva 
congratulated them with feeling. There were 
tears of ecstasy in his eyes, for he was over-
whelmed by love and affection  
(11).Bhīṣmadeva said: Oh, what terrible s uffer-
ings and what terrible injustices you good souls 
suffer for being the sons of religion personified. 
You did not deserve to remain alive under those 
tribulations, yet you were protected by the 
brāhma ṇas, God and religion  (12).As far as my 
daughterinlaw  Kuntī is concerned, upon the 
great General Pā ṇḍu’s death, she became a 
widow with many children, and therefore she 
suffered greatly. And when you were grown up 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

59 
 she suffered a great deal also because of your 
actions  (13).In my opinion, this is all due to i n-
evitable time, under whose control everyone in 
every planet is carried, just as the clouds are 
carried by the wind  (14).Oh, how wonderful is 
the influence of inevitable time! It is irreversi-
ble  otherwise, how can there be reverses in the 
presence of King  Yudhi ṣṭhira, the son of the 
demigod controlling religion; Bhīma, the great 
fighter with a club; the great bowman Arjuna 
with his mighty weapon Gā ṇḍīva; and above 
all, the Lord, the direct wellwisher of the 
Pāṇḍavas?  (15)O King, no one can know the 
plan of  the Lord [Śrī K ṛṣṇa]. Even though great 
philosophers inquire exhaustively, they are be-
wildered  (16).O best among the descendants of 
Bharata [Yudhi ṣṭhira], I maintain, therefore, 
that all this is within the plan of the Lord. Ac-
cepting the inconceivable pla n of the Lord, you 
must follow it. You are now the appointed ad-
ministrative head, and, my lord, you should 
now take care of those subjects who are now 
rendered helpless  (17). 
This Śrī K ṛṣṇa is no other than the incon-
ceivable, original Personality of Godhea d. He 
is the first Nārāya ṇa, the supreme enjoyer. But 
He is moving amongst the descendants of King 
Vṛṣṇi just like one of us, and He is bewildering 
us with His selfcreated energy  (18).O King, 
Lord Śiva, Nārada the sage amongst the demi-
gods, and Kapila, the  incarnation of Godhead, 
all know very confidentially about His glories 
through direct contact  (19).O King, that per-
sonality whom, out of ignorance only, you 
thought to be your maternal cousin, your very 
dear friend, wellwisher, counselor, messenger, 
benef actor, etc., is that very Personality of God-
head Śrī K ṛṣṇa (20).Being the Absolute Person-
ality of Godhead, He is present in everyone’s 
heart. He is equally kind to everyone, and He is 
free from the false ego of differentiation. 
Therefore whatever He does i s free from mate-
rial inebriety. He is equibalanced  (21).Yet, de-
spite His being equally kind to everyone, He 
has graciously come before me while I am end-
ing my life, for I am His unflinching servitor  
(22).The Personality of Godhead, who appears 
in the mind of the devotee by attentive devotion 
and meditation and by chanting of the holy name, releases the devotee from the bondage of 
fruitive activities at the time of his quitting the 
material body  (23).May my Lord, who is 
fourhanded and whose beautifully decor ated 
lotus face, with eyes as red as the rising sun, is 
smiling, kindly await me at that moment when 
I quit this material body  (24). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, 
after hearing Bhī ṣmadeva speak in that appeal-
ing tone, asked him, in the presence of all the 
great ṛṣis, about the essential principles of var-
ious religious duties  (25).At Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira’s inquiry, Bhī ṣmadeva first de-
fined all the classifications of castes and orders 
of life in terms of the individual’s qualifica-
tions. Then he sys tematically, in twofold divi-
sions, described counteraction by detachment 
and interaction by attachment.He then ex-
plained, by divisions, acts of charity, the prag-
matic activities of a king and activities for sal-
vation. Then he described the duties of women 
and devotees, both briefly and exten-
sively .Then he described the occupational du-
ties of different orders and statuses of life, cit-
ing instances from history, for he was himself 
well acquainted with the truth  (26-28).While 
Bhīṣmadeva was describing occupational du-
ties, the sun’s course ran into the northern hem-
isphere. This period is desired by mystics who 
die at their will  (29).Thereupon that man who 
spoke on different subjects with thousands of 
meanings, and who fou ght on thousands of bat-
tlefields and protected thousands of men, 
stopped speaking and, being completely freed 
from all bondage, withdrew his mind from eve-
rything else and fixed his wideopen eyes upon 
the original Personality of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, 
who stoo d before him, fourhanded, dressed in 
yellow garments that glittered and shined  
(30).By pure meditation, looking at Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, he at once was freed from all material 
inauspiciousness and was relieved of all bodily 
pains caused by the arrow wounds. Thus  all the 
external activities of his senses at once stopped, 
and he prayed transcendentally to the controller 
of all living beings while quitting his material 
body  (31). 
Bhīṣmadeva said:  Let me now invest my 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

60 
 thinking, feeling and willing, which were so 
long engaged in different subjects and occupa-
tional duties, in the allpowerful Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa. 
He is always selfsatisfied, but sometimes, be-
ing the leader of the devotees, He enjoys tran-
scendental pleasure by descending to the mate-
rial world, although from Him  only the material 
world is created  (32).Śrī K ṛṣṇa is the intimate 
friend of Arjuna. He has appeared on this earth 
in His transcendental body, which resembles 
the bluish color of the tamāla tree. His body at-
tracts everyone in the three planetary systems 
[upper, middle and lower]. May His glittering 
yellow dress and His lotus face, covered with 
paintings of sandalwood pulp, be the object of 
my attraction, and may I not desire fruitive re-
sults (33).On the battlefield [where Śrī K ṛṣṇa 
attended Arjuna out of fr iendship], the flowing 
hair of Lord K ṛṣṇa turned ashen due to the dust 
raised by the hoofs of the horses. And because 
of His labor, beads of sweat wetted His face. 
All these decorations, intensified by the 
wounds dealt by my sharp arrows, were en-
joyed by H im. Let my mind thus go unto Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa (34).In obedience to the command of His 
friend, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa entered the arena of the 
Battlefield of Kuruk ṣetra between the soldiers 
of Arjuna and Duryodhana, and while there He 
shortened the life spans of the oppos ite party by 
His merciful glance. This was done simply by 
His looking at the enemy. Let my mind be fixed 
upon that K ṛṣṇa (35).When Arjuna was seem-
ingly polluted by ignorance upon observing the 
soldiers and commanders before him on the 
battlefield, the Lord  eradicated his ignorance 
by delivering transcendental knowledge. May 
His lotus feet always remain the object of my 
attraction  (36).Fulfilling my vow and sacrific-
ing His own promise, He got down from the 
chariot, took up its wheel, and ran towards me 
hurri edly, just as a lion goes to kill an elephant. 
He even dropped His outer garment on the way  
(37).May He, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Personality 
of Godhead, who awards salvation, be my ulti-
mate destination. On the battlefield He charged 
me, as if angry because of the wounds dealt by 
my sharp arrows. His shield was scattered, and 
His body was smeared with blo od due to the wounds  (38).At the moment of death, let my ul-
timate attraction be to Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Personal-
ity of Godhead. I concentrate my mind upon the 
chariot driver of Arjuna who stood with a whip 
in His right hand and a bridle rope in His left, 
who was  very careful to give protection to Ar-
juna’s chariot by all means. Those who saw 
Him on the Battlefield of Kuruk ṣetra attained 
their original forms after death  (39).Let my 
mind be fixed upon Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, whose mo-
tions and smiles of love attracted the da msels 
of Vrajadhāma [the gopīs]. The damsels imi-
tated the characteristic movements of the Lord 
[after His disappearance from the rāsa dance]  
(40).At the Rājasūyayajña [sacrifice] per-
formed by Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, there was the 
greatest assembly of all the  elite men of the 
world, the royal and learned orders, and in that 
great assembly Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa was worshiped 
by one and all as the most exalted Personality 
of Godhead. This happened during my pres-
ence, and I remembered the incident in order to 
keep my mi nd upon the Lord  (41).Now I can 
meditate with full concentration upon that one 
Lord, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, now present before me be-
cause now I have transcended the misconcep-
tions of duality in regard to His presence in eve-
ryone’s heart, even in the hearts of the ment al 
speculators. He is in everyone’s heart. The sun 
may be perceived differently, but the sun is one  
(42). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thus Bhī ṣmadeva 
merged himself in the Supersoul, Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
with his mind, speech, sight a nd actions, and 
thus he became silent, and his breathing 
stopped  (43).Knowing that Bhī ṣmadeva had 
merged into the unlimited eternity of the Su-
preme Absolute, all present there became silent 
like birds at the end of the day  (44).Thereafter, 
both men and dem igods sounded drums in 
honor, and the honest royal order commenced 
demonstrations of honor and respect. And from 
the sky fell showers of flowers  (45).O descend-
ant of Bh ṛgu [Śaunaka], after performing fu-
neral rituals for the dead body of Bhī ṣmadeva, 
Mahārāj a Yudhi ṣṭhira was momentarily over-
taken with grief  (46).All the great sages then 
glorified Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, who was present 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

61 
 there, by confidential Vedic hymns. Then all of 
them returned to their respective hermitages, 
bearing always Lord K ṛṣṇa within their hearts  
(47).Thereafter, Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira at once 
went to his capital, Hastināpura, accompanied 
by Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, and there he consoled his 
uncle and aunt Gāndhārī, who was an ascetic  
(48).After this, the great religious King, 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, exe cuted the royal 
power in the kingdom strictly according to the 
codes of royal principles approved by his uncle 
and confirmed by Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa (49). 
SB 1.10: Departure of Lord Kṛṣṇa for 
Dvārakā  
Śaunaka Muni asked:  After killing his en-
emies who desired to u surp his rightful inher-
itance, how did the greatest of all religious men, 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, assisted by his brothers, 
rule his subjects? Surely he could not freely en-
joy his kingdom with unrestricted conscious-
ness (1). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is the 
maintainer of the world, became pleased after 
reestablishing Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira in his own 
kingdom and after restoring the Kuru dynasty, 
which had been exhausted by the bamboo fire 
of anger  (2).Mahārāja Yu dhiṣṭhira, after being 
enlightened by what was spoken by 
Bhīṣmadeva and Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the infallible, 
engaged himself in matters of perfect 
knowledge because all his misgivings were 
eradicated. Thus he ruled over the earth and 
seas and was followed by hi s younger brothers  
(3).During the reign of Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, 
the clouds showered all the water that people 
needed, and the earth produced all the necessi-
ties of man in profusion. Due to its fatty milk 
bag and cheerful attitude, the cow used to mois-
ten the grazing ground with milk  (4).The rivers, 
oceans, hills, mountains, forests, creepers and 
active drugs, in every season, paid their tax 
quota to the King in profusion  (5).Because of 
the King’s having no enemy, the living beings 
were not at any time dist urbed by mental ago-
nies, diseases, or excessive heat or cold  (6). 
Śrī Hari, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, resided at Hastināpura for a few months to pacify His rel-
atives and please His own sister [Subhadrā]  
(7).Afterwards, when the Lord asked permis-
sion to depart and the King gave it, the Lord 
offered His respects to Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira 
by bowing down at his feet, and the King em-
braced Him. After this the Lord, being em-
braced by others and receiving their obei-
sances, got into His chariot  (8).At that time 
Subhadrā, Draupadī, Kuntī, Uttarā, Gāndhārī, 
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Yuyutsu, K ṛpācārya, Nak ula, Sa-
hadeva, Bhīmasena, Dhaumya and Satyavatī all 
nearly fainted because it was impossible for 
them to bear separation from Lord K ṛṣṇa (9-
10).The intelligent, who have understood the 
Supreme Lord in association with pure devo-
tees and have become freed fr om bad material-
istic association, can never avoid hearing the 
glories of the Lord, even though they have 
heard them only once. How then could the 
Pāṇḍavas tolerate His separation, for they had 
been intimately associated with His person, 
seeing Him face to face, touching Him, con-
versing with Him, and sleeping, sitting and din-
ing with Him? (11-12)All their hearts were 
melting for Him on the pot of attraction. They 
looked at Him without blinking their eyes, and 
they moved hither and thither in perplexity  
(13).The female relatives, whose eyes were 
flooded with tears out of anxiety for K ṛṣṇa, 
came out of the palace. They could stop their 
tears only with great difficulty. They feared that 
tears would cause misfortune at the time of de-
parture  (14). 
While the Lord wa s departing from the pal-
ace of Hastināpura, different types of drums  
like the m ṛdaṅga, dhola, nagra, dhundhurī and 
dundubhi  and flutes of different types, the vī ṇā, 
gomukha and bherī, all sounded together to 
show Him honor  (15).Out of a loving desire to 
see the Lord, the royal ladies of the Kurus got 
up on top of the palace, and smiling with affec-
tion and shyness, they showered flowers upon 
the Lord  (16).At that time Arjuna, the great 
warrior and conqueror of sleep, who is the inti-
mate friend of the most beloved Supreme Lord, 
took up an umbrella which had a handle of jew-
els and was embroidered with lace and pearls  
(17).Uddhava and Sātyaki began to fan the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

62 
 Lord with decorated fans, and the Lord, as the 
master of Madhu, seated on scattered flowers, 
commanded them along the road  (18).It was be-
ing heard here and there that the benedictions 
being paid to K ṛṣṇa were neither b efitting nor 
unbefitting because they were all for the Abso-
lute, who was now playing the part of a human 
being  (19).Absorbed in the thought of the tran-
scendental qualities of the Lord, who is sung in 
select poetry, the ladies on the roofs of all the 
houses  of Hastināpura began to talk of Him. 
This talk was more attractive than the hymns of 
the Vedas  (20). 
They said: Here He is, the original Person-
ality of Godhead as we definitely remember 
Him. He alone existed before the manifested 
creation of the modes of nature, and in Him 
only, because He is the Supreme Lord, all liv-
ing beings merge, as if sleeping at night, their 
energy suspended  (21).The Personality of God-
head, again desiring to give names and forms to 
His parts and parcels, the living entities, placed 
them under the guidance of material nature. By 
His own potency, material nature is empowered 
to recreate  (22).Here is the same Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead whose transcendental 
form is experienced by the great devotees who 
are completely cleansed of mate rial conscious-
ness by dint of rigid devotional service and full 
control of life and the senses. And that is the 
only way to purify existence  (23).O dear 
friends, here is that very Personality of God-
head whose attractive and confidential pas-
times are descri bed in the confidential parts of 
Vedic literature by His great devotees. It is He 
only who creates, maintains and annihilates the 
material world and yet remains unaffected  
(24).Whenever there are kings and administra-
tors living like animals in the lowest m odes of 
existence, the Lord in His transcendental form 
manifests His supreme power, the Truth Posi-
tive, shows special mercy to the faithful, per-
forms wonderful activities and manifests vari-
ous transcendental forms as is necessary in dif-
ferent periods and a ges (25).Oh, how su-
premely glorified is the dynasty of King  Yadu, 
and how virtuous is the land of Mathurā, where 
the supreme leader of all living beings, the hus-
band  of the goddess of fortune, has taken His birth and wandered in His childhood  (26).Un-
doubtedly it is wonderful that Dvārakā has de-
feated the glories o f the heavenly planets and 
has enhanced the celebrity of the earth. The in-
habitants of Dvārakā are always seeing the soul 
of all living beings [K ṛṣṇa] in His loving fea-
ture. He glances at them and favors them with 
sweet smiles  (27).O friends, just think of  His 
wives, whose hands He has accepted. How they 
must have undergone vows, baths, fire sacri-
fices and perfect worship of the Lord of the uni-
verse to constantly relish now the nectar from 
His lips [by kissing]. The damsels of Vra-
jabhūmi would often faint j ust by expecting 
such favors  (28).The children of these ladies 
are Pradyumna, Sāmba, Amba, etc. Ladies like 
Rukmi ṇī, Satyabhāmā and Jāmbavatī were for-
cibly taken away by Him from their 
svaya ṁvara ceremonies after He defeated 
many powerful kings, headed by Śiśupāla. And 
other ladies were also forcibly taken away by 
Him after He killed Bhaumāsura and thousands 
of his assistants. All of these ladies are glori-
ous.All these women auspiciously glorified 
their lives despite their being without individu-
ality and wi thout purity. Their husband , the lo-
tuseyed Personality of Godhead, never left 
them alone at home. He always pleased their 
hearts by making valuable presentations  (29-
30). 
While the ladies of the capital [Hastināpura] 
were greeting Him and talking in this w ay, the 
Lord, smiling, accepted their good greetings, 
and casting the grace of His glance over them, 
He departed from the city  (31).Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, although no one’s enemy, en-
gaged four divisions of defense [horse, ele-
phant, chariot and army] to acco mpany Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of the asuras [demons]. The 
Mahārāja did this because of the enemy, and 
also out of affection for the Lord  (32).Out of 
profound affection for Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Pā ṇḍa-
vas, who were of the Kuru dynasty, accompa-
nied Him a considerable  distance to see Him 
off. They were overwhelmed with the thought 
of future separation. The Lord, however, per-
suaded them to return home, and He proceeded 
towards Dvārakā with His dear companions  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

63 
 (33).O Śaunaka, the Lord then proceeded to-
wards Kurujā ṅgala, Pāñcālā, Śūrasenā, the land 
on the bank of the river Yamunā, Brahmāvarta, 
Kuruk ṣetra, Matsya, Sārasvata, the province of 
the desert and the land of scanty water. After 
crossing these provinces He gradually reached 
the Sauvīra and Ābhīra provinces, then, we st of 
these, reached Dvārakā at last  (34-35).On His 
journey through these provinces He was wel-
comed, worshiped and given various presenta-
tions. In the evening, in all places, the Lord sus-
pended His journey to perform evening rites. 
This was regularly obser ved after sunset  (36). 
SB 1.11: Lord Kṛṣṇa’s Entrance into 
Dvārakā  
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Upon reaching the bor-
der of His most prosperous metropolis, known 
as the country of the Ānartas [Dvārakā], the 
Lord sounded His auspicious conchshell, her-
alding His arriv al and apparently pacifying the 
dejection of the inhabitants  (1).The white and 
fatbowled conchshell, being gripped by the 
hand of Lord K ṛṣṇa and sounded by Him, ap-
peared to be reddened by the touch of His tran-
scendental lips. It seemed that a white swan 
was playing in the stems of red lotus flowers  
(2).The citizens of Dvārakā, having heard that 
sound which threatens fear personified in the 
material world, began to run towards Him fast, 
just to have a long desired audience with the 
Lord, who is the protector  of all devotees  
(3).The citizens arrived before the Lord with 
their respective presentations, offering them to 
the fully satisfied and selfsufficient one, who, 
by His own potency, incessantly supplies oth-
ers (4). These presentations were like the offer-
ing of a lamp to the sun. Yet the citizens began 
to speak in ecstatic language to receive the 
Lord, just as wards welcome their guardian and 
father  (5).The citizens said: O Lord, You are 
worshiped by all demigods like Brahmā, the 
four Sanas and even the King of heaven. You 
are the ultimate rest for those who are really as-
piring to achieve the highest benefit of life. You 
are the supreme transcendental Lo rd, and inev-
itable time cannot exert its influence upon You  
(6).O creator of the universe, You are our mother, wellwisher, Lord, father, spiritual mas-
ter and worshipable Deity. By following in 
Your footsteps we have become successful in 
every respect. We p ray, therefore, that You 
continue to bless us with Your mercy  (7).Oh, it 
is our good luck that we have come again today 
under Your protection by Your presence, for 
Your Lordship rarely visits even the denizens 
of heaven. Now it is possible for us to look i nto 
Your smiling face, which is full of affectionate 
glances. We can now see Your transcendental 
form, full of all auspiciousness  (8).O lotuseyed 
Lord, whenever You go away to Mathu-
rāVṛndāvana or Hastināpura to meet Your 
friends and relatives, every moment  of Your 
absence seems like millions of years. O infalli-
ble one, at that time our eyes become useless, 
as if bereft of sun  (9).O master, if You live 
abroad all the time, then we cannot look at Your 
attractive face, whose smiles vanquish all our 
sufferings.  How can we exist without Your 
presence? (10) 
As Bhogavatī, the capital of Nāgaloka, is 
protected by the Nāgas, so was Dvārakā pro-
tected by the descendants of V ṛṣṇi  Bhoja, 
Madhu, Daśārha, Arha, Kukura, Andhaka, etc.  
who were as strong as Lord K ṛṣṇa (11).The city 
of Dvārakāpurī was filled with the op ulences of 
all seasons. There were hermitages, orchards, 
flower gardens, parks and reservoirs of water 
breeding lotus flowers all over  (12).The city 
gateway, the household doors and festooned 
arches along the roads were all nicely decorated 
with festive si gns like plantain trees and mango 
leaves, all to welcome the Lord. Flags, garlands 
and painted signs and slogans all combined to 
shade the sunshine  (13).The highways, sub-
ways, lanes, markets and public meeting places 
were all thoroughly cleansed and then m ois-
tened with scented water. And to welcome the 
Lord, fruits, flowers and unbroken seeds were 
strewn everywhere  (14).In each and every door 
of the residential houses, auspicious things like 
curd, unbroken fruits, sugarcane and full water-
pots with articles for worship, incense and can-
dles were all displayed  (15). 
On hearing that the most dear K ṛṣṇa was ap-
proaching Dvārakādhāma, magnanimous 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

64 
 Vasudeva, Akrūra, Ugrasena, Balarāma (the 
superhumanly powerful), Pradyumna, 
Cārude ṣṇa and Sāmba the son of Jāmbavatī, a ll 
extremely happy, abandoned resting, sitting 
and dining .They hastened toward the Lord on 
chariots with brāhma ṇas bearing flowers. Be-
fore them were elephants, emblems of good 
fortune. Conchshells and bugles were sounded, 
and Vedic hymns were chanted. Thus  they of-
fered their respects, which were saturated with 
affection  (16-18).At the same time, many hun-
dreds of wellknown prostitutes began to pro-
ceed on various vehicles. They were all very 
eager to meet the Lord, and their beautiful faces 
were decorated wit h dazzling earrings, which 
enhanced the beauty of their foreheads  (19).Ex-
pert dramatists, artists, dancers, singers, histo-
rians, genealogists and learned speakers all 
gave their respective contributions, being in-
spired by the superhuman pastimes of the Lor d. 
Thus they proceeded on and on  (20). 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, ap-
proached them and offered due honor and re-
spect to each and every one of the friends, rel-
atives, citizens and all others who came to re-
ceive and welcome Him  (21).The almighty 
Lord greeted everyone present by bowing His 
head, exchanging greetings, embracing, shak-
ing hands, looking and smiling, giving assur-
ances and awarding benedictions, even to the 
lowest in rank.Then the Lord personally en-
tered the city accompanied by elderly relatives 
and invalid brāhma ṇas with their wives, all of-
fering benedictions and singing the glories of 
the Lord. Others also praised the glories of the 
Lord  (22-23). 
When Lord K ṛṣṇa passed over the public 
roads, all the ladies from the respectable fami-
lies of Dvārakā went up to the roofs of their pal-
aces just to have a look at the Lord. They con-
sidered this to be the greatest festival  (24).The 
inhabitants of Dvārakā were regularly accus-
tomed to look upon the reservoir of all beauty, 
the infallible Lord, yet  they were never sati-
ated.The Lord’s chest is the abode of the god-
dess of fortune. His moonlike face is the drink-
ing vessel for eyes which hanker after all that is 
beautiful. His arms are the resting places for the administrative demigods. And His lotus fe et are 
the refuge of pure devotees who never talk or 
sing of any subject except His Lordship  (25-
26).As the Lord passed along the public road of 
Dvārakā, His head was protected from the sun-
shine by a white umbrella. White feathered fans 
moved in semicircle s, and showers of flowers 
fell upon the road. His yellow garments and 
garlands of flowers made it appear as if a dark 
cloud were surrounded simultaneously by sun, 
moon, lightning and rainbows  (27). 
After entering the house of His father, He 
was embraced by  the mothers present, and the 
Lord offered His obeisances unto them by plac-
ing His head at their feet. The mothers were 
headed by Devakī [His real mother].The moth-
ers, after embracing their son, sat Him on their 
laps. Due to pure affection, milk sprang fro m 
their breasts. They were overwhelmed with de-
light, and the tears from their eyes wetted the 
Lord  (28-29).Thereafter, the Lord entered His 
palaces, which were perfect to the fullest ex-
tent. His wives lived in them, and they num-
bered over sixteen thousand  (30).The queens of 
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa rejoiced within their minds to 
see their husband  home after a long period 
abroad. The queens got up at once from their 
seats and meditations. As was socially custom-
ary, they covered their faces shyly and looked 
about coyly  (31).The insuperable ecstasy was 
so strong that the queens, who were shy, first 
embraced the Lord in the innermost recesses of 
their hearts. Then they embraced Him visually, 
and then they sent their sons to embrace Him 
[which is equal to personal embracin g]. But, O 
chief amongst the Bh ṛgus, though they tried to 
restrain their feelings, they inadvertently shed 
tears  (32).Although Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa was con-
stantly by their sides, as well as exclusively 
alone, His feet appeared to them to be newer 
and newer. The goddess of fortune, although by 
nature always restless and moving, could not 
quit the Lord’s feet. So what woman can be de-
tached from those feet, having once taken shel-
ter of them? (33) 
The Lord was pacified after killing those 
kings who were burdensome to the earth. They 
were puffed up with their military strength, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

65 
 their horses, elephants, chariots, infantry, etc. 
He Himself was not a party in the fight. He 
simply created hostility between the powerful 
administrators, and they fought amongst them-
selves. He was like the wind which causes fric-
tion between bamboos and so sparks a fire  
(34).That Supreme  Personality of Godhead, Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, out of His causeless mercy, appeared on 
this planet by His internal potency and enjoyed 
Himself amongst competent women as if He 
were engaging in mundane affairs  (35).Alt-
hough the queens’ beautiful smiles and furtive 
glances were all spotless and exciting, and alt-
hough they could conquer Cupid himself by 
making him give up his bow in frustration, and 
although even the tolerant Śiva could fall vic-
tim to them, still, despite all their magical feats 
and attractions, they cou ld not agitate the 
senses of the Lord.The common materialistic 
conditioned souls speculate that the Lord is one 
of them. Out of their ignorance they think that 
the Lord is affected by matter, although He is 
unattached (36-37).This is the divinity of the 
Personality of Godhead: He is not affected by 
the qualities of material nature, even though He 
is in contact with them. Similarly, the devotees 
who have taken shelter of the Lord do not be-
come influenced by the material qualities  
(38).The simple and delicate women truly 
thought that Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, their beloved hus-
band , followed them and was dominated by 
them. They were unaware of the extent of the 
glories of their husband , as the atheists are un-
aware of Him as the supreme controller  (39). 
SB 1.12: Birth of E mperor Parīkṣit  
The sage Śaunaka said:  The womb of Ut-
tarā, mother of Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, was spoiled 
by the dreadful and invincible brahmāstra 
weapon released by Aśvatthāmā. But Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit was saved by the Supreme Lord  
(1).How was the great emperor P arīkṣit, who 
was a highly intelligent and great devotee, born 
in that womb? How did his death take place, 
and what did he achieve after his death?We all 
respectfully want to hear about him [Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit] to whom Śukadeva Gosvāmī imparted 
transcendenta l knowledge. Please speak on this 
matter  (2-3). Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Emperor 
Yudhi ṣṭhira administered generously to every-
one during his reign. He was exactly like his 
father. He had no personal ambition and was 
freed from all sorts of sense gratification  be-
cause of his continuous service unto the lotus 
feet of the Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa (4). 
News even reached the celestial planets 
about Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira’s worldly posses-
sions, the sacrifices by which he would attain a 
better destination, his queen, his stalwar t broth-
ers, his extensive land, his sovereignty over the 
planet earth, his fame, etc  (5).O brāhma ṇas, the 
opulence of the King was so enchanting that the 
denizens of heaven aspired for it. But because 
he was absorbed in the service of the Lord, 
nothing cou ld satisfy him except the Lord’s ser-
vice (6). 
O son of Bh ṛgu [Śaunaka], when the child 
Parīk ṣit, the great fighter, was in the womb of 
his mother, Uttarā, and was suffering from the 
burning heat of the brahmāstra [thrown by 
Aśvatthāmā], he could observe th e Supreme 
Lord coming to him  (7).He [the Lord] was only 
thumb high, but He was all transcendental. He 
had a very beautiful, blackish, infallible body, 
and He wore a dress of lightning yellow and a 
helmet of blazing gold. Thus He was seen by 
the child.The L ord was enriched with four 
hands, earrings of molten gold and eyes blood 
red with fury. As He loitered about, His club 
constantly encircled Him like a shooting star  
(8-9).The Lord was thus engaged in vanquish-
ing the radiation of the brahmāstra, just as the 
sun evaporates a drop of dew. He was observed 
by the child, who thought about who He was  
(10).While thus being observed by the child, 
the Supreme Lord Personality of God head, the 
Supersoul of everyone and the protector of the 
righteous, who stretches in all directions and 
who is unlimited by time and space, disap-
peared at once  (11). 
Thereupon, when all the good signs of the 
zodiac gradually evolved, the heir apparent of 
Pāṇḍu, who would be exactly like him in prow-
ess, took birth  (12).King Yudhi ṣṭhira, who was 
very satisfied with the birth of Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit, had the purificatory process of birth 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

66 
 performed. Learned brāhma ṇas, headed by 
Dhaumya and K ṛpa, recited auspicious  hymns  
(13).Upon the birth of a son, the King, who 
knew how, where and when charity should be 
given, gave gold, land, villages, elephants, 
horses and good food grains to the brāhma ṇas 
(14).The learned brāhma ṇas, who were very 
satisfied with the charities o f the King, ad-
dressed him as the chief amongst the Pūrus and 
informed him that his son was certainly in the 
line of descent from the Pūrus.The brāhma ṇas 
said: This spotless son has been restored by the 
allpowerful and allpervasive Lord Vi ṣṇu, the 
Personali ty of Godhead, in order to oblige you. 
He was saved when he was doomed to be de-
stroyed by an irresistible supernatural weapon  
(15-16).For this reason this child will be well 
known in the world as one who is protected by 
the Personality of Godhead. O most f ortunate 
one, there is no doubt that this child will be-
come a firstclass devotee and will be qualified 
with all good qualities  (17). 
The good King [Yudhi ṣṭhira] inquired : O 
great souls, will he become as saintly a king, as 
pious in his very name and as famous and glo-
rified in his achievements, as others who ap-
peared in this great royal family? (18) 
The learned brāhma ṇas said : O son of 
Pṛthā, this child shall be exactly like King 
Ikṣvāku, son of Manu, in maintaining all those 
who are born. And as for following the brah-
minical principles, especially in being true to 
his promise, he shall be exactly like Rāma, the 
Personality of Godhead, the  son of Mahārāja 
Daśaratha  (19).This child will be a munificent 
donor of charity and protector of the surren-
dered, like the famous King Śibi of the Uśīnara 
country. And he will expand the name and fame 
of his family like Bharata, the son of Mahārāja 
Duṣyanta (20).Amongst great bowmen, this 
child will be as good as Arjuna. He will be as 
irresistible as fire and as unsurpassable as the 
ocean  (21).This child will be as strong as a lion, 
and as worthy a shelter as the Himālaya Moun-
tains. He will be forbearing l ike the earth, and 
as tolerant as his parents  (22).This child will be 
like his grandfather Yudhi ṣṭhira or Brahmā in 
equanimity of mind. He will be munificent like the lord of the Kailāsa Hill, Śiva. And he will 
be the resort of everyone, like the Supreme P er-
sonality of Godhead, Nārāya ṇa, who is even the 
shelter of the goddess of fortune  (23).This child 
will be almost as good as Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa by fol-
lowing in His footsteps. In magnanimity he will 
become as great as King Rantideva. And in re-
ligion he will be like Mahārāja Yayāti  (24).This 
child will be like Bali Mahārāja in patience, a 
staunch devotee of Lord K ṛṣṇa like Prahlāda 
Mahārāja, a performer of many aśvamedha 
[horse] sacrifices and a follower of the old and 
experienced men  (25).This child will be the fa-
ther of kings who will be like sages. For world 
peace and for the sake of religion, he will be the 
chastiser of the upstarts and the quarrelsome  
(26).After hearing about his death, which will 
be caused by the bite of a snakebird sent by a 
son of a brāhma ṇa, he will get himself freed 
from all material attachment and surrender unto 
the Personality of Godhead, taking shelter of 
Him (27).After inquiring about proper 
selfknowledge from the son of Vyāsadeva, who 
will be a great philosopher, he will renounce all  
material attachment and achieve a life of fear-
lessness  (28). 
Thus those who were expert in astrological 
knowledge and in performance of the birth cer-
emony instructed King Yudhi ṣṭhira about the 
future history of his child. Then, being sumptu-
ously remunerat ed, they all returned to their re-
spective homes  (29).So his son would become 
famous in the world as Parīk ṣit [examiner] be-
cause he would come to examine all human be-
ings in his search after that personality whom 
he saw before his birth. Thus he would come to 
constantly contemplate Him  (30).As the moon, 
in its waxing fortnight, develops day after day, 
so the royal prince [Parīk ṣit] very soon devel-
oped luxuriantly under the care and full facili-
ties of his guardian grandfathers  (31). 
Just at this time, King Yu dhiṣṭhira was con-
sidering performing a horse sacrifice to get 
freed from sins incurred from fighting with 
kinsmen. But he became anxious to get some 
wealth, for there were no surplus funds outside 
of fines and tax collection  (32).Understanding 
the hearty w ishes of the King, his brothers, as 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

67 
 advised by the infallible Lord K ṛṣṇa, collected 
sufficient riches from the north [left by King 
Marutta]  (33).By those riches, the King could 
procure the ingredients for three horse sacri-
fices. Thus the pious King Yudhi ṣṭhira, who 
was very fearful after the Battle of Kuruk ṣetra, 
pleased Lord Hari, the Personality of Godhead  
(34).Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Personality of God-
head, being invited to the sacrifices by 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, saw to it that they were 
performed by qualifi ed [twiceborn] brāhma ṇas. 
After that, for the pleasure of the relatives, the 
Lord remained a few months  (35).O Śaunaka, 
thereafter the Lord, having bade farewell to 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira, Draupadī and other relatives, 
started for the city of Dvārakā, accompanie d by 
Arjuna and other members of the Yadu dynasty  
(36). 
SB 1.13: Dhṛtarāṣṭra Quits Home  
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said:  While traveling on 
a pilgrimage, Vidura received knowledge of the 
destination of the self from the great sage Mait-
reya and then returned to Hasti nāpura. He be-
came as well versed in the subject as he desired  
(1).After asking various questions and becom-
ing established in the transcendental loving ser-
vice of Lord K ṛṣṇa, Vidura retired from putting 
questions to Maitreya Muni  (2).When they saw 
Vidura re turn to the palace, all the inhabitants  
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, his younger brothers, 
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sātyaki, Sañjaya, K ṛpācārya, 
Kuntī, Gāndhārī, Draupadī, Subhadrā, Uttarā, 
Kṛpī, many other wives of the Kauravas, and 
other ladies with children  all hurried to him in 
great delight. It so appeared that they had re-
gained their consciousness after a long period . 
With great delight they all approached him, as 
if life had returned to their bodies. They ex-
changed obeisances and welcomed each other 
with embraces.Due  to anxieties and long sepa-
ration, they all cried out of affection. King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira then arranged to offer sitting ac-
commodations and a reception  (3-6).After 
Vidura ate sumptuously and took sufficient 
rest, he was comfortably seated. Then the King 
began t o speak to him, and all who were present 
there listened  (7). 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira said:  My uncle, do you remember how you always protected us, 
along with our mother, from all sorts of calam-
ities? Your partiality, like the wings of a bird, 
saved us from poi soning and arson  (8).While 
traveling on the surface of the earth, how did 
you maintain your livelihood? At which holy 
places and pilgrimage sites did you render ser-
vice?  (9)My lord, devotees like your good self 
are verily holy places personified. Because y ou 
carry the Personality of Godhead within your 
heart, you turn all places into places of pilgrim-
age (10).My uncle, you mus t have visited 
Dvārakā. In that holy place are our friends and 
wellwishers, the descendants of Yadu, who are 
always rapt in the service of the Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa. 
You might have seen them or heard about them. 
Are they all living happily in their abodes? (11) 
Thus being questioned by Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, Mahātmā Vidura gradually de-
scribed everything he had personally experi-
enced, except news of the annihilation of the 
Yadu dynasty  (12).Compassionate Mahātmā 
Vidura could not stand to see the Pā ṇḍavas dis-
tressed a t any time. Therefore he did not dis-
close this unpalatable and unbearable incident 
because calamities come of their own accord  
(13). 
Thus Mahātmā Vidura, being treated just 
like a godly person by his kinsmen, remained 
there for a certain period just to rec tify the men-
tality of his eldest brother and in this way bring 
happiness to all the others  (14).As long as 
Vidura played the part of a śūdra, being cursed 
by Ma ṇḍūka Muni, Aryamā officiated at the 
post of Yamarāja to punish those who commit-
ted sinful acts  (15).Having won his kingdom 
and observed the birth of one grandson compe-
tent to continue the noble tradition of his fam-
ily, Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira reigned peacefully 
and enjoyed uncommon opulence in coopera-
tion with his younger brothers, who were all ex-
pert administrators to the common people  
(16).Insurmountable eternal time impercepti-
bly overcomes those who are too much at-
tached to family affairs and are always en-
grossed in their thought  (17). 
Mahātmā Vidura knew all this, and there-
fore he addressed Dh ṛtarāṣṭra, saying: My dear 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

68 
 King, please get out of here immediately. Do 
not delay. Just see how fear has overtaken you  
(18).This frightful situation cannot be remedied 
by any person in this material world. My lord, 
it is the Supreme Personality of Godhead as 
eternal time [kāla] that has approached us all  
(19).Whoever is under the influence of su-
preme kāla [eternal time] must surrender his 
most dear life, and what to speak of other 
things, such as wealth, honor, children, land 
and home  (20).Your father, brother, w ellwish-
ers and sons are all dead and passed away. You 
yourself have expended the major portion of 
your life, your body is now overtaken by inva-
lidity, and you are living in the home of an-
other.You have been blind from your very 
birth, and recently you have  become hard of 
hearing. Your memory is shortened, and your 
intelligence is disturbed. Your teeth are loose, 
your liver is defective, and you are coughing up 
mucus  (21).Alas, how powerful are the hopes 
of a living being to continue his life. Verily, 
you ar e living just like a household dog and are 
eating remnants of food given by Bhīma  
(22).There is no need to live a degraded life and 
subsist on the charity of those whom you tried 
to kill by arson and poisoning. You also in-
sulted their married wife and usur ped their 
kingdom and wealth  (23).Despite your unwill-
ingness to die and your desire to live even at the 
cost of honor and prestige, your miserly body 
will certainly dwindle and deteriorate like an 
old garment  (24).He is called undisturbed who 
goes to an un known, remote place and, freed 
from all obligations, quits his material body 
when it has become useless  (25).He is certainly 
a firstclass man who awakens and understands, 
either by himself or from others, the falsity and 
misery of this material world and t hus leaves 
home and depends fully on the Personality of 
Godhead residing within his heart  (26).Please, 
therefore, leave for the North immediately, 
without letting your relatives know, for soon 
that time will approach which will diminish the 
good qualities of men  (27). 
Thus Mahārāja Dh ṛtarāṣṭra, the scion of the 
family of Ajamī ḍha, firmly convinced by intro-
spective knowledge [prajñā], broke at once the strong network of familial affection by his res-
olute determination. Thus he immediately left 
home to set out on the path  of liberation, as di-
rected by his younger brother Vidura  (28).The 
gentle and chaste Gāndhārī, who was the 
daughter of King Subala of Kandahar [or 
Gāndhāra], followed her husband , seeing that 
he was going to the Himālaya Mountains, 
which are the delight of  those who have ac-
cepted the staff of the renounced order like 
fighters who have accepted a good lashing from 
the enemy  (29). 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, whose enemy was 
never born, performed his daily morning duties 
by praying, offering fire sacrifice to the su ngod, 
and offering obeisances, grains, cows, land and 
gold to the brāhma ṇas. He then entered the pal-
ace to pay respects to the elderly. However, he 
could not find his uncles or aunt, the daughter 
of King Subala  (30).Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, full 
of anxiety, t urned to Sañjaya, who was sitting 
there, and said: O Sañjaya, where is our uncle, 
who is old and blind? (31)Where is my well-
wisher, uncle Vidura, and mother Gāndhārī, 
who is very afflicted due to all her sons’ de-
mise? My uncle Dh ṛtarāṣṭra was also very mor-
tified due to the death of all his sons and grand-
sons. Undoubtedly I am very ungrateful. Did 
he, therefore, take my offenses very seriously 
and, along with his wife, drown himself in the 
Ganges? (32). When my father, Pā ṇḍu, fell 
down and we were all small ch ildren, these two 
uncles gave us protection from all kinds of ca-
lamities. They were always our good wellwish-
ers. Alas, where have they gone from 
here? (33). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Because of compas-
sion and mental agitation, Sañjaya, not having 
seen his own mast er, Dh ṛtarāṣṭra, was ag-
grieved and could not properly reply to 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira (34).First he slowly pac-
ified his mind by intelligence, and wiping away 
his tears and thinking of the feet of his master, 
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, he began to reply to Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira (35). 
Sañjaya said : My dear descendant of the 
Kuru dynasty, I have no information of the de-
termination of your two uncles and Gāndhārī. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

69 
 O King, I have been cheated by those great 
souls  (36).While Sañjaya was thus speaking, 
Śrī Nārada, the powerful dev otee of the Lord, 
appeared on the scene carrying his tumburu. 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira and his brothers received 
him properly by getting up from their seats and 
offering obeisances  (37). 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira said : O godly per-
sonality, I do not know where my tw o uncles 
have gone. Nor can I find my ascetic aunt who 
is griefstricken by the loss of all her sons  
(38).You are like a captain of a ship in a great 
ocean and you can direct us to our destination. 
Thus addressed, the godly personality, Devar ṣi 
Nārada, grea test of the philosopher devotees, 
began to speak  (39).Śrī Nārada said: O pious 
King, do not lament for anyone, for everyone is 
under the control of the Supreme Lord. There-
fore all living beings and their leaders carry on 
worship to be well protected. It is  He only who 
brings them together and disperses them  
(40).As a cow, bound through the nose by a 
long rope, is conditioned, so also human beings 
are bound by different Vedic injunctions and 
are conditioned to obey the orders of the Su-
preme  (41).As a player sets up and disperses his 
playthings according to his own sweet will, so 
the supreme will of the Lord brings men to-
gether and separates them  (42).O King, in all 
circumstances, whether you consider the soul 
to be an eternal principle, or the material body 
to be perishable, or everything to exist in the 
impersonal Absolute Truth, or everything to be 
an inexplicable combination of matter and 
spirit, feelings of separation are due only to il-
lusory affection and nothing more  (43).There-
fore give up your anxiety d ue to ignorance of 
the self. You are now thinking of how they, 
who are helpless poor creatures, will exist with-
out you  (44).This gross material body made of 
five elements is already under the control of 
eternal time [kāla], action [karma] and the 
modes of material nature [gu ṇa]. How then can 
it, being already in the jaws of the serpent, pro-
tect others? (45)Those who are devoid of hands 
are prey for those who have hands; those de-
void of legs are prey for the fourlegged.  The 
weak are the subsistence of the strong, and the 
general rule holds that one living being is food for another  (46)Therefore, O King, you should 
look to the Supreme Lord only, who is one 
without a second and who manifests Himself 
by different energies a nd is both within and 
without  (47).That Supreme Personality of God-
head, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, in the guise of alldevour-
ing time [kālarūpa] has now descended to the 
earth to eliminate the envious from the world  
(48).The Lord has already performed His duties 
to help the demigods, and He is awaitin g the 
rest. You Pā ṇḍavas may wait as long as the 
Lord is here on earth  (49). 
O King, your uncle Dh ṛtarāṣṭra, his brother 
Vidura and his wife Gāndhārīhave gone to the 
southern side of the Himālaya Mountains, 
where there are shelters of the great sages.The 
place is called Saptasrota [“divided by seven”] 
because there the waters of the sacred Ganges 
were divided into seven branches. This was 
done for the satisfaction of the seven great ṛṣis 
(51).On the banks at Saptasrota, Dh ṛtarāṣṭra is 
now engaged in beginni ng a ṣṭāṅgayoga by 
bathing three times daily, in the morning, noon 
and evening, by performing the Agnihotra sac-
rifice with fire and by drinking only water. This 
helps one control the mind and the senses and 
frees one completely from thoughts of familial 
affection  (52).One who has controlled the sit-
ting postures [the yogic āsanas] and the breath-
ing process can turn the senses toward the Ab-
solute Personality of Godhead and thus become 
immune to the contaminations of the modes of 
material nature, namely mundane  goodness, 
passion and ignorance  (53).Dhṛtarāṣṭra will 
have to amalgamate his pure identity with in-
telligence and then merge into the Supreme Be-
ing with knowledge of his qualitative oneness, 
as a living entity, with the Supreme Brahman. 
Being freed from th e blocked sky, he will have 
to rise to the spiritual sky.He will have to sus-
pend all the actions of the senses, even from the 
outside, and will have to be impervious to in-
teractions of the senses, which are influenced 
by the modes of material nature. After  renounc-
ing all material duties, he must become immov-
ably established, beyond all sources of hin-
drances on the path  (54-55).O King, he will quit 
his body, most probably on the fifth day from 
today. And his body will turn to ashes  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

70 
 (56).While outside observi ng her husband , who 
will burn in the fire of mystic power along with 
his thatched cottage, his chaste wife will enter 
the fire with rapt attention  (57).Vidura, being 
affected with delight and grief, will then leave 
that place of sacred pilgrimage  (58).Havi ng 
spoken thus, the great sage Nārada, along with 
his vī ṇā, ascended into outer space. Yudhi ṣṭhira 
kept his instruction in his heart and so was able 
to get rid of all lamentations  (59). 
SB 1.14: The Disappearance of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa  
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said : Arjuna  went to 
Dvārakā to see Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa and other friends 
and also to learn from the Lord of His next ac-
tivities  (1).A few months passed, and Arjuna 
did not return. Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira then be-
gan to observe some inauspicious omens, 
which were fearful in th emselves  (2).He saw 
that the direction of eternal time had changed, 
and this was very fearful. There were disrup-
tions in the seasonal regularities. The people in 
general had become very greedy, angry and de-
ceitful. And he saw that they were adopting 
foul m eans of livelihood  (3).All ordinary trans-
actions and dealings became polluted with 
cheating, even between friends. And in familial 
affairs, there was always misunderstanding be-
tween fathers, mothers and sons, between well-
wishers, and between brothers. Even  between 
husband  and wife there was always strain and 
quarrel  (4).In course of time it came to pass that 
people in general became accustomed to greed, 
anger, pride, etc. Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, ob-
serving all these omens, spoke to his younger 
brother  (5). 
Mah ārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira said  to his younger 
brother Bhīmasena: I sent Arjuna to Dvārakā to 
meet his friends and to learn from the Person-
ality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, of His program of 
work  (6).Since he departed, seven months have 
passed, yet he has not returned. I do  not know 
factually how things are going there  (7).Is He 
going to quit His earthly pastimes, as Devar ṣi 
Nārada indicated? Has that time already ar-
rived? (8)From Him only, all our kingly opu-
lence, good wives, lives, progeny, control over our subjects, victor y over our enemies, and fu-
ture accommodations in higher planets have be-
come possible. All this is due to His causeless 
mercy upon us  (9).Just see, O man with a 
tiger’s strength, how many miseries due to ce-
lestial influences, earthly reactions and bodily 
pains  all very dangerous in themselves  are 
foreboding danger in the near future by delud-
ing our intelligence  (10).The left side of my 
body  my thighs, arms and eyes  are all quiver-
ing again and again. I am having heart palpita-
tions due to fear. All this in dicates undesirable 
happenings  (11).Just see, O Bhīma, how the 
shejackal cries at the rising sun and vomits fire, 
and how the dog barks at me fearlessly  (12).O 
Bhīmasena, tiger amongst men, now useful an-
imals like cows are passing me on my left side, 
and l ower animals like the asses are circumam-
bulating me. My horses appear to weep upon 
seeing me  (13).Just see! This pigeon is like a 
messenger of death. The shrieks of the owls and 
their rival crows make my heart tremble. It ap-
pears that they want to make a v oid of the 
whole universe  (14).Just see how the smoke en-
circles the sky. It appears that the earth and 
mountains are throbbing. Just hear the cloud-
less thunder and see the bolts from the blue  
(15).The wind blows violently, blasting dust 
everywhere and crea ting darkness. Clouds are 
raining everywhere with bloody disasters  
(16).The rays of the sun are declining, and the 
stars appear to be fighting amongst themselves. 
Confused living entities appear to be ablaze and 
weeping  (17).Rivers, tributaries, ponds, res er-
voirs and the mind are all perturbed. Butter no 
longer ignites fire. What is this extraordinary 
time? What is going to happen? (18)The calves 
do not suck the teats of the cows, nor do the 
cows give milk. They are standing, crying, tears 
in their eyes, and  the bulls take no pleasure in 
the pasturing grounds  (19).The Deities seem to 
be crying in the temple, lamenting and perspir-
ing. They seem about to leave. All the cities, 
villages, towns, gardens, mines and hermitages 
are now devoid of beauty and bereft of  all hap-
piness. I do not know what sort of calamities 
are now awaiting us  (20).I think that all these 
earthly disturbances indicate some greater loss 
to the good fortune of the world. The world was 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

71 
 fortunate to have been marked with the foot-
prints of the l otus feet of the Lord. These signs 
indicate that this will no longer be  (21).O 
Brāhma ṇa Śaunaka, while Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, observing the inauspicious signs 
on the earth at that time, was thus thinking to 
himself, Arjuna came back from the city of the 
Yadus [Dvārakā]  (22).When he bowed at his 
feet, the King saw that his dejection was un-
precedented. His head was down, and tears 
glided from his lotus eyes . Seeing Arjuna pale 
due to heartfelt anxieties, the King, remember-
ing the indications of the sage Nārada , ques-
tioned him in the midst of friends  (23-24). 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira said:  My dear 
brother, please tell me whether our friends and 
relatives, such as Madhu, Bhoja, Daśārha, 
Ārha, Sātvata, Andhaka and the members of the 
Yadu family are all passing their d ays in happi-
ness (25).Is my respectable grandfather 
Śūrasena in a happy mood? And are my mater-
nal uncle Vasudeva and his younger brothers 
all doing well? (26)His seven wives, headed by 
Devakī, are all sisters. Are they and their sons 
and daughtersinlaw all happy? (27)Are 
Ugrasena, whose son was the mischievous 
Kaṁsa, and his younger brother still living? 
Are H ṛdīka and his son K ṛtavarmā happy? Are 
Akrūra, Jayanta, Gada, Sāra ṇa and Śatrujit all 
happy? How is Balarāma, the Personality of 
Godhead and the protect or of devotees? (28-
29)How is Pradyumna, the great general of the 
Vṛṣṇi family? Is He happy? And is Aniruddha, 
the plenary expansion of the Personality of 
Godhead, faring well? (30)Are all the chieftain 
sons of Lord K ṛṣṇa, such as Su ṣeṇa, Cārude ṣṇa, 
Sāmba th e son of Jāmbavatī, and Ṛṣabha, along 
with their sons, all doing well? (31)Also, Śru-
tadeva, Uddhava and others, Nanda, Sunanda 
and other leaders of liberated souls who are 
constant companions of the Lord are protected 
by Lord Balarāma and K ṛṣṇa. Are they al l do-
ing well in their respective functions? Do they, 
who are all eternally bound in friendship with 
us, remember our welfare? (32-33) 
Is Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who gives pleasure to the cows, the senses and the brāhma ṇas, who is ver y affec-
tionate towards His devotees, enjoying the pi-
ous assembly at Dvārakā Purī surrounded by 
friends? (34)The original Personality of God-
head, the enjoyer, and Balarāma, the primeval 
Lord Ananta, are staying in the ocean of the 
Yadu dynasty for the welfar e, protection and 
general progress of the entire universe. And the 
members of the Yadu dynasty, being protected 
by the arms of the Lord, are enjoying life like 
the residents of the spiritual sky  (35-36).Simply 
by administering comforts at the lotus feet of  
the Lord, which is the most important of all ser-
vices, the queens at Dvārakā, headed by 
Satyabhāmā, induced the Lord to conquer the 
demigods. Thus the queens enjoy things which 
are prerogatives of the wives of the controller 
of thunderbolts  (37).The great  heroes of the 
Yadu dynasty, being protected by the arms of 
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, always remain fearless in every 
respect. And therefore their feet trample over 
the Sudharmā assembly house, which the best 
demigods deserved but which was taken away 
from them  (38). 
My brother Arjuna, please tell me whether 
your health is all right. You appear to have lost 
your bodily luster. Is this due to others disre-
specting and neglecting you because of your 
long stay at Dvārakā? (39) Has someone ad-
dressed you with unfriendly wor ds or threat-
ened you? Could you not give charity to one 
who asked, or could you not keep your promise 
to someone? (40)You are always the protector 
of the deserving living beings, such as 
brāhma ṇas, children, cows, women and the dis-
eased. Could you not give them protection 
when they approached you for shelter?  
(41)Have you contacted a woman of impeach-
able character, or have you not properly treated 
a deserving woman? Or have you been defeated 
on the way by someone who is inferior or equal 
to you? (42)Have you not taken care of old men 
and boys who deserve to dine with you? Have 
you left them and taken your meals alone? 
Have you committed some unpardonable mis-
take which is considered to be abomina-
ble?(43)Or is it that you are feeling empty for 
all time because y ou might have lost your most 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

72 
 intimate friend, Lord K ṛṣṇa? O my brother Ar-
juna, I can think of no other reason for your be-
coming so dejected  (44). 
SB 1.15: The Pāṇḍavas Retire Timely  
Sūta Gosvāmī said: Arjuna, the celebrated 
friend of Lord K ṛṣṇa, was griefs tricken because 
of his strong feeling of separation from K ṛṣṇa, 
over and above all Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira’s 
speculative inquiries  (1).Due to grief, Arjuna’s 
mouth and lotuslike heart had dried up. There-
fore his body lost all luster. Now, remembering 
the Supr eme Lord, he could hardly utter a word 
in reply  (2).With great difficulty he checked the 
tears of grief that smeared his eyes. He was 
very distressed because Lord K ṛṣṇa was out of 
his sight, and he increasingly felt affection for 
Him.Remembering Lord K ṛṣṇa and His well 
wishes, benefactions, intimate familial rela-
tions and His chariot driving, Arjuna, over-
whelmed and breathing very heavily, began to 
speak  (3-4). 
Arjuna said:  O King! The Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Hari, who treated me exactly 
like an int imate friend, has left me alone. Thus 
my astounding power, which astonished even 
the demigods, is no longer with me  (5).I have 
just lost Him whose separation for a moment 
would render all the universes unfavorable and 
void, like bodies without life  (6).Only by His 
merciful strength was I able to vanquish all the 
lusty princes assembled at the palace of King 
Drupada for the selection of the bridegroom. 
With my bow and arrow I could pierce the fish 
target and thereby gain the hand of Draupadī  
(7).Because He w as near me, it was possible for 
me to conquer with great dexterity the powerful 
King of heaven, Indradeva, along with his dem-
igod associates and thus enable the firegod to 
devastate the Khā ṇḍava Forest. And only by 
His grace was the demon named Maya saved 
from the blazing Khā ṇḍava Forest, and thus we 
could build our assembly house of wonderful 
architectural workmanship, where all the 
princes assembled during the performance of 
Rājasūyayajña and paid you tributes  (8).Your 
respectable younger brother, who pos sesses the 
strength of ten thousand elephants, killed, by His grace, Jarāsandha, whose feet were wor-
shiped by many kings. These kings had been 
brought for sacrifice in Jarāsandha’s 
Mahābhairavayajña, but they were thus re-
leased. Later they paid tribute to Your Majesty  
(9).It was He only who loosened the hair of all 
the wives of the miscreants who dared open the 
cluster of your Queen’s hair, which had been 
nicely dressed and sanctified for the great 
Rājasūya sacrificial ceremony. At that time she 
fell down a t the feet of Lord K ṛṣṇa with tears in 
her eyes  (10).During our exile, Durvāsā Muni, 
who eats with his ten thousand disciples, in-
trigued with our enemies to put us in dangerous 
trouble. At that time He [Lord K ṛṣṇa], simply 
by accepting the remnants of food , saved us. By 
His accepting food thus, the assembly of munis, 
while bathing in the river, felt sumptuously fed. 
And all the three worlds were also satisfied  
(11).It was by His influence only that in a fight 
I was able to astonish the personality of god 
Lord Śiva and his wife, the daughter of Mount 
Himālaya. Thus he [Lord Śiva] became pleased 
with me and awarded me his own weapon. 
Other demigods also delivered their respective 
weapons to me, and in addition I was able to 
reach the heavenly planets in this p resent body 
and was allowed a halfelevated seat  (12).When 
I stayed for some days as a guest in the heav-
enly planets, all the heavenly demigods, includ-
ing King Indradeva, took shelter of my arms, 
which were marked with the Gā ṇḍīva bow, to 
kill the demon nam ed Nivātakavaca. O King, 
descendant of Ajamī ḍha, at the present moment 
I am bereft of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, by whose influence I was so powerful  
(13). 
The military strength of the Kauravas was 
like an ocean in which there dwelled many in-
vinci ble existences, and thus it was insur-
mountable. But because of His friendship, I, 
seated on the chariot, was able to cross over it. 
And only by His grace was I able to regain the 
cows and also collect by force many helmets of 
the kings, which were bedecked  with jewels 
that were sources of all brilliance  (14).It was 
He only who withdrew the duration of life from 
everyone and who, in the battlefield, withdrew 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

73 
 the speculative power and strength of enthusi-
asm from the great military phalanx made by 
the Kauravas , headed by Bhī ṣma, Kar ṇa, 
Droṇa, Śalya, etc. Their arrangement was ex-
pert and more than adequate, but He [Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa], while going forward, did all this  
(15).Great generals like Bhī ṣma, Dro ṇa, Kar ṇa, 
Bhūriśravā, Suśarmā, Śalya, Jayadratha and 
Bāhlika all directed their invincible weapons 
against me. But by His [Lord K ṛṣṇa’s] grace 
they could not even touch a hair on my head. 
Similarly, Prahlāda Mahārāja, the supreme 
devotee of Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva, was unaffected 
by the weapons the demons used against him  
(16).It was by His mercy only that my enemies 
neglected to kill me when I descended from my 
chariot to get water for my thirsty horses. And 
it was due to my lack of esteem for my Lord 
that I dared engage Him as my chariot driver, 
for He is worshiped and of fered services by the 
best men to attain salvation  (17).O King! His 
jokings and frank talks were pleasing and beau-
tifully decorated with smiles. His addresses 
unto me as “O son of P ṛthā, O friend, O son of 
the Kuru dynasty,” and all such heartiness are 
now remembered by me, and thus I am over-
whelmed  (18).Gener ally both of us used to live 
together and sleep, sit and loiter together. And 
at the time of advertising oneself for acts of 
chivalry, sometimes, if there were any irregu-
larity, I used to reproach Him by saying, “My 
friend, You are very truthful.” Even in those 
hours when His value was minimized, He, be-
ing the Supreme Soul, used to tolerate all those 
utterings of mine, excusing me exactly as a true 
friend excuses his true friend, or a father ex-
cuses his son  (19).O Emperor, now I am sepa-
rated from my friend and dearmost wellwisher, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and 
therefore my heart appears to be void of every-
thing. In His absence I have been defeated by a 
number of infidel cowherd men while I was 
guarding the bodies of all the wives of K ṛṣṇa 
(20).I ha ve the very same Gā ṇḍīva bow, the 
same arrows, the same chariot drawn by the 
same horses, and I use them as the same Arjuna 
to whom all the kings offered their due re-
spects. But in the absence of Lord K ṛṣṇa, all of 
them, at a moment’s notice, have become n ull and void. It is exactly like offering clarified 
butter on ashes, accumulating money with a 
magic wand or sowing seeds on barren land  
(21).O King, since you have asked me about 
our friends and relatives in the city of Dvārakā, 
I will inform you that all  of them were cursed 
by the brāhma ṇas, and as a result they all be-
came intoxicated with wine made of putrefied 
rice and fought among themselves with sticks, 
not even recognizing one another. Now all but 
four or five of them are dead and gone  (22-
23).Factua lly this is all due to the supreme will 
of the Lord, the Personality of Godhead. Some-
times people kill one another, and at other times 
they protect one another  (24).O King, as in the 
ocean the bigger and stronger aquatics swallow 
up the smaller and weaker ones, so also the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, to lighten the 
burden of the earth, has engaged the stronger 
Yadu to kill the weaker, and the bigger Yadu to 
kill the smaller  (25-26).Now I am attracted to 
those instructions imparted to me by the Per-
sonali ty of Godhead [Govinda] because they 
are impregnated with instructions for relieving 
the burning heart in all circumstances of time 
and space  (27). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thus being deeply ab-
sorbed in thinking of the instructions of the 
Lord, which were impart ed in the great inti-
macy of friendship, and in thinking of His lotus 
feet, Arjuna’s mind became pacified and free 
from all material contamination  (28).Arjuna’s 
constant remembrance of the lotus feet of Lord 
Śrī K ṛṣṇa rapidly increased his devotion, and as 
a result all the trash in his thoughts subsided  
(29).Because of the Lord’s pastimes and activ-
ities and because of His absence, it appeared 
that Arjuna forgot the instructions left by the 
Personality of Godhead. But factually this was 
not the case, and agai n he became lord of his 
senses  (30).Because of his possessing spiritual 
assets, the doubts of duality were completely 
cut off. Thus he was freed from the three modes 
of material nature and placed in transcendence. 
There was no longer any chance of his beco m-
ing entangled in birth and death, for he was 
freed from material form  (31). 
Upon hearing of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s returning to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

74 
 His abode, and upon understanding the end of 
the Yadu dynasty’s earthly manifestation, 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira decided to go back 
home, back  to Godhead  (32).Kuntī, after over-
hearing Arjuna’s telling of the end of the Yadu 
dynasty and disappearance of Lord K ṛṣṇa, en-
gaged in the devotional service of the transcen-
dental Personality of Godhead with full atten-
tion and thus gained release from the c ourse of 
material existence  (33).The supreme unborn, 
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, caused the members of the 
Yadu dynasty to relinquish their bodies, and 
thus He relieved the burden of the world. This 
action was like picking out a thorn with a thorn, 
though both are the  same to the controller  
(34).The Supreme Lord relinquished the body 
which He manifested to diminish the burden of 
the earth. Just like a magician, He relinquishes 
one body to accept different ones, like the fish 
incarnation and others  (35).When the Persona l-
ity of Godhead, Lord K ṛṣṇa, left this earthly 
planet in His selfsame form, from that very day 
Kali, who had already partially appeared, be-
came fully manifest to create inauspicious con-
ditions for those who are endowed with a poor 
fund of knowledge  (36).Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira 
was intelligent enough to understand the influ-
ence of the Age of Kali, characterized by in-
creasing avarice, falsehood, cheating and vio-
lence throughout the capital, state, home and 
among individuals. So he wisely prepared him-
self to leav e home, and he dressed accordingly  
(37).Thereafter, in the capital of Hastināpura, 
he enthroned his grandson, who was trained 
and equally qualified, as the emperor and mas-
ter of all land bordered by the seas  (38).Then he 
posted Vajra, the son of Aniruddha [grandson 
of Lord K ṛṣṇa], at Mathurā as the King of 
Śūrasena. Afterwards Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira 
performed a Prājāpatya sacrifice and placed in 
himself the fire for quitting household life  
(39).Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira at once relinquished 
all his garments, belt and ornaments of the 
royal order and became completely disinter-
ested and unattached to everything  (40).Then 
he amalgamated all the sense organs into the 
mind, then the mind into life, life into breath-
ing, his total existence into the embodiment of 
the five  elements, and his body into death. Then, as pure self, he became free from the ma-
terial conception of life  (41).Thus annihilating 
the gross body of five elements into the three 
qualitative modes of material nature, he merged 
them in one nescience and then  absorbed that 
nescience in the self, Brahman, which is inex-
haustible in all circumstances  (42).After that, 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira dressed himself in torn 
clothing, gave up eating all solid foods, volun-
tarily became dumb and let his hair hang loose. 
All this  combined to make him look like an ur-
chin or madman with no occupation. He did not 
depend on his brothers for anything. And, just 
like a deaf man, he heard nothing  (43).He then 
started towards the north, treading the path ac-
cepted by his forefathers and gr eat men, to de-
vote himself completely to the thought of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. And he lived 
in that way wherever he went  (44). 
The younger brothers of Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira observed that the Age of Kali had 
already arrived throughout the world and that 
the citizens of the kingdom were already af-
fected by irreligious practice. Therefore they 
decided to follow in the footsteps of their elder 
brother  (45).They all had performed all the 
principles of religion and as a result rightly de-
cided that the  lotus feet of the Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa 
are the supreme goal of all. Therefore they 
meditated upon His feet without interruption  
(46).Thus by pure consciousness due to con-
stant devotional remembrance, they attained 
the spiritual sky, which is ruled over by the S u-
preme Nārāya ṇa, Lord K ṛṣṇa. This is attained 
only by those who meditate upon the one Su-
preme Lord without deviation. This abode of 
the Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, known as Goloka 
Vṛndāvana, cannot be attained by persons who 
are absorbed in the material conception of life. 
But the Pā ṇḍavas, being completely washed of 
all material contamination, attained that abode 
in their very same bodies  (47-48).Vidura, while 
on pilgrimage, left his body at Prabhāsa. Be-
cause he was absorbed in thought of K ṛṣṇa, he 
was received by the  denizens of the Pit ṛloka 
planet, where he returned to his original post  
(49).Draupadī also saw that her husband s, 
without caring for her, were leaving home. She 
knew well about Lord Vāsudeva, K ṛṣṇa, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

75 
 Personality of Godhead. Both she and Sub-
hadrā became  absorbed in thoughts of K ṛṣṇa 
and attained the same results as their husband s 
(50). 
The subject of the departure of the sons of 
Pāṇḍu for the ultimate goal of life, back to God-
head, is fully auspicious and is perfectly pure. 
Therefore anyone who hears thi s narration with 
devotional faith certainly gains the devotional 
service of the Lord, the highest perfection of 
life (51). 
SB 1.16: How Parīkṣit Received the Age 
of Kali  
Sūta Gosvāmī said : O learned brāhma ṇas, 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit then began to rule over the 
world as a great devotee of the Lord under the 
instructions of the best of the twiceborn 
brāhma ṇas. He ruled by those great qualities 
which were foretold by expert astrologers at the 
time of his birth  (1).King Parīk ṣit married the 
daughter of King Uttara a nd begot four sons, 
headed by Mahārāja Janamejaya  (2).Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit, after having selected K ṛpācārya for 
guidance as his spiritual master, performed 
three horse sacrifices on the banks of the Gan-
ges. These were executed with sufficient re-
wards for the attendants. And at these sacri-
fices, even the common man could see demi-
gods  (3).Once, when Mahārāja Parīk ṣit was on 
his way to conquer the world, he saw the master 
of Kaliyuga, who was lower than a śūdra, dis-
guised as a king and hurting the legs of a cow 
and bull. The King at once caught hold of him 
to deal sufficient punishment  (4). 
Śaunaka Ṛṣi inquired:  Why did Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit simply punish him, since he was the 
lowest of the śūdras, having dressed as a king 
and having struck a cow on the leg? Please de-
scribe all these incidents if they relate to the 
topics of Lord K ṛṣṇa.The devotees of the Lord 
are accustomed to licking up the honey availa-
ble from the lotus feet of the Lord. What is the 
use of topics which simply waste one’s valua-
ble life? (5-6)O Sūta Go svāmī, there are those 
amongst men who desire freedom from death 
and get eternal life. They escape the slaughter-
ing process by calling the controller of death, Yamarāja  (7).As long as Yamarāja, who causes 
everyone’s death, is present here, no one shall 
meet with death. The great sages have invited 
the controller of death, Yamarāja, who is the 
representative of the Lord. Living beings who 
are under his grip should take advantage by 
hearing the deathless nectar in the form of this 
narration of the transcenden tal pastimes of the 
Lord  (8).Lazy human beings with paltry intelli-
gence and a short duration of life pass the night 
sleeping and the day performing activities that 
are for naught  (9). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  While Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit was residing in the capital o f the Kuru 
empire, the symptoms of the Age of Kali began 
to infiltrate within the jurisdiction of his state. 
When he learned about this, he did not think the 
matter very palatable. This did, however, give 
him a chance to fight. He took up his bow and 
arrow s and prepared himself for military activ-
ities (10). Mahārāja Parīk ṣit sat on a chariot 
drawn by black horses. His flag was marked 
with the sign of a lion. Being so decorated and 
surrounded by charioteers, cavalry, elephants 
and infantry soldiers, he left the capital to con-
quer in all directions  (11).Mahārāja Parīk ṣit 
then conquered all parts of the earthly planet  
Bhadrāśva, Ketumāla, Bhārata, the northern 
Kuru, Kimpuru ṣa, etc.  and exacted tributes 
from their respective rulers  (12).Wherever the 
King visit ed, he continuously heard the glories 
of his great forefathers, who were all devotees 
of the Lord, and also of the glorious acts of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa. He also heard how he himself had 
been protected by the Lord from the powerful 
heat of the weapon of Aśvatthāmā. People also 
mentioned the great affection between the de-
scendants of V ṛṣṇi and P ṛthā due to the latter’s 
great devotion to Lord Keśava. The King, being 
very pleased with the singers of such glories, 
opened his eyes in great satisfaction. Out of 
magnanimity  he was pleased to award them 
very valuable necklaces and clothing  (13-
15).Mahārāja Parīk ṣit heard that out of His 
causeless mercy Lord K ṛṣṇa [Vi ṣṇu], who is 
universally obeyed, rendered all kinds of ser-
vice to the malleable sons of Pā ṇḍu by accept-
ing post s ranging from chariot driver to presi-
dent to messenger, friend, night watchman, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

76 
 etc., according to the will of the Pā ṇḍavas, 
obeying them like a servant and offering obei-
sances like one younger in years. When he 
heard this, Mahārāja Parīk ṣit became over-
whelmed with devotion to the lotus feet of the 
Lord  (16).Now you may hear from me of what 
happened while Mahārāja Parīk ṣit was passing 
his days hearing of the good occupations of his 
forefathers and being absorbed in thought of 
them  (17).The personality of r eligious princi-
ples, Dharma, was wandering about in the form 
of a bull. And he met the personality of earth in 
the form of a cow who appeared to grieve like 
a mother who had lost her child. She had tears 
in her eyes, and the beauty of her body was lost. 
Thus Dharma questioned the earth as follows  
(18). 
Dharma [in the form of a bull] asked : 
Madam, are you not hale and hearty? Why are 
you covered with the shadow of grief? It ap-
pears by your face that you have become black. 
Are you suffering from some internal  disease, 
or are you thinking of some relative who is 
away in a distant place? (19)I have lost my three 
legs and am now standing on one only. Are you 
lamenting for my state of existence? Or are you 
in great anxiety because henceforward the un-
lawful meateate rs will exploit you? Or are you 
in a sorry plight because the demigods are now 
bereft of their share of sacrificial offerings be-
cause no sacrifices are being performed at pre-
sent? Or are you grieving for living beings be-
cause of their sufferings due to fam ine and 
drought? (20)Are you feeling compunction for 
the unhappy women and children who are left 
forlorn by unscrupulous persons? Or are you 
unhappy because the goddess of learning is be-
ing handled by brāhma ṇas addicted to acts 
against the principles of rel igion? Or are you 
sorry to see that the brāhma ṇas have taken shel-
ter of administrative families that do not respect 
brahminical culture? (21) The socalled adminis-
trators are now bewildered by the influence of 
this Age of Kali, and thus they have put all sta te 
affairs into disorder. Are you now lamenting 
this disorder? Now the general populace does 
not follow the rules and regulations for eating, 
sleeping, drinking, mating, etc., and they are in-clined to perform such anywhere and every-
where. Are you unhappy b ecause of this?  (22)O 
mother earth, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Hari, incarnated Himself as L ord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa just to unload your heavy burden. All His 
activities here are transcendental, and they ce-
ment the path of liberation. You are now bereft 
of His presence. You are probably now think-
ing of those activities and feeling sorry in their 
absence  (23).Mother, you are the reservoir of 
all riches. Please inform me of the root cause of 
your tribulations by which you have been re-
duced to such a weak state. I think that the pow-
erful influence of time, which conquers the 
most powerful, might have forcibly t aken away 
all your fortune, which was adored even by the 
demigods  (24). 
The earthly deity [in the form of a cow] 
thus replied  to the personality of religious 
principles [in the form of a bull]: O Dharma, 
whatever you have inquired from me shall be 
known to  you. I shall try to reply to all those 
questions. Once you too were maintained by 
your four legs, and you increased happiness all 
over the universe by the mercy of the Lord .In 
Him reside (1) truthfulness, (2) cleanliness, (3) 
intolerance of another’s unha ppiness, (4) the 
power to control anger, (5) selfsatisfaction, (6) 
straightforwardness, (7) steadiness of mind, (8) 
control of the sense organs, (9) responsibility, 
(10) equality, (11) tolerance, (12) equanimity, 
(13) faithfulness, (14) knowledge, (15) abs ence 
of sense enjoyment, (16) leadership, (17) chiv-
alry, (18) influence, (19) the power to make 
everything possible, (20) the discharge of 
proper duty, (21) complete independence, (22) 
dexterity, (23) fullness of all beauty, (24) seren-
ity, (25) kindhearted ness, (26) ingenuity, (27) 
gentility, (28) magnanimity, (29) determina-
tion, (30) perfection in all knowledge, (31) 
proper execution, (32) possession of all objects 
of enjoyment, (33) joyfulness, (34) immovabil-
ity, (35) fidelity, (36) fame, (37) worship, (3 8) 
pridelessness, (39) being (as the Personality of 
Godhead), (40) eternity, and many other tran-
scendental qualities which are eternally present 
and never to be separated from Him. That Per-
sonality of Godhead, the reservoir of all good-
ness and beauty, Lord  Śrī K ṛṣṇa, has now 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

77 
 closed His transcendental pastimes on the face 
of the earth. In His absence the Age of Kali has 
spread its influence everywhere, so I am sorry 
to see this condition of existence (25 -30).I am 
thinking about myself and also, O best amongs t 
the demigods, about you, as well as about all 
the demigods, sages, denizens of Pit ṛloka, dev-
otees of the Lord and all men obedient to the 
system of var ṇa and āśrama in human society  
(31).Lakṣmījī, the goddess of fortune, whose 
glance of grace was sought by demigods like 
Brahmā and for whom they surrendered many 
a day unto the Personality of Godhead, gave up 
her own abode in the forest of lotus flowers and 
engaged herself in the service of the lotus feet 
of the Lord. I was endowed with specific pow-
ers to s upersede the fortune of all the three 
planetary systems by being decorated with the 
impressions of the flag, thunderbolt, elephant-
driving rod and lotus flower, which are signs of 
the lotus feet of the Lord. But at the end, when 
I felt I was so fortunate, t he Lord left me  (32-
33). 
O personality of religion, I was greatly over-
burdened by the undue military phalanxes ar-
ranged by atheistic kings, and I was relieved by 
the grace of the Personality of Godhead. Simi-
larly you were also in a distressed condition, 
weakened in your standing strength, and thus 
He also incarnated by His internal energy in the 
family of the Yadus to relieve you  (34).Who, 
therefore, can tolerate the pangs of separation 
from that Supreme Personality of Godhead? He 
could conquer the gravity and passionate wrath 
of His sweethearts like Satyabhāmā by His 
sweet smile of love, pleasing glance and hearty 
appeals. When He traversed my [earth’s] sur-
face, I would be immersed in the dust of His 
lotus feet and thus would be sumptuously cov-
ered with gra ss which appeared like hairs 
standing on me out of pleasure  (35). 
While the earth and the personality of reli-
gion were thus engaged in conversation, the 
saintly King Parīk ṣit reached the shore of the 
Sarasvatī River, which flowed towards the east  
(36). 
SB 1.17: Punishment and Reward of Kali  Sūta Gosvāmī said:  After reaching that 
place, Mahārāja Parīk ṣit observed that a lower-
caste śūdra, dressed like a king, was beating a 
cow and a bull with a club, as if they had no 
owner  (1).The bull was as white as a whit e lotus 
flower. He was terrified of the śūdra who was 
beating him, and he was so afraid that he was 
standing on one leg, trembling and urinating  
(2).Although the cow is beneficial because one 
can draw religious principles from her, she was 
now rendered poo r and calfless. Her legs were 
being beaten by a śūdra. There were tears in her 
eyes, and she was distressed and weak. She was 
hankering after some grass in the field  
(3).Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, well equipped with ar-
rows and bow and seated on a goldembossed 
chariot, spoke to him [the śūdra] with a deep 
voice sounding like thunder  (4).Oh, who are 
you? You appear to be strong and yet you dare 
kill, within my protection, those who are help-
less! By your dress you pose yourself to be a 
godly man [king], but by your de eds you are 
opposing the principles of the twiceborn k ṣatri-
yas (5).You rogue, do you dare beat an innocent 
cow because Lord K ṛṣṇa and Arjuna, the carrier 
of the Gā ṇḍīva bow, are out of sight? Since you 
are beating the innocent in a secluded place, 
you are considered a culprit and therefore de-
serve to be killed  (6). 
Then he [Mahārāja Parīk ṣit] asked the 
bull:  Oh, who are you? Are you a bull as white 
as a white lotus, or are you a demigod? You 
have lost three of your legs and are moving on 
only one. Are you s ome demigod causing us 
grief in the form of a bull? (7) Now for the first 
time in a kingdom well protected by the arms 
of the kings of the Kuru dynasty, I see you 
grieving with tears in your eyes. Up till now no 
one on earth has ever shed tears because of 
royal negligence  (8).O son of Surabhi, you 
need lament no longer now. There is no need to 
fear this lowclass śūdra. And, O mother cow, as 
long as I am living as the ruler and subduer of 
all envious men, there is no cause for you to 
cry. Everything will be good for you  (9).O 
chaste one, the king’s good name, duration of 
life and good rebirth vanish when all kinds of 
living beings are terrified by miscreants in his 
kingdom. It is certainly the prime duty of the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

78 
 king to subdue first the sufferings of those who 
suffer. Therefore I  must kill this most wretched 
man because he is violent against other living 
beings  (10-11).He [Mahārāja Parīk ṣit] repeat-
edly addressed and questioned the bull thus: O 
son of Surabhi, who has cut off your three legs? 
In the state of the kings who are obedient to the 
laws of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa, there is no one as unhappy as  you (12).O 
bull, you are offenseless and thoroughly hon-
est; therefore I wish all good to you. Please tell 
me of the perpetrator of these mutilations, 
which blacken the reputation of the sons of 
Pṛthā (13).Whoever causes offenseless living 
beings to suffer  must fear me anywhere and 
everywhere in the world. By curbing dishonest 
miscreants, one automatically benefits the of-
fenseless  (14).An upstart living being who 
commits offenses by torturing those who are 
offenseless shall be directly uprooted by me, 
even though he be a denizen of heaven with ar-
mor and decorations  (15).The supreme duty of 
the ruling king is to give all protection to lawa-
biding persons and to chastise those who stray 
from the ordinances of the scriptures in ordi-
nary times, when there is no e mergency  (16). 
The personality of religion said:  These 
words just spoken by you befit a person of the 
Pāṇḍava dynasty. Captivated by the devotional 
qualities of the Pā ṇḍavas, even Lord K ṛṣṇa, the 
Personality of Godhead, performed duties as a 
messenger  (17).O greatest among human be-
ings, it is very difficult to ascertain the particu-
lar miscreant who has caused our sufferings, 
because we are bewildered by all the different 
opinions of theoretical philosophers  (18).Some 
of the philosophers, who deny all sorts of dual-
ity, declare that one’s own self is responsible 
for his personal happiness and distress. Others 
say that superhuman powers are responsible, 
while yet others say that activity is responsible, 
and the gross materialists maintain that nature 
is the ult imate cause  (19).There are also some 
thinkers who believe that no one can ascertain 
the cause of distress by argumentation, nor 
know it by imagination, nor express it by 
words. O sage amongst kings, judge for your-
self by thinking over all this with your ow n in-
telligence  (20). Sūta Gosvāmī said : O best among the 
brāhma ṇas, the Emperor Parīk ṣit, thus hearing 
the personality of religion speak, was fully sat-
isfied, and without mistake or regret he gave his 
reply  (21). 
The King said:  O you, who are in the form 
of a bull! You know th e truth of religion, and 
you are speaking according to the principle that 
the destination intended for the perpetrator of 
irreligious acts is also intended for one who 
identifies the perpetrator. You are no other than 
the personality of religion  (22).Thus it is con-
cluded that the Lord’s energies are inconceiva-
ble. No one can estimate them by mental spec-
ulation or by word jugglery  (23).In the age of 
Satya [truthfulness] your four legs were estab-
lished by the four principles of austerity, clean-
liness, mercy a nd truthfulness. But it appears 
that three of your legs are broken due to ram-
pant irreligion in the form of pride, lust for 
women, and intoxication  (24).You are now 
standing on one leg only, which is your truth-
fulness, and you are somehow or other hob-
bling  along. But quarrel personified [Kali], 
flourishing by deceit, is also trying to destroy 
that leg  (25).The burden of the earth was cer-
tainly diminished by the Personality of God-
head and by others as well. When He was pre-
sent as an incarnation, all good was  performed 
because of His auspicious footprints  (26).Now 
she, the chaste one, being unfortunately for-
saken by the Personality of Godhead, laments 
her future with tears in her eyes, for now she is 
being ruled and enjoyed by lowerclass men 
who pose as rulers  (27). 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, who could fight one 
thousand enemies singlehandedly, thus paci-
fied the personality of religion and the earth. 
Then he took up his sharp sword to kill the per-
sonality of Kali, who is the cause of all irreli-
gion (28).When the personality o f Kali under-
stood that the King was willing to kill him, he 
at once abandoned the dress of a king and, un-
der pressure of fear, completely surrendered to 
him, bowing his head  (29).Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, 
who was qualified to accept surrender and wor-
thy of being sung in history, did not kill the 
poor surrendered and fallen Kali, but smiled 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

79 
 compassionately, for he was kind to the poor  
(30). 
The King thus said:  We have inherited the 
fame of Arjuna; therefore since you have sur-
rendered yourself with folded hands you need 
not fear for your life. But you cannot remain in 
my kingdom, for you are the friend of irreligion  
(31).If the personality of Kali, irreligion, is al-
lowed to act as a mangod or an executive head, 
certainly irreligious principles like greed, false-
hood, robbery, incivility, treachery, misfortune, 
cheating, quarrel and vanity will abound  
(32).Therefore, O friend of irreligion, you do 
not deserve to remain in a place where experts 
perform sacrifices according to truth and reli-
gious principles for the satisf action of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead  (33).In all sacri-
ficial ceremonies, although sometimes a demi-
god is worshiped, the Supreme Lord Personal-
ity of Godhead is worshiped because He is the 
Supersoul of everyone, and exists both inside 
and outside lik e the air. Thus it is He only who 
awards all welfare to the worshiper  (34). 
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said:  The personality of 
Kali, thus being ordered by Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, 
began to tremble in fear. Seeing the King be-
fore him like Yamarāja, ready to kill him, Kali  
spoke to the King as follows  (35). 
O Your Majesty, though I may live any-
where and everywhere under your order, I shall 
but see you with bow and arrows wherever I 
look (36).Therefore, O chief amongst the pro-
tectors of religion, please fix some place for me  
where I can live permanently under the protec-
tion of your government  (37). 
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, thus 
being petitioned by the personality of Kali, 
gave him permission to reside in places where 
gambling, drinking, prostitution and animal 
slaughter were performed  (38).The personality 
of Kali asked for something more , and because 
of his begging, the King gave him permission 
to live where there is gold because wherever 
there is gold there is also falsity, intoxication, 
lust, envy and enmity  (39).Thus the personality 
of Kali, by the directions of Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, 
the son of Uttarā, was allowed to live in those five places  (40).Therefore, whoever desires 
progressive wellbeing, especially kings, reli-
gionists, public leaders, brāhma ṇas and 
sannyāsīs, should never come in contact with 
the four abovementioned irreligious pr inciples  
(41).Thereafter the King reestablished the lost 
legs of the personality of religion [the bull], and 
by encouraging activities he sufficiently im-
proved the condition of the earth  (42).The most 
fortunate emperor Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, who was 
entrusted with the kingdom of Hastināpura by 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira when he desired to retire 
to the forest, is now ruling the world with great 
success due to his being glorified by the deeds 
of the kings of the Kuru dynasty  (43-
44).Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, the son of Abhim anyu, 
is so experienced that by dint of his expert ad-
ministration and patronage, it has been possible 
for you to perform a sacrifice such as this  (45). 

SB 1.18: Mahārāja Parīkṣit Cursed by a 
Brāhmaṇa Boy  
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Due to the mercy 
of the Pers onality of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, who 
acts wonderfully, Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, though 
struck by the weapon of the son of Dro ṇa in his 
mother’s womb, could not be burned  (1).Fur-
thermore, Mahārāja Parīk ṣit was always con-
sciously surrendered to the Personality of Go d-
head, and therefore he was neither afraid nor 
overwhelmed by fear due to a snakebird which 
was to bite him because of the fury of a 
brāhma ṇa boy  (2).Furthermore, after leaving 
all his associates, the King surrendered himself 
as a disciple to the son of Vy āsa [Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī], and thus he was able to understand 
the actual position of the Personality of God-
head, and at last gave up his material body on 
the bank of the Ganges  (3).This was so because 
those who have dedicated their lives to the tran-
scendental  topics of the Personality of God-
head, of whom the Vedic hymns sing, and who 
are constantly engaged in remembering the lo-
tus feet of the Lord, do not run the risk of hav-
ing misconceptions even at the last moment of 
their lives  (4).As long as the great, pow erful 
son of Abhimanyu remains the Emperor of the 
world, there is no chance that the personality of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

80 
 Kali will flourish  (5).The very day and moment 
the Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, 
left this earth, the personality of Kali, who pro-
motes all kinds of irreligious activities, came 
into this world  (6).Mahārāja Parīk ṣit was a re-
alist, like the bees who only accept the essence 
[of a flower]. He knew perfectly well that in 
this Ag e of Kali, auspicious things produce 
good effects immediately, whereas inauspi-
cious acts must be actually performed [to ren-
der effects]. So he was never envious of the per-
sonality of Kali  (7).Mahārāja Parīk ṣit consid-
ered that less intelligent men might fin d the per-
sonality of Kali to be very powerful, but that 
those who are selfcontrolled would have noth-
ing to fear. The King was powerful like a tiger 
and took care for the foolish, careless persons  
(8).O sages, as you did ask me, now I have de-
scribed almost everything regarding the narra-
tions about Lord K ṛṣṇa in connection with the 
history of the pious Mahārāja Parīk ṣit 
(9).Those who are desirous of achieving com-
plete perfection in life must submissively hear 
all topics that are connected with the transcen-
dental activities and qualities of the Personality 
of Godhead, who acts wonderfully  (10). 
The good sages said: O grave Sūta 
Gosvāmī! May you live many years and have 
eternal fame, for you are speaking very nicely 
about the activities of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Person-
ality of Godhead. This is just like nectar for 
mortal beings like us  (11).We have just begun 
the performance of this fruitive activity, a sac-
rificial fire, without certainty of its result due to 
the many imperfections in our action. Our bod-
ies have become black from the smoke, but we 
are factually pleased by the nectar of the lotus 
feet of the Personality of Godhead, Govinda, 
which you are distributing  (12).The value of a 
moment’s association with the devotee of the 
Lord cannot even be compared to the attai n-
ment of heavenly planets or liberation from 
matter, and what to speak of worldly benedic-
tions in the form of material prosperity, which 
are for those who are meant for death  (13).The 
Personality of Godhead, Lord K ṛṣṇa [Go-
vinda], is the exclusive shelter f or all great liv-
ing beings, and His transcendental attributes 
cannot even be measured by such masters of mystic powers as Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā. 
Can anyone who is expert in relishing nectar 
[rasa] ever be fully satiated by hearing topics 
about Him? (14)O Sūta Gosvāmī, you are a 
learned and pure devotee of the Lord because 
the Personality of Godhead is your chief object 
of service. Therefore please describe to us the 
pastimes of the Lord, which are above all ma-
terial conception, for we are anxious to rece ive 
such messages  (15).O Sūta Gosvāmī, please 
describe those topics of the Lord by which 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, whose intelligence was 
fixed on liberation, attained the lotus feet of the 
Lord, who is the shelter of Garu ḍa, the king of 
birds. Those topics were vibrated by the son of 
Vyāsa [Śrīla Śukadeva] . Thus please narrate to 
us the narrations of the Unlimited, for they are 
purifying and supreme. They were spoken to 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, and they are very dear to the 
pure devotees, being full of bhaktiyoga  (16-
17). 
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said:  O God, although 
we are born in a mixed caste, we are still pro-
moted in birthright simply by serving and fol-
lowing the great who are advanced in 
knowledge. Even by conversing with such 
great souls, one can without delay cleanse on e-
self of all disqualifications resulting from lower 
births  (18).And what to speak of those who are 
under the direction of the great devotees, chant-
ing the holy name of the Unlimited, who has 
unlimited potency? The Personality of God-
head, unlimited in poten cy and transcendental 
by attributes, is called Ananta [Unlimited]  
(19).It is now ascertained that He [the Person-
ality of Godhead] is unlimited and there is none 
equal to Him. Consequently no one can speak 
of Him adequately. Great demigods cannot ob-
tain the  favor of the goddess of fortune even by 
prayers, but this very goddess renders service 
unto the Lord, although He is unwilling to have 
such service  (20).Who can be worthy of the 
name of the Supreme Lord but the Personality 
of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa? Brahmājī collected the 
water emanating from the nails of His feet in 
order to award it to Lord Śiva as a worshipful 
welcome. This very water [the Ganges] is puri-
fying the whole universe, including Lord Śiva  
(21).Selfcontrolled persons who are attached to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

81 
 the Suprem e Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa can all of a sudden 
give up the world of material attachment, in-
cluding the gross body and subtle mind, and go 
away to attain the highest perfection of the re-
nounced order of life, by which nonviolence 
and renunciation are consequential  (22).O ṛṣis, 
who are as powerfully pure as the sun, I shall 
try to describe to you the transcendental pas-
times of Vi ṣṇu as far as my knowledge is con-
cerned. As the birds fly in the sky as far as their 
capacity allows, so do the learned devotees de-
scribe the Lord as far as their realization allows  
(23). 
Once upon a time Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, while 
engaged in hunting in the forest with bow and 
arrows, became extremely fatigued, hungry and 
thirsty while following the stags. While search-
ing for a reservoir of water,  he entered the her-
mitage of the wellknown Śamīka Ṛṣi and saw 
the sage sitting silently with closed eyes  (24-
25).The muni’s sense organs, breath, mind and 
intelligence were all restrained from material 
activities, and he was situated in a trance apart 
from  the three [wakefulness, dream and uncon-
sciousness], having achieved a transcendental 
position qualitatively equal with the Supreme 
Absolute  (26).The sage, in meditation, was 
covered by the skin of a stag, and long, com-
pressed hair was scattered all over h im. The 
King, whose palate was dry from thirst, asked 
him for water  (27).The King, not received by 
any formal welcome by means of being offered 
a seat, place, water and sweet addresses, con-
sidered himself neglected, and so thinking he 
became angry  (28).O brāhma ṇas, the circum-
stances having distressed him with extreme 
hunger and thirst, the King directed toward the 
sage his anger and envy, which he had never 
before directed toward a brāhma ṇa (29).While 
leaving, the King, being so insulted, picked up 
a lifele ss snake with his bow and angrily placed 
it on the shoulder of the sage. Then he returned 
to his palace  (30).Upon returning, he began to 
contemplate and argue within himself whether 
the sage had actually been in meditation, with 
senses concentrated and eye s closed, or 
whether he had just been feigning trance just to 
avoid receiving a lower k ṣatriya  (31). The sage had a son who was very powerful, 
being a brāhma ṇa’s son. While he was playing 
with inexperienced boys, he heard of his fa-
ther’s distress, which wa s occasioned by the 
King. Then and there the boy spoke as follows  
(32).[The brāhma ṇa’s son, Ś ṛṅgi, said:] O just 
look at the sins of the rulers who, like crows 
and watchdogs at the door, perpetrate sins 
against their masters, contrary to the principles 
governing servants  (33).The descendants of the 
kingly orders are definitely designated as 
watchdogs, and they must keep themselves at 
the door. On what grounds can dogs enter the 
house and claim to dine with the master on the 
same plate? (34)After the departur e of Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead and supreme 
ruler of everyone, these upstarts have flour-
ished, our protector being gone. Therefore I 
myself shall take up this matter and punish 
them. Just witness my power  (35).The son of 
the ṛṣi, his eyes r edhot with anger, touched the 
water of the River Kauśika while speaking to 
his playmates and discharged the following 
thunderbolt of words  (36).The brāhma ṇa’s son 
cursed the King thus: On the seventh day from 
today a snakebird will bite the most wretched 
one of that dynasty [Mahārāja Parīk ṣit] because 
of his having broken the laws of etiquette by 
insulting my father  (37). 
Thereafter, when the boy returned to the her-
mitage, he saw a snake on his father’s shoulder, 
and out of his grief he cried very loudly  (38).O 
brāhma ṇas, the ṛṣi, who was born in the family 
of Aṅgirā Muni, hearing his son crying, gradu-
ally opened his eyes and saw the dead snake 
around his neck  (39).He threw the dead snake 
aside and asked his son why he was crying, 
whether anyone had done him  harm. On hear-
ing this, the son explained to him what had hap-
pened  (40).The father heard from his son that 
the King had been cursed, although he should 
never have been condemned, for he was the 
best amongst all human beings. The ṛṣi did not 
congratulate hi s son, but, on the contrary, began 
to repent, saying: Alas! What a great sinful act 
was performed by my son. He has awarded 
heavy punishment for an insignificant offense  
(41). O my boy, your intelligence is immature, 
and therefore you have no knowledge tha t the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

82 
 king, who is the best amongst human beings, is 
as good as the Personality of Godhead. He is 
never to be placed on an equal footing with 
common men. The citizens of the state live in 
prosperity, being protected by his unsurpassa-
ble prowess  (42).My dea r boy, the Lord, who 
carries the wheel of a chariot, is represented by 
the monarchical regime, and when this regime 
is abolished the whole world becomes filled 
with thieves, who then at once vanquish the un-
protected subjects like scattered lambs  
(43).Due t o the termination of the monarchical 
regimes and the plundering of the people’s 
wealth by rogues and thieves, there will be 
great social disruptions. People will be killed 
and injured, and animals and women will be 
stolen. And for all these sins we shall b e re-
sponsible  (44).At that time the people in gen-
eral will fall systematically from the path of a 
progressive civilization in respect to the quali-
tative engagements of the castes and the orders 
of society and the Vedic injunctions. Thus they 
will be more a ttracted to economic develop-
ment for sense gratification, and as a result 
there will be an unwanted population on the 
level of dogs and monkeys  (45). 
The Emperor Parīk ṣit is a pious king. He is 
highly celebrated and is a firstclass devotee of 
the Personality of Godhead. He is a saint 
amongst royalty, and he has performed many 
horse sacrifices. When such a king is tired and 
fatigued, being stricken with hunger and thirst, 
he does not at all deserve to be cursed  
(46).Then the ṛṣi prayed to the allpervading 
Personality of Godhead to pardon his immature 
boy, who had no intelligence and who commit-
ted the great sin of cursing a person who was 
completely free f rom all sins, who was subor-
dinate and who deserved to be protected  
(47).The devotees of the Lord are so forbearing 
that even though they are defamed, cheated, 
cursed, disturbed, neglected or even killed, they 
are never inclined to avenge themselves  
(48).The sage thus regretted the sin committed 
by his own son. He did not take the insult paid 
by the King very seriously  (49).Generally the 
transcendentalists, even though engaged by 
others in the dualities of the material world, are 
not distressed. Nor do they take pleasure [in worldly things], for they are transcendentally 
engaged  (50). 

SB 1.19: The Appearance of Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī  
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said:  While returning 
home, the King [Mahārāja Parīk ṣit] felt that the 
act he had committed against the faultless a nd 
powerful brāhma ṇa was heinous and uncivi-
lized. Consequently he was distressed  
(1).[King Parīk ṣit thought:] Due to my neglect-
ing the injunctions of the Supreme Lord I must 
certainly expect some difficulty to overcome 
me in the near future. I now desire w ithout res-
ervation that the calamity come now, for in this 
way I may be freed of the sinful action and not 
commit such an offense again  (2).I am uncivi-
lized and sinful due to my neglect of brahmini-
cal culture, God consciousness and cow protec-
tion. Therefor e I wish that my kingdom, 
strength and riches burn up immediately by the 
fire of the brāhma ṇa’s wrath so that in the fu-
ture I may not be guided by such inauspicious 
attitudes  (3).While the King was thus repent-
ing, he received news of his imminent death, 
which would be due to the bite of a snakebird, 
occasioned by the curse spoken by the sage’s 
son. The King accepted this as good news, for 
it would be the cause of his indifference toward 
worldly things  (4).Mahārāja Parīk ṣit sat down 
firmly on the banks of th e Ganges to concen-
trate his mind in K ṛṣṇa consciousness, rejecting 
all other practices of selfrealization, because 
transcendental loving service to K ṛṣṇa is the 
greatest achievement, superseding all other 
methods  (5).The river [by which the King sat to 
fast] carries the most auspicious water, which 
is mixed with the dust of the lotus feet of the 
Lord and tulasī leaves. Therefore that water 
sanctifies the three worlds inside and outside 
and even sanctifies Lord Śiva and other demi-
gods. Consequently everyone who is destined 
to die must take shelter of this river  (6). 
Thus the King, the worthy descendant of the 
Pāṇḍavas, decided once and for all and sat on 
the Ganges’ bank to fast until death and give 
himself up to the lotus feet of Lord K ṛṣṇa, who 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

83 
 alone is abl e to award liberation. So, freeing 
himself from all kinds of associations and at-
tachments, he accepted the vows of a sage  
(7).At that time all the great minds and thinkers, 
accompanied by their disciples, and sages who 
could verily sanctify a place of pilg rimage just 
by their presence, arrived there on the plea of 
making a pilgrim’s journey  (8).From different 
parts of the universe there arrived great sages 
like Atri, Cyavana, Śaradvān, Ari ṣṭanemi, 
Bhṛgu, Vasi ṣṭha, Parāśara, Viśvāmitra, A ṅgirā, 
Paraśurāma, Utathya, Indrapramada, 
Idhmavāhu, Medhātithi, Devala, Ār ṣṭiṣeṇa, 
Bhāradvāja, Gautama, Pippa lāda, Maitreya, 
Aurva, Kava ṣa, Kumbhayoni, Dvaipāyana and 
the great personality Nārada  (9-10).There were 
also many other saintly demigods, kings and 
special royal orders called aru ṇādayas [a spe-
cial rank of rājar ṣis] from different dynasties of 
sages. When  they all assembled together to 
meet the Emperor [Parīk ṣit], he received them 
properly and bowed his head to the ground  
(11).After all the ṛṣis and others had seated 
themselves comfortably, the King, humbly 
standing before them with folded hands, told 
them  of his decision to fast until death  (12). 
The fortunate King said:  Indeed, we are 
the most grateful of all the kings who are 
trained to get favors from the great souls. Gen-
erally you [sages] consider royalty as refuse to 
be rejected and left in a distant place  (13).The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the control-
ler of both the transcendental and mundane 
worlds, has graciously overtaken me in the 
form of a brāhma ṇa’s curse. Due to my being 
too much attached to family life, the Lord, in 
order to save me, has appeared before me in 
such a way that only out of fear I will detach 
myself from the world  (14).O brāhma ṇas, just 
accept me as a completely surrendered soul, 
and let mother Ganges, the representative of the 
Lord, also accept me in that way, for I have al-
ready taken  the lotus feet of the Lord into my 
heart. Let the snakebird  or whatever magical 
thing the brāhma ṇa created  bite me at once. I 
only desire that you all continue singing the 
deeds of Lord Vi ṣṇu (15).Again, offering obei-
sances unto all you brāhma ṇas, I pra y that if I 
should again take my birth in the material world I will have complete attachment to the unlim-
ited Lord K ṛṣṇa, association with His devotees 
and friendly relations with all living beings  
(16). 
In perfect selfcontrol, Mahārāja Parīk ṣit sat 
down o n a seat of straw, with strawroots facing 
the east, placed on the southern bank of the 
Ganges, and he himself faced the north. Just 
previously he had given charge of his kingdom 
over to his son  (17).Thus the King, Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit, sat to fast until death . All the demigods 
of the higher planets praised the King’s actions 
and in pleasure continually scattered flowers 
over the earth and beat celestial drums  (18).All 
the great sages who were assembled there also 
praised the decision of Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, and 
they expressed their approval by saying “Very 
good.” Naturally the sages are inclined to do 
good to common men, for they have all the 
qualitative powers of the Supreme Lord. There-
fore they were very much pleased to see 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, a devotee of the L ord, and 
they spoke as follows  (19).[The sages said:] O 
chief of all the saintly kings of the Pā ṇḍu dyn-
asty who are strictly in the line of Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa! It is not at all astonishing that you give 
up your throne, which is decorated with the hel-
mets of ma ny kings, to achieve eternal associa-
tion with the Personality of Godhead  (20).We 
shall all wait here until the foremost devotee of 
the Lord, Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, returns to the su-
preme planet, which is completely free from all 
mundane contamination and all k inds of lamen-
tation  (21). 
All that was spoken by the great sages was 
very sweet to hear, full of meaning and appro-
priately presented as perfectly true. So after 
hearing them, Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, desiring to 
hear of the activities of Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Per-
sonality of Godhead, congratulated the great 
sages  (22).The King said: O great sages, you 
have all very kindly assembled here, having 
come from all parts of the universe. You are all 
as good as supreme knowledge personified, 
who resides in the planet above the three worlds 
[Satyaloka]. Consequently you are naturally in-
clined to do good to others, and but for this you 
have no interest, either in this life or in the next  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

84 
 (23).O trustworthy brāhma ṇas, I now ask you 
about my immediate duty. Please, after proper 
deliberation, tell me of the unalloyed duty of 
everyone in all circumstances, and specifically 
of those who are just about to die  (24). 
At that moment there appeared the powerful 
son of Vyāsadeva, who traveled over the earth 
disinterested and satisfied wit h himself. He did 
not manifest any symptoms of belonging to any 
social order or status of life. He was surrounded 
with women and children, and he dressed as if 
others had neglected him  (25).This son of 
Vyāsadeva was only sixteen years old. His legs, 
hands,  thighs, arms, shoulders, forehead and 
the other parts of his body were all delicately 
formed. His eyes were beautifully wide, and his 
nose and ears were highly raised. He had a very 
attractive face, and his neck was well formed 
and beautiful like a conchs hell (26).His collar-
bone was fleshy, his chest broad and thick, his 
navel deep and his abdomen beautifully striped. 
His arms were long, and curly hair was strewn 
over his beautiful face. He was naked, and the 
hue of his body reflected that of Lord K ṛṣṇa 
(27).He was blackish and very beautiful due to 
his youth. Because of the glamor of his body 
and his attractive smiles, he was pleasing to 
women. Though he tried to cover his natural 
glories, the great sages present there were all 
expert in the art of physiog nomy, and so they 
honored him by rising from their seats  (28). 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, who is also known as 
Viṣṇurāta [one who is always protected by 
Viṣṇu], bowed his head to receive the chief 
guest, Śukadeva Gosvāmī. At that time all the 
ignorant women and boys ceased following 
Śrīla Śukadeva. Receiving respect from all,  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī took his exalted seat  
(29).Śukadeva Gosvāmī was then surrounded 
by saintly sages and demigods just as the moon 
is surrounded by stars, planets and other heav-
enly bodies. His presence was gorgeous, and he 
was respected by all  (30).The sage  ŚrīŚukadeva 
Gosvāmī sat perfectly pacified, intelligent and 
ready to answer any question without hesita-
tion. The great devotee, Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, ap-
proached him, offered his respects by bowing 
before him, and politely inquired with sweet words and folded  hands  (31). 
The fortunate King Parīk ṣit said:  O 
brāhma ṇa, by your mercy only, you have sanc-
tified us, making us like unto places of pilgrim-
age, all by your presence here as my guest. By 
your mercy, we, who are but unworthy royalty, 
become eligible to serv e the devotee  
(32).Simply by our remembering you, our 
houses become instantly sanctified. And what 
to speak of seeing you, touching you, washing 
your holy feet and offering you a seat in our 
home? (33)Just as the atheist cannot remain in 
the presence of the  Personality of Godhead, so 
also the invulnerable sins of a man are immedi-
ately vanquished in your presence, O saint! O 
great mystic! (34)Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Personality of 
Godhead, who is very dear to the sons of King 
Pāṇḍu, has accepted me as one of those rela-
tives just to please His great cousins and broth-
ers (35).Otherwise [without being inspired by 
Lord K ṛṣṇa] how is it that you have volunt arily 
appeared here, though you are moving incog-
nito to the common man and are not visible to 
us who are on the verge of death? (36)You are 
the spiritual master of great saints and devotees. 
I am therefore begging you to show the way of 
perfection for all p ersons, and especially for 
one who is about to die  (37).38Please let me 
know what a man should hear, chant, remember 
and worship, and also what he should not do. 
Please explain all this to me  (38).O powerfu l 
brāhma ṇa, it is said that you hardly stay in the 
houses of men long enough to milk a cow  (39). 
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said:  The King thus 
spoke and questioned the sage, using sweet lan-
guage. Then the great and powerful personality, 
the son of Vyāsadeva, who kn ew the principles 
of religion, began his reply  (40). 
Canto  2: The Cosmic Manifestation  
SB 2.1: The First Step in God Realiza-
tion 
Invocation   O my Lord, the all -pervading 
Personality of Godhead, I off er my respectful 
obeisances unto You.  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said : My dear King, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

85 
 your question is glorious because it is very ben-
eficial to all kinds of people. The answer to this 
question is the prime subject matter for hearing, 
and it is approved by all transcendentalists  (1).  
Those persons wh o are materially engrossed, 
being blind to the knowledge of ultimate truth, 
have many subject matters for hearing in hu-
man society, O Emperor  (2).The lifetime of 
such an envious householder is passed at night 
either in sleeping or in sex indulgence, and in  
the daytime either in making money or main-
taining family members  (3). Persons devoid of 
ātma -tattva do not inquire into the problems of 
life, being too attached to the fallible soldiers 
like the body, children and wife. Although suf-
ficiently experienced, they still do not see their 
inevitable destruction  (4). O descendant of 
King Bharata, one who desires to be free from 
all miseries must hear about, glorify and also 
remember the Personality of Godhead, who is 
the Supersoul, the controller and the savior 
from all miseries  (5). The highest perfection of 
human life, achieved e ither by complete 
knowledge of matter and spirit, by practice of 
mystic powers, or by perfect discharge of occu-
pational duty, is to remember the Personality of 
Godhead at the end of life  (6).O King Parīkṣit, 
mainly the topmost transcendentalists, who are 
above the regulative principles and restrictions, 
take pleasure in describing the glories of the 
Lord  (7).At the end of the Dvāpara -yuga, I 
studied this great supplement of Vedic litera-
ture n amed Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, which is 
equal to all the Vedas, from my father, Śrīla 
Dvaipāyana Vyāsadeva  (8). O saintly King, I 
was certainly situated perfectly in transcend-
ence, yet I was still attracted by the delineation 
of the pastimes of the Lord, who is d escribed 
by enlightened verses  (9).That very Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam I shall recite before you because 
you are the most sincere devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa. 
One who gives full attention and respect to 
hearing Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam achieves un-
flinching faith in the Supreme  Lord, the giver 
of salvation  (10). O King, constant chanting of 
the holy name of the Lord after the ways of the 
great authorities is the doubtless and fearless 
way of success for all, including those who are free from all material desires, those who are d e-
sirous of all material enjoyment, and also those 
who are self -satisfied by dint of transcendental 
knowledge  (11).  What is the value of a pro-
longed life which is wasted, inexperienced by 
years in this world? Better a moment of full 
consciousness, because that gives one a start in 
searching after his supreme interest  (12).The 
saintly King Khaṭvāṅga, after being informed 
that the duration of his life would be only a mo-
ment more, at once freed himself from all ma-
terial activities and took shelter of the supre me 
safety, the Personality of Godhead  
(13).Mahārāja Parīkṣit, now your duration of 
life is limited to seven more days, so during this 
time you can perform all those rituals which are 
needed for the best purpose of your next life  
(14). 
At the last stage of one’s life, one should be 
bold enough not to be afraid of death. But one 
must cut off all attachment to the material body 
and everything pertaining to it and all desires 
thereof  (15).One should leave home and prac-
tice self -control. In a sacred place he sho uld 
bathe regularly and sit down in a lonely place 
duly sanctified  (16).  After sitting in the above 
manner, make the mind remember the three 
transcendental letters [a -u-m], and by regulat-
ing the breathing process, control the mind so 
as not to forget the transcendental seed  
(17).Gradually, as the mind becomes progres-
sively spiritualized, withdraw it from sense ac-
tivities, and by intelligence the senses will be 
controlled. The mind too absorbed in material 
activities can be engaged in the service of the 
Personality of Godhead and become fixed in 
full transcendental consciousness  (18). There-
after, you should meditate upon  the limbs of 
Viṣṇu, one after another, without being devi-
ated from the conception of the complete body. 
Thus the mind becomes free from all sense ob-
jects. There should be no other thing to be 
thought upon. Because the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, Viṣṇu , is the Ultimate Truth, 
the mind becomes completely reconciled in 
Him only  (19).One’s mind is always agitated 
by the passionate mode of material nature and 
bewildered by the ignorant mode of nature. But 
one can rectify such conceptions by the relation 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

86 
 of Viṣṇu and thus become pacified by cleansing 
the dirty things created by them  (20). O King, 
by this system of remembrance and by being 
fixed in the habit of seeing the all -good per-
sonal conception of the Lord, one can very soon 
attain devotional service to the Lord, under His 
direct shelter  (21).  

The fortunate King Parīkṣit, inquiring 
further, said : O brāhmaṇa, please describe in 
full detail how and where the mind has to be 
applied and how the conception can be fixed so 
that the dirty things in a person’s mind can be 
removed  (22).  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī answered : One should 
control the sitting posture, regulate the breath-
ing process by the yogic prāṇāyāma and thus 
control the mind and senses and with intelli-
gence apply the mind to the gross potencies of 
the Lor d [called the virāṭ -rūpa]  (23).This gigan-
tic manifestation of the phenomenal material 
world as a whole is the personal body of the 
Absolute Truth, wherein the universal resultant 
past, present and future of material time is ex-
perienced  (24). The gigantic u niversal form of 
the Personality of Godhead, within the body of 
the universal shell, which is covered by seven-
fold material elements, is the subject for the 
virāṭ conception  (25).Persons who have real-
ized it have studied that the planets known as 
Pātāla co nstitute the bottoms of the feet of the 
universal Lord, and the heels and the toes are 
the Rasātala planets. The ankles are the 
Mahātala planets, and His shanks constitute the 
Talātala planets  (26).The knees of the universal 
form are the planetary system o f the name Su-
tala, and the two thighs are the Vitala and Atala 
planetary systems. The hips are Mahītala, and 
outer space is the depression of His navel  
(27).The chest of the Original Personality of the 
gigantic form is the luminary planetary system, 
His ne ck is the Mahar planets, His mouth is the 
Janas planets, and His forehead is the Tapas 
planetary system. The topmost planetary sys-
tem, known as Satyaloka, is the head of He who 
has one thousand heads  (28).His arms are the 
demigods headed by Indra, the ten directional 
sides are His ears, and physical sound is His sense of hearing. His nostrils are the two 
Aśvinī -kumāras, and material fragrance is His 
sense of smell. His mouth is the blazing fire  
(29).The sphere of outer space constitutes His 
eyepits, and the  eyeball is the sun as the power 
of seeing. His eyelids are both the day and 
night, and in the movements of His eyebrows, 
Brahmā and similar supreme personalities re-
side. His palate is the director of water, Varuṇa, 
and the juice or essence of everything i s His 
tongue  (30).They say that the Vedic hymns are 
the cerebral passage of the Lord, and His jaws 
of teeth are Yama, god of death, who punishes 
the sinners. The art of affection is His set of 
teeth, and the most alluring illusory material 
energy is His sm ile. This great ocean of mate-
rial creation is but the casting of His glance 
over us  (31).Modesty is the upper portion of 
His lips, hankering is His chin, religion is the 
breast of the Lord, and irreligion is His back. 
Brahmājī, who generates all living beings in the 
material world, is His genitals, and the Mitrā -
varuṇas are His two testicles.  The ocean is His 
waist, and the hills and mountains are the stacks 
of His bones  (32). O King, the rivers are the 
veins of the gigantic body, the trees are the 
hairs of His body, and the omnipotent air is His 
breath. The passing ages are His movements, 
and His activities are the reactions of the three 
modes of material nature  (33).O best amongst 
the Kurus, the clouds which carry water are the 
hairs on His head, the terminations of days or 
nights are His dress, and the supreme cause of 
material creation is H is intelligence. His mind 
is the moon, the reservoir of all changes  
(34).The principle of matter [mahat -tattva] is 
the consciousness of the omnipresent Lord, as 
asserted by the experts, and Rudradeva is His 
ego. The horse, mule, camel and elephant are 
His nails, and wild animals and all quadrupeds 
are situated in the belt zone of the Lord  
(35).Varieties of birds are indications of His 
masterful artistic sense. Manu, the father of 
mankind, is the emblem of His standard intelli-
gence, and humanity is His resid ence. The ce-
lestial species of human beings, like the 
Gandharvas, Vidyādharas, Cāraṇas and angels, 
all represent His musical rhythm, and the de-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

87 
 moniac soldiers are representations of His won-
derful prowess  (36).The virāṭ -puruṣa’s face is 
the brāhmaṇas, His a rms are the kṣatriyas, His 
thighs are the vaiśyas, and the śūdras are under 
the protection of His feet. All the worshipable 
demigods are also overtaken by Him, and it is 
the duty of everyone to perform sacrifices with 
feasible goods to appease the Lord  (37).I have 
thus explained to you the gross material gigan-
tic conception of the Personality of Godhead. 
One who seriously desires liberation concen-
trates his mind on this form of the Lord, be-
cause there is nothing more than this in the ma-
terial world  (38).  One should concentrate his 
mind upon the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who alone distributes Himself in so many 
manifestations just as ordinary persons create 
thousands of manifestations in dreams. One 
must concentrate the mind on Him, the only all -
blissf ul Absolute Truth. Otherwise one will be 
misled and will cause his own degradation  (39).  

SB 2.2: The Lord in the Heart  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Formerly, 
prior to the manifestation of the cosmos, Lord 
Brahmā, by meditating on the virāṭ -rūpa, re-
gained h is lost consciousness by appeasing the 
Lord. Thus he was able to rebuild the creation 
as it was before.  

The way of presentation of the Vedic sounds 
is so bewildering that it directs the intelligence 
of the people to meaningless things like the 
heavenly k ingdoms. The conditioned souls 
hover in dreams of such heavenly illusory 
pleasures, but actually they do not relish any 
tangible happiness in such places  (2).For this 
reason the enlightened person should endeavor 
only for the minimum necessities of life wh ile 
in the world of names. He should be intelli-
gently fixed and never endeavor for unwanted 
things, being competent to perceive practically 
that all such endeavors are merely hard labor 
for nothing  (3). When there are ample earthly 
flats to lie on, what is  the necessity of cots and 
beds? When one can use his own arms, what is 
the necessity of a pillow? When one can use the palms of his hands, what is the necessity of va-
rieties of utensils? When there is ample cover-
ing, or the skins of trees, what is the nec essity 
of clothing? (4) Are there no torn clothes lying 
on the common road? Do the trees, which exist 
for maintaining others, no longer give alms in 
charity? Do the rivers, being dried up, no longer 
supply water to the thirsty? Are the caves of the 
mountai ns now closed? Or above all, does the 
Almighty Lord not protect the fully surren-
dered souls? Why then do the learned sages go 
to flatter those who are intoxicated by hard -
earned wealth? (5) Thus being fixed, one must 
render service unto the Supersoul situa ted in 
one’s own heart by His omnipotency. Because 
He is the Almighty Personality of Godhead, 
eternal and unlimited, He is the ultimate goal of 
life, and by worshiping Him one can end the 
cause of the conditioned state of existence  (6).  
Who else but the g ross materialists will neglect 
such transcendental thought and take to the 
nonpermanent names only, seeing the mass of 
people fallen in the river of suffering as the 
consequence of accruing the result of their own 
work? (7) 

Others conceive of the Personal ity of God-
head residing within the body in the region of 
the heart and measuring only eight inches, with 
four hands carrying a lotus, a wheel of a char-
iot, a conchshell and a club respectively  (8).His 
mouth expresses His happiness. His eyes 
spread like the  petals of a lotus, and His gar-
ments, yellowish like the saffron of a kadamba 
flower, are bedecked with valuable jewels. His 
ornaments are all made of gold, set with jewels, 
and He wears a glowing headdress and earrings  
(9). His lotus feet are placed over the whorls of 
the lotuslike hearts of great mystics. On His 
chest is the Kaustubha jewel, engraved with a 
beautiful calf, and there are other jewels on His 
shoulders. His complete torso is garlanded with 
fresh flowers  (10). He is well decorated with an 
ornamental wreath about His waist and rings 
studded with valuable jewels on His fingers. 
His leglets, His bangles, His oiled hair, curling 
with a bluish tint, and His beautiful smiling 
face are all very pleasing  (11).The Lord’s mag-
nanimous pastimes and the gl owing glancing of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

88 
 His smiling face are all indications of His ex-
tensive benedictions. One must therefore con-
centrate on this transcendental form of the 
Lord, as long as the mind can be fixed on Him 
by meditation  (12).The process of meditation 
should begin from the lotus feet of the Lord and 
progress to His smiling face. The meditation 
should be concentrated upon the lotus feet, then 
the calves, then the thighs, and in this way 
higher and higher. The more the mind becomes 
fixed upon the different parts of th e limbs, one 
after another, the more the intelligence be-
comes purified  (13). Unless the gross material-
ist develops a sense of loving service unto the 
Supreme Lord, the seer of both the transcen-
dental and material worlds, he should remem-
ber or meditate upon  the universal form of the 
Lord at the end of his prescribed duties  (14).  O 
King, whenever the yogī desires to leave this 
planet of human beings, he should not be per-
plexed about the proper time or place, but 
should comfortably sit without being disturbed 
and, regulating the life air, should control the 
senses by the mind  (15).  

Thereafter, the yogī should merge his mind, 
by his unalloyed intelligence, into the living en-
tity, and then merge the living entity into the 
Superself. And by doing this, the fully satisfied 
living entity becomes situated in the supreme 
stage of satis faction, so that he ceases from all 
other activities  (16). In that transcendental state 
of labdhopaśānti, there is no supremacy of dev-
astating time, which controls even the celestial 
demigods who are empowered to rule over 
mundane creatures. (And what to s peak of the 
demigods themselves?) Nor is there the mode 
of material goodness, nor passion, nor igno-
rance, nor even the false ego, nor the material 
Causal Ocean, nor the material nature  (17).The 
transcendentalists desire to avoid everything 
godless, for the y know that supreme situation 
in which everything is related with the Supreme 
Lord Viṣṇu. Therefore a pure devotee who is in 
absolute harmony with the Lord does not create 
perplexities, but worships the lotus feet of the 
Lord at every moment, taking them i nto his 
heart  (18).  By the strength of scientific knowledge, one should be well situated in ab-
solute realization and thus be able to extinguish 
all material desires. One should then give up 
the material body by blocking the air hole 
[through which stool i s evacuated] with the 
heel of one’s foot and by lifting the life air from 
one place to another in the six primary places  
(19).  The meditative devotee should slowly 
push up the life air from the navel to the heart, 
from there to the chest, and from there t o the 
root of the palate. He should search out the 
proper places with intelligence  (20).Thereafter 
the bhakti -yogī should push the life air up be-
tween the eyebrows, and then, blocking the 
seven outlets of the life air, he should maintain 
his aim for going back home, back to Godhead. 
If he is completely free from all desires for ma-
terial enjoyment, he should then reach the cer-
ebral hole and give up his material connections, 
having gone to the Supreme  (21).  

However, O King, if a yogī maintains a de-
sire for improved material enjoyments, like 
transference to the topmost planet, Brah-
maloka, or the achievement of the eightfold 
perfections, travel in outer space with the 
Vaihāyasas, or a situation in one of the millions 
of planets, then he has to take away with h im 
the materially molded mind and senses  
(22).The transcendentalists are concerned with 
the spiritual body. As such, by the strength of 
their devotional service, austerities, mystic 
power and transcendental knowledge, their 
movements are unrestricted, with in and beyond 
the material worlds. The fruitive workers, or 
the gross materialists, can never move in such 
an unrestricted manner  (23).O King, when such 
a mystic passes over the Milky Way by the il-
luminatin g Suṣumṇā to reach the highest 
planet, Brahmaloka, he goes first to 
Vaiśvānara, the planet of the deity of fire, 
wherein he becomes completely cleansed of all 
contaminations, and thereafter he still goes 
higher, to the circle of Śiśumāra, to relate with 
Lord Hari, the Personality of Godhead  (24). 
This Śiśumāra is the pivot for the turning of the 
complete universe, and it is called the navel of 
Viṣṇu [Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu]. The yogī alone 
goes beyond this circle of Śiśumāra and attains 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

89 
 the planet [Maharloka]  where purified saints 
like Bhṛgu enjoy a duration of life of 
4,300,000,000 solar years. This planet is wor-
shipable even for saints who are transcenden-
tally situated  (25).At the time of the final dev-
astation of the complete universe [the end of the 
duratio n of Brahmā’s life], a flame of fire ema-
nates from the mouth of Ananta [from the bot-
tom of the universe]. The yogī sees all the plan-
ets of the universe burning to ashes, and thus he 
leaves for Satyaloka by airplanes used by the 
great purified souls. The du ration of life in 
Satyaloka is calculated to be 
15,480,000,000,000 years  (26).In that planet of 
Satyaloka, there is neither bereavement, nor old 
age nor death. There is no pain of any kind, and 
therefore there are no anxieties, save that some-
times, due to consciousness, there is a feeling 
of compassion for those unaware of the process 
of devotional service, who are subjected to un-
surpassable miseries in the material world  
(27).After reaching Satyaloka, the devotee is 
specifically able to be incorporated fea rlessly 
by the subtle body in an identity similar to that 
of the gross body, and one after another he 
gradually attains stages of existence from 
earthly to watery, fiery, glowing and airy, until 
he reaches the ethereal stage  (28).The devotee 
thus surpasses  the subtle objects of different 
senses like aroma by smelling, the palate by 
tasting, vision by seeing forms, touch by con-
tacting, the vibrations of the ear by ethereal 
identification, and the sense organs by material 
activities  (29).The devotee, thus sur passing the 
gross and the subtle forms of coverings, enters 
the plane of egoism. And in that status he 
merges the material modes of nature [ignorance 
and passion] in this point of neutralization and 
thus reaches egoism in goodness. After this, all 
egoism i s merged in the mahat -tattva, and he 
comes to the point of pure self -realization  
(30).Only the purified soul can attain the per-
fection of associating with the Personality of 
Godhead in complete bliss and satisfaction in 
his constitutional state. Whoever is  able to ren-
ovate such devotional perfection is never again 
attracted by this material world, and he never 
returns  (31).  Your Majesty Mahārāja Parīkṣit, 
know that all that I have described in reply to your proper inquiry is just according to the ver-
sion o f the Vedas, and it is eternal truth. This 
was described personally by Lord Kṛṣṇa unto 
Brahmā, with whom the Lord was satisfied 
upon being properly worshiped  (32).  

For those who are wandering in the material 
universe, there is no more auspicious means of  
deliverance than what is aimed at in the direct 
devotional service of Lord Kṛṣṇa  (33).The 
great personality Brahmā, with great attention 
and concentration of the mind, studied the Ve-
das three times, and after scrutinizingly exam-
ining them, he ascertained that attraction for the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa is 
the highest perfection of religion  (34). The Per-
sonality of Godhead Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is in every 
living being along with the individual soul. And 
this fact is perceived and hypothesized in o ur 
acts of seeing and taking help from the intelli-
gence  (35).O King, it is therefore essential that 
every human being hear about, glorify and re-
member the Supreme Lord, the Personality of 
Godhead, always and everywhere  (36). Those 
who drink through aural r eception, fully filled 
with the nectarean message of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the 
beloved of the devotees, purify the polluted aim 
of life known as material enjoyment and thus 
go back to Godhead, to the lotus feet of Him 
[the Personality of Godhead]  (37).  

SB 2.3: Pur e Devotional Service: The 
Change in Heart  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Mahārāja 
Parīkṣit, as you have inquired from me as to the 
duty of the intelligent man who is on the thresh-
old of death, so I have answered you  (1).One 
who desires to be absorbed in the imp ersonal 
brahmajyoti effulgence should worship the 
master of the Vedas [Lord Brahmā or 
Bṛhaspati, the learned priest], one who desires 
powerful sex should worship the heavenly 
King, Indra, and one who desires good progeny 
should worship the great progenitor s called the 
Prajāpatis. One who desires good fortune 
should worship Durgādevī, the superintendent 
of the material world. One desiring to be very 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

90 
 powerful should worship fire, and one who as-
pires only after money should worship the Va-
sus. One should worshi p the Rudra incarnations 
of Lord Śiva if he wants to be a great hero. One 
who wants a large stock of grains should wor-
ship Aditi. One who desires to attain the heav-
enly planets should worship the sons of Aditi. 
One who desires a worldly kingdom should 
wors hip Viśvadeva, and one who wants to be 
popular with the general mass of population 
should worship the Sādhya demigod. One who 
desires a long span of life should worship the 
demigods known as the Aśvinī -kumāras, and a 
person desiring a strongly built body s hould 
worship the earth. One who desires stability in 
his post should worship the horizon and the 
earth combined. One who desires to be beauti-
ful should worship the beautiful residents of the 
Gandharva planet, and one who desires a good 
wife should worship  the Apsarās and the Urvaśī 
society girls of the heavenly kingdom. One who 
desires domination over others should worship 
Lord Brahmā, the head of the universe. One 
who desires tangible fame should worship the 
Personality of Godhead, and one who desires a 
good bank balance should worship the demigod 
Varuṇa. If one desires to be a greatly learned 
man he should worship Lord Śiva, and if one 
desires a good marital relation he should wor-
ship the chaste goddess Umā, the wife of Lord 
Śiva (2-7).One should worship Lord Viṣṇu or 
His devotee for spiritual advancement in 
knowledge, and for protection of heredity and 
advancement of a dynasty one should worship 
the various demigods  (8). One who desires 
domination over a kingdom or an empire 
should worship the Manus. One who desires 
victory over an enemy should worship the de-
mons, and one who desires sense gratification 
should worship the moon. But one who desires 
nothing of material enjoyment should worship 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead  (9). A per-
son who has broader intelligence, whether he 
be full of all material desire, without any mate-
rial desire, or desiring liberation, must by all 
means worship the supreme whole, the Person-
ality of Godhead  (10).  All the different kinds 
of worshipers of multidemigods can attain t he 
highest perfectional benediction, which is spontaneous attraction unflinchingly fixed 
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
only by the association of the pure devotee of 
the Lord  (11).Transcendental knowledge in re-
lation with the Supreme Lord Hari i s 
knowledge resulting in the complete suspen-
sion of the waves and whirlpools of the material 
modes. Such knowledge is self -satisfying due 
to its being free from material attachment, and 
being transcendental it is approved by authori-
ties. Who could fail to be attracted? (12) 
Śaunaka said:  The son of Vyāsadeva, Śrīla 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, was a highly learned sage 
and was able to describe things in a poetic man-
ner. What did Mahārāja Parīkṣit again inquire 
from him after hearing all that he had said? (13) 
O learne d Sūta Gosvāmī! Please continue to ex-
plain such topics to us because we are all eager 
to hear. Besides that, topics which result in the 
discussion of the Lord Hari should certainly be 
discussed in the assembly of devotees  
(14).Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the grands on of the 
Pāṇḍavas, was from his very childhood a great 
devotee of the Lord. Even while playing with 
dolls, he used to worship Lord Kṛṣṇa by imitat-
ing the worship of the family Deity  (15).  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva, was 
also full in transcend ental knowledge and was 
a great devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa, son of 
Vasudeva. So there must have been discussion 
of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is glorified by great philos-
ophers and in the company of great devotees  
(16).  Both by rising and by setting, the sun de-
creases th e duration of life of everyone, except 
one who utilizes the time by discussing topics 
of the all -good Personality of Godhead  (17). Do 
the trees not live? Do the bellows of the black-
smith not breathe? All around us, do the beasts 
not eat and discharge semen ? (18) Men who are 
like dogs, hogs, camels and asses praise those 
men who never listen to the transcendental pas-
times of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the deliverer from 
evils  (19).  
One who has not listened to the messages 
about the prowess and marvelous acts of the 
Personality of Godhead and has not sung or 
chanted loudly the worthy songs about the Lord 
is to be considered to possess earholes like the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

91 
 holes of snakes and a tongue like the tongue of 
a frog  (20).  The upper portion of the body, 
though crowned with a silk turban, is only a 
heavy burden if not bowed down before the 
Person ality of Godhead who can award mukti 
[freedom]. And the hands, though decorated 
with glittering bangles, are like those of a dead 
man if not engaged in the service of the Person-
ality of Godhead Hari  (21).The eyes which do 
not look at the symbolic represent ations of the 
Personality of Godhead Viṣṇu [His forms, 
name, quality, etc.] are like those printed on the 
plumes of the peacock, and the legs which do 
not move to the holy places [where the Lord is 
remembered] are considered to be like tree 
trunks (22).The person who has not at any time 
received the dust of the feet of the Lord’s pure 
devotee upon his head is certainly a dead body. 
And the person who has never experienced the 
aroma of the tulasī leaves from the lotus feet of 
the Lord is also a dead body, alt hough breath-
ing (23). Certainly that heart is steel -framed 
which, in spite of one’s chanting the holy name 
of the Lord with concentration, does not change 
when ecstasy takes place, tears fill the eyes and 
the hairs stand on end  (24).  O Sūta Gosvāmī, 
your words are pleasing to our minds. Please 
therefore explain this to us as it was spoken by 
the great devotee Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who is 
very expert in transcendental knowledge, and 
who spoke to Mahārāja Parīkṣit upon being 
asked  (25).  
SB 2.4: The Process of C reation  
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the 
son of Uttarā, after hearing the speeches of 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, which were all about the 
truth of the self, applied his concentration faith-
fully upon Lord Kṛṣṇa  (1).Mahārāja Parīkṣit, as 
a result of his whol ehearted attraction for Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, was able to give up all deep -rooted af-
fection for his personal body, his wife, his chil-
dren, his palace, his animals like horses and el-
ephants, his treasury house, his friends and rel-
atives, and his undisputed kingdom  (2).O great 
sages, the great soul Mahārāja Parīkṣit, con-
stantly rapt in thought of Lord Kṛṣṇa, knowing 
well of his imminent death, renounced all sorts 
of fruitive activities, namely acts of religion, economic development and sense gratification, 
and thus fix ed himself firmly in his natural love 
for Kṛṣṇa and asked all these questions, exactly 
as you are asking me  (3-4).  
Mahārāja Parīkṣit said : O learned 
brāhmaṇa, you know everything because you 
are without material contamination. Therefore 
whatever you have spoken to me appears per-
fectly right. Your speeches are gradually de-
stroying the darkness of my ignorance, for you 
are narrating the topics of the Lord  (5). I beg to 
know from you how the Personality of God-
head, by His personal energies, creates these 
phen omenal universes as they are, which are in-
conceivable even to the great demigods  (6). 
Kindly describe how the Supreme Lord, who is 
all-powerful, engages His different energies 
and different expansions in maintaining and 
again winding up the phenomenal worl d in the 
sporting spirit of a player  (7). O learned 
brāhmaṇa, the transcendental activities of the 
Lord are all wonderful, and they appear incon-
ceivable because even great endeavors by many 
learned scholars have still proved insufficient 
for understanding them  (8).The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is one, whether He alone 
acts with the modes of material nature, or sim-
ultaneously expands in many forms, or expands 
consecutively to direct the modes of nature  (9). 
Kindly clear up all these doubtful inquiries, be-
cause you are not only vastly learned in the Ve-
dic literatures and self -realized in transcend-
ence, but are also a great devotee of the Lord 
and are therefore as good as the Personality of 
Godhead  (10).  
Sūta Gosvāmī said : When Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī was thus requested by the King to de-
scribe the creative energy of the Personality of 
Godhead, he then systematically remembered 
the master of the senses [Śrī Kṛṣṇa], and to re-
ply properly he spoke thus  (11).  
Śukade va Gosvāmī said:  Let me offer my 
respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who, for the creation of 
the material world, accepts the three modes of 
nature. He is the complete whole residing 
within the body of everyone, and His ways are 
inconceivable  (12). I again offer my respectful 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

92 
 obeisances unto the form of complete existence 
and transcendence, who is the liberator of the 
pious devotees from all distresses and the de-
stroyer of the further advances in atheistic tem-
perament of the nonde votee -demons. For the 
transcendentalists who are situated in the top-
most spiritual perfection, He grants their spe-
cific destinations  (13).Let me offer my respect-
ful obeisances unto Him who is the associate of 
the members of the Yadu dynasty and who is 
alwa ys a problem for the nondevotees. He is the 
supreme enjoyer of both the material and spir-
itual worlds, yet He enjoys His own abode in 
the spiritual sky. There is no one equal to Him 
because His transcendental opulence is im-
measurable  (14). Let me offer my respectful 
obeisances unto the all -auspici ous Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, about whom glorification, remem-
brances, audience, prayers, hearing and wor-
ship can at once cleanse the effects of all sins 
of the performer  (15). Let me offer my respect-
ful obeisances again and again unto the all -aus-
picious Lord Śrī Kṛṣ ṇa. The highly intellectual, 
simply by surrendering unto His lotus feet, are 
relieved of all attachments to present and future 
existences and without difficulty progress to-
ward spiritual existence  (16). Let me offer my 
respectful obeisances unto the all -auspicious 
Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa again and again because the 
great learned sages, the great performers of 
charity, the great workers of distinction, the 
great philosophers and mystics, the great 
chanters of the Vedic hymns and the great fol-
lowers of Vedic principle s cannot achieve any 
fruitful result without dedication of such great 
qualities to the service of the Lord  (17).Kirāta, 
Hūṇa, Āndhra, Pulinda, Pulkaśa, Ābhīra, 
Śumbha, Yavana, members of the Khasa races 
and even others addicted to sinful acts can be 
purifi ed by taking shelter of the devotees of the 
Lord, due to His being the supreme power. I 
beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto Him  
(18). He is the Supersoul and the Supreme Lord 
of all self -realized souls. He is the personifica-
tion of the Vedas, religi ous scriptures and aus-
terities. He is worshiped by Lord Brahmā and 
Śiva and all those who are transcendental to all 
pretensions. Being so revered with awe and 
veneration, may that Supreme Absolute be pleased with me  (19).  May Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, 
who is the wo rshipable Lord of all devotees, the 
protector and glory of all the kings like 
Andhaka and Vṛṣṇi of the Yadu dynasty, the 
husband  of all goddesses of fortune, the direc-
tor of all sacrifices and therefore the leader of 
all living entities, the controller of all intelli-
gence, the proprietor of all planets, spiritual and 
material, and the supreme incarnation on the 
earth (the supreme all in all), be merciful upon 
me (20). It is the Personality of Godhead Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa who gives liberation. By thinking of His 
lotus feet at every second, following in the foot-
steps of authorities, the devotee in trance can 
see the Absolute Truth. The learned mental 
speculators, however, think of Him according 
to their whims. May the Lord be pleased with 
me (21).  May the Lord, who in t he beginning 
of the creation amplified the potent knowledge 
of Brahmā from within his heart and inspired 
him with full knowledge of creation and of His 
own Self, and who appeared to be generated 
from the mouth of Brahmā, be pleased with me  
(22).May the Sup reme Personality of Godhead, 
who enlivens the materially created bodies of 
the elements by lying down within the universe, 
and who in His puruṣa incarnation causes the 
living being to be subjected to the sixteen divi-
sions of material modes which are his ge nera-
tor, be pleased to decorate my statements  (23). 
I offer my respectful obeisances unto Śrīla 
Vyāsadeva, the incarnation of Vāsudeva who 
compiled the Vedic scriptures. The pure devo-
tees drink up the nectarean transcendental 
knowledge dropping from the lo tuslike mouth 
of the Lord  (24).My dear King, Brahmā, the 
firstborn, on being questioned by Nārada, ex-
actly apprised him on this subject as it had been 
directly spoken by the Lord to His own son, 
who was impregnated with Vedic knowledge 
from his very birth  (25).  
SB 2.5: The Cause of All Causes  
Śrī Nārada Muni asked  Brahmājī: O chief 
amongst the demigods, O firstborn living en-
tity, I beg to offer my respectful obeisances 
unto you. Please tell me that transcendental 
knowledge which specifically directs one to  the 
truth of the individual soul and the Supersoul.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

93 
 My dear father, please describe factually the 
symptoms of this manifest world. What is its 
background? How is it created? How is it con-
served? And under whose control is all this be-
ing done? (2) My dear  father, all this is known 
to you scientifically because whatever was cre-
ated in the past, whatever will be created in the 
future, or whatever is being created at present, 
as well as everything within the universe, is 
within your grip, just like a walnut  (3). My dear 
father, what is the source of your knowledge? 
Under whose protection are you standing? And 
under whom are you working? What is your 
real position? Do you alone create all entities 
with material elements by your personal en-
ergy? (4) As the spide r very easily creates the 
network of its cobweb and manifests its power 
of creation without being defeated by others, so 
also you yourself, by employment of your self -
sufficient energy, create without any other’s 
help (5).  Whatever we can understand by th e 
nomenclature, characteristics and features of a 
particular thing  superior, inferior or equal, 
eternal or temporary  is not created from any 
source other than that of Your Lordship, thou 
so great  (6).  Yet we are moved to wonder about 
the existence of so meone more powerful than 
you when we think of your great austerities in 
perfect discipline, although your good self is so 
powerful in the matter of creation  (7). My dear 
father, you know everything, and you are the 
controller of all. Therefore, may all tha t I have 
inquired from you be kindly instructed to me so 
that I may be able to understand it as your stu-
dent (8).  
Lord Brahmā said : My dear boy Nārada, 
being merciful to all (including me) you have 
asked all these questions because I have been 
inspired to  see into the prowess of the Almighty 
Personality of Godhead  (9).  Whatever you 
have spoken about me is not false because un-
less and until one is aware of the Personality of 
Godhead, who is the ultimate truth beyond me, 
one is sure to be illusioned by obse rving my 
powerful activities  (10). I create after the 
Lord’s creation by His personal effulgence 
[known as the brahmajyoti], just as when the 
sun manifests its fire, the moon, the firmament, 
the influential planets and the twinkling stars also manifest the ir brightness  (11).  I offer my 
obeisances and meditate upon Lord Kṛṣṇa 
[Vāsudeva], the Personality of Godhead, whose 
invincible potency influences them [the less in-
telligent class of men] to call me the supreme 
controller  (12).  The illusory energy of the  Lord 
cannot take precedence, being ashamed of her 
position, but those who are bewildered by her 
always talk nonsense, being absorbed in 
thoughts of “It is I” and “It is mine.” (13)  The 
five elementary ingredients of creation, the in-
teraction thereof set up by eternal time, and the 
intuition or nature of the indiv idual living be-
ings are all differentiated parts and parcels of 
the Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, and in 
truth there is no other value in them  (14).  The 
Vedic literatures are made by and are meant for 
the Supreme Lord, the demigods are also meant 
for serving the Lord as parts of His body, the 
different planets are also meant for the sake of 
the Lord, and different sacrifices are performed 
just to please Him  (15).  All different types of 
meditation or mysticism are means for realizing 
Nārāyaṇa. All aust erities are aimed at achiev-
ing Nārāyaṇa. Culture of transcendental 
knowledge is for getting a glimpse of 
Nārāyaṇa, and ultimately salvation is entering 
the kingdom of Nārāyaṇa  (16).  Inspired by 
Him only, I discover what is already created by 
Him [Nārāyaṇa ] under His vision as the all -per-
vading Supersoul, and I also am created by Him 
only (17).The Supreme Lord is pure, spiritual 
form, transcendental to all material qualities, 
yet for the sake of the creation of the material 
world and its maintenance and ann ihilation, He 
accepts through His external energy the mate-
rial modes of nature called goodness, passion 
and ignorance  (18). These three modes of ma-
terial nature, being further manifested as mat-
ter, knowledge and activities, put the eternally 
transcendental  living entity under conditions of 
cause and effect and make him responsible for 
such activities  (19).  O Brāhmaṇa Nārada, the 
Superseer, the transcendent Lord, is beyond the 
perception of the material senses of the living 
entities because of the above -mentioned three 
modes of nature. But He is the controller of 
everyone, including me  (20).  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

94 
 The Lord, who is the controller of all ener-
gies, thus creates, by His own potency, eternal 
time, the fate of all living entities, and their par-
ticular nature, for which  they were created, and 
He again merges them independently  (21). Af-
ter the incarnation of the first puruṣa 
[Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu], the mahat -tattva, or 
the principles of material creation, take place, 
and then time is manifested, and in course of 
time the three qualities appear. Nature means 
the three qualitative app earances. They trans-
form into activities  (22).  Material activities are 
caused by the mahat -tattva’s being agitated. At 
first there is transformation of the modes of 
goodness and passion, and later  due to the 
mode of ignorance  matter, its knowledge, and 
different activities of material knowledge come 
into play  (23). The self -centered materialistic 
ego, thus being transformed into three features, 
becomes known as the modes of goodness, pas-
sion and ignorance in three divisions, namely 
the powers that evolve  matter, knowledge of 
material creations, and the intelligence that 
guides such materialistic activities. Nārada, 
you are quite competent to understand this  (24).  
From the darkness of false ego, the first of the 
five elements, namely the sky, is generated . Its 
subtle form is the quality of sound, exactly as 
the seer is in relationship with the seen  (25).Be-
cause the sky is transformed, the air is gener-
ated with the quality of touch, and by previous 
succession the air is also full of sound and the 
basic prin ciples of duration of life: sense per-
ception, mental power and bodily strength. 
When the air is transformed in course of time 
and nature’s course, fire is generated, taking 
shape with the sense of touch and sound. Since 
fire is also transformed, there is a  manifestation 
of water, full of juice and taste. As previously, 
it also has form and touch and is also full of 
sound. And water, being transformed from all 
variegatedness on earth, appears odorous and, 
as previously, becomes qualitatively full of 
juice, t ouch, sound and form respectively  (26-
29).  From the mode of goodness the mind is 
generated and becomes manifest, as also the ten 
demigods controlling the bodily movements. 
Such demigods are known as the controller of 
directions, the controller of air, the  sun-god, the father of Dakṣa Prajāpati, the Aśvinī -kumāras, 
the fire -god, the King of heaven, the worshipa-
ble deity in heaven, the chief of the Ādityas, 
and Brahmājī, the Prajāpati. All come into ex-
istence  (30).  By further transformation of the 
mode of p assion, the sense organs like the ear, 
skin, nose, eyes, tongue, mouth, hands, geni-
tals, legs, and the outlet for evacuating, together 
with intelligence and living energy, are all gen-
erated  (31).  
O Nārada, best of the transcendentalists, the 
forms of the body cannot take place as long as 
these created parts, namely the elements, 
senses, mind and modes of nature, are not as-
sembled  (32).  Thus when all these became as-
sembled by force of the energy of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, this universe certainl y 
came into being by accepting both the primary 
and secondary causes of creation  (33).  Thus all 
the universes remained thousands of aeons 
within the water [the Causal Ocean], and the 
Lord of living beings, entering in each of them, 
caused them to be fully  animated  (34).  The 
Lord [Mahā -Viṣṇu], although lying in the 
Causal Ocean, came out of it, and dividing 
Himself as Hiraṇyagarbha, He entered into 
each universe and assumed the virāṭ -rūpa, with 
thousands of legs, arms, mouths, heads, etc  
(35).  Great philosophers imagin e that the com-
plete planetary systems in the universe are dis-
plays of the different upper and lower limbs of 
the universal body of the Lord  (36). The 
brāhmaṇas represent His mouth, the kṣatriyas 
His arms, the vaiśyas His thighs, and the śūdras 
are born of His legs  (37). The lower planetary 
systems, up to the limit of the earthly stratum, 
are said to be situated in His legs. The middle 
planetary systems, beginning from Bhuvarloka, 
are situated in His navel. And the still higher 
planetary systems, occupied by  the demigods 
and highly cultured sages and saints, are situ-
ated in the chest of the Supreme Lord  (38).  
From the forefront of the chest up to the neck 
of the universal form of the Lord are situated 
the planetary systems named Janaloka and Ta-
poloka, wherea s Satyaloka, the topmost plane-
tary system, is situated on the head of the form. 
The spiritual planets, however, are eternal  (39). 
My dear son Nārada, know from me that there 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

95 
 are seven lower planetary systems out of the to-
tal fourteen. The first planetary s ystem, known 
as Atala, is situated on the waist; the second, 
Vitala, is situated on the thighs; the third, Su-
tala, on the knees; the fourth, Talātala, on the 
shanks; the fifth, Mahātala, on the ankles; the 
sixth, Rasātala, on the upper portion of the feet;  
and the seventh, Pātāla, on the soles of the feet. 
Thus the virāṭ form of the Lord is full of all 
planetary systems  (40-41).Others may divide 
the whole planetary system into three divisions, 
namely the lower planetary systems on the legs 
[up to the earth] , the middle planetary systems 
on the navel, and the upper planetary systems 
[Svarloka] from the chest to the head of the Su-
preme Personality  (42).  
SB 2.6: Puruṣa -sūkta Confirmed  
Lord Brahmā said : The mouth of the virāṭ -
puruṣa [the universal form of the L ord] is the 
generating center of the voice, and the control-
ling deity is Fire. His skin and six other layers 
are the generating centers of the Vedic hymns, 
and His tongue is the productive center of dif-
ferent foodstuffs and delicacies for offering to 
the d emigods, the forefathers and the general 
mass of people  (1).His two nostrils are the gen-
erating centers of our breathing and of all other 
airs, His smelling powers generate the Aśvinī -
kumāra demigods and all kinds of medicinal 
herbs, and His breathing energies produce dif-
ferent kinds of fragrance  (2). His eyes are  the 
generating centers of all kinds of forms, and 
they glitter and illuminate. His eyeballs are like 
the sun and the heavenly planets. His ears hear 
from all sides and are receptacles for all the Ve-
das, and His sense of hearing is the generating 
center of  the sky and of all kinds of sound  
(3).His bodily surface is the breeding ground 
for the active principles of everything and for 
all kinds of auspicious opportunities. His skin, 
like the moving air, is the generating center for 
all kinds of sense of touch and is the place for 
performing all kinds of sacrifice  (4).The hairs 
on His body are the cause of all vegetation, par-
ticularly of those trees which are required as in-
gredients for sacrifice. The hairs on His head 
and face are reservoirs for the clouds, and  His 
nails are the breeding ground of electricity, stones and iron ores  (5).The Lord’s arms are the 
productive fields for the great demigods and 
other leaders of the living entities who protect 
the general mass  (6).Thus the forward steps of 
the Lord are th e shelter for the upper, lower and 
heavenly planets, as well as for all that we need. 
His lotus feet serve as protection from all kinds 
of fear  (7). From the Lord’s genitals originate 
water, semen, generatives, rains and the procre-
ators. His genitals are t he cause of a pleasure 
that counteracts the distress of begetting  (8).O 
Nārada, the evacuating outlet of the universal 
form of the Lord is the abode of the controlling 
deity of death, Mitra, and the evacuating hole 
and the rectum of the Lord is the place of envy, 
misfortune, death, hell, etc  (9).The back of the 
Lord is the place for all kinds of frustration and 
ignorance, as well as for immorality. From His 
veins flow the great rivers and rivulets, and on 
His bones are stacked the great mountains  
(10).The impersonal feature of the Lord is the 
abode of great oceans, and His b elly is the rest-
ing place for the materially annihilated living 
entities. His heart is the abode of the subtle ma-
terial bodies of living beings. Thus it is known 
by the intelligent class of men  (11).Also, the 
consciousness of that great personality is the 
abode of religious principles  mine, yours, and 
those of the four bachelors Sanaka, Sanātana, 
Sanat -kumāra and Sanandana. That conscious-
ness is also the abode of truth and transcenden-
tal knowledge  (12).Beginning from me 
[Brahmā] down to you and Bhava [Śiva ], all the 
great sages who were born before you, the dem-
igods, the demons, the Nāgas, the human be-
ings, the birds, the beasts, as well as the rep-
tiles, etc., and all phenomenal manifestations of 
the universes, namely the planets, stars, aster-
oids, luminari es, lightning, thunder, and the in-
habitants of the different planetary systems, 
namely the Gandharvas, Apsarās, Yakṣas, 
Rakṣas, Bhūtagaṇas, Uragas, Paśus, Pitās, Sid-
dhas, Vidyādharas, Cāraṇas, and all other dif-
ferent varieties of living entities, including  the 
birds, beasts, trees and everything that be, are 
all covered by the universal form of the Lord at 
all times, namely past, present and future, alt-
hough He is transcendental to all of them, eter-
nally existing in a form not exceeding nine 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

96 
 inches  (13-16).The sun illuminates both inter-
nally and externally by expanding its radiation; 
similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
by expanding His universal form, maintains 
everything in the creation both internally and 
externally  (17).The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is the controller of immortality and 
fearlessness, and He is transcendental to death 
and the fruitive actions of the material world. O 
Nārada, O brāhmaṇa, it is therefore difficult to 
measure the glories of the Supreme Person  
(18).  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is to 
be known as the supreme reservoir of all mate-
rial opulences by the one fourth of His energy 
in whic h all the living entities exist. Deathless-
ness, fearlessness and freedom from the anxie-
ties of old age and disease exist in the kingdom 
of God, which is beyond the three higher plan-
etary systems and beyond the material cover-
ings (19).The spiritual world, w hich consists of 
three fourths of the Lord’s energy, is situated 
beyond this material world, and it is especially 
meant for those who will never be reborn. Oth-
ers, who are attached to family life and who do 
not strictly follow celibacy vows, must live 
within the three material worlds  (20).By His 
energies, the all -pervading Personality of God-
head is thus comprehensively the master in the 
activities of controlling and in devotional ser-
vice. He is the ultimate master of both nesci-
ence and factual knowledge of all situations  
(21). 
From that Personality of Godhead, all the 
universal globes and the universal form with all 
material elements, qualities and senses are gen-
erated. Yet He is aloof from such material man-
ifestations, like the sun, which is separate from 
its rays and heat  (22).When I was born from the 
abdominal lotus flower of the Lord [Mahā -
Viṣṇu], the great person, I had no ingredients 
for sacrificial performances except the bodily 
limbs of the great Personality of Godhead  
(23).For performing sacrificial ceremonies, one 
requires sacrificial ingredients, such as flowers, 
leaves and straw, along with the sacrificial altar 
and a suitable time [spring]  (24).Other require-
ments are utensils, grains, clarified butter, honey, gold, earth, water, the Ṛg Veda, Yajur  
Veda and Sāma Veda and four priests to per-
form the sacrifice  (25).Other necessities in-
clude invoking the different names of the dem-
igods by specific hymns and vows of recom-
pense, in accordance with the particular scrip-
ture, for specific purposes and by sp ecific pro-
cesses (26).Thus I had to arrange all these nec-
essary ingredients and paraphernalia of sacri-
fice from the personal bodily parts of the Per-
sonality of Godhead. By invocation of the dem-
igods’ names, the ultimate goal, Viṣṇu, was 
gradually attained, and thus compensation and 
ultimate offering were complete  (27).  Thus I 
created the ingredients and paraphernalia for 
offering sacrifice out of the parts of the body of 
the Supreme Lord, the enjoyer of the sacrifice, 
and I performed the sacrifice to satisf y the Lord  
(28). My dear son, thereafter your nine broth-
ers, who are the masters of living creatures, per-
formed the sacrifice with proper rituals to sat-
isfy both the manifested and nonmanifested 
personalities  (29).Thereafter, the Manus, the 
fathers of mank ind, the great sages, the forefa-
thers, the learned scholars, the Daityas and 
mankind performed sacrifices meant to please 
the Supreme Lord  (30).All the material mani-
festations of the universes are therefore situated 
in His powerful material energies, which  He ac-
cepts self -sufficiently, although He is eternally 
without affinity for the material modes  (31).By 
His will, I create, Lord Śiva destroys, and He 
Himself, in His eternal form as the Personality 
of Godhead, maintains everything. He is the 
powerful controller of these three energies (32). 
My dear son, whatever you inquired from 
me I have thus explained  unto you, and you 
must know for certain that whatever there is (ei-
ther as cause or as effect, both in the material 
and spiritual worlds) is dependent on the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead  (33).O Nārada, 
because I have caught hold of the lotus feet of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, 
with great zeal, whatever I say has never 
proved to have been false. Nor is the progress 
of my mind ever deterred. Nor are my senses 
ever degraded by temporary attachment to mat-
ter (34).Although I am known as the great  
Brahmā, perfect in the disciplic succession of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

97 
 Vedic wisdom, and although I have undergone 
all austerities and am an expert in mystic pow-
ers and self -realization, and although I am rec-
ognized as such by the great forefathers of the 
living entities, who of fer me respectful obei-
sances, still I cannot understand Him, the Lord, 
the very source of my birth  (35).Therefore it is 
best for me to surrender unto His feet, which 
alone can deliver one from the miseries of re-
peated birth and death. Such surrender is all -
auspicious and allows one to perceive all hap-
piness. Even the sky cannot estimate the limits 
of its own expansion. So what can others do 
when the Lord Himself is unable to estimate 
His own limits? (36) 
Since neither Lord Śiva nor you nor I could 
ascertain the limits of spiritual happiness, how 
can other demigods know it? And because all 
of us are bewildered by the illusory, external 
energy of the Supreme Lord, we can see only 
this manifested cosmos accor ding to our indi-
vidual ability  (37).Let us offer our respectful 
obeisances unto that Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, whose incarnations and activities are 
chanted by us for glorification, though He can 
hardly be fully known as He is  (38).That su-
preme origi nal Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, expanding His plenary portion as 
Mahā -Viṣṇu, the first incarnation, creates this 
manifested cosmos, but He is unborn. The cre-
ation, however, takes place in Him, and the ma-
terial substance and manifestations are a ll Him-
self. He maintains them for some time and ab-
sorbs them into Himself again  (39).The Person-
ality of Godhead is pure, being free from all 
contaminations of material tinges. He is the Ab-
solute Truth and the embodiment of full and 
perfect knowledge. He is  all-pervading, with-
out beginning or end, and without rival. O 
Nārada, O great sage, the great thinkers can 
know Him when completely freed from all ma-
terial hankerings and when sheltered under un-
disturbed conditions of the senses. Otherwise, 
by untenable a rguments, all is distorted, and the 
Lord disappears from our sight  (40).  
Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu is the first incarna-
tion of the Supreme Lord, and He is the master 
of eternal time, space, cause and effects, mind, the elements, the material ego, the modes of  na-
ture, the senses, the universal form of the Lord, 
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and the sum total of all 
living beings, both moving and nonmoving  
(41). I myself [Brahmā], Lord Śiva, Lord 
Viṣṇu, great generators of living beings like 
Dakṣa and Prajāpati, yoursel ves [Nārada and 
the Kumāras], heavenly demigods like Indra 
and Candra, the leaders of the Bhūrloka plan-
ets, the leaders of the earthly planets, the lead-
ers of the lower planets, the leaders of the 
Gandharva planets, the leaders of the 
Vidyādhara planets, t he leaders of the 
Cāraṇaloka planets, the leaders of the Yakṣas, 
Rakṣas and Uragas, the great sages, the great 
demons, the great atheists and the great space-
men, as well as the dead bodies, evil spirits, sa-
tans, jinn, kūṣmāṇḍas, great aquatics, great 
beast s and great birds, etc.  in other words, an-
ything and everything which is exceptionally 
possessed of power, opulence, mental and per-
ceptual dexterity, strength, forgiveness, beauty, 
modesty, opulence, and breeding, whether in 
form or formless  may appear t o be the specific 
truth and the form of the Lord, but actually they 
are not so. They are only a fragment of the tran-
scendental potency of the Lord  (42-44).O 
Nārada, now I shall state, one after another, the 
transcendental incarnations of the Lord known 
as līlā -avatāras. Hearing of their activities 
counteracts all foul matters accumulated in the 
ear. These pastimes are pleasing to hear and are 
to be relished . Therefore they are in my heart  
(45).  
SB 2.7: Scheduled Incarnations with 
Specific Functions  
Lord Brahmā said : When the unlimitedly 
powerful Lord assumed the form of a boar as a 
pastime, just to lift the planet earth, which was 
drowned in the great ocean  of the universe 
called the Garbhodaka, the first demon 
[Hiraṇyākṣa] appeared, and the Lord pierced 
him with His tusk  (1).  
The Prajāpati first begot Suyajña in the 
womb of his wife Ākūti, and then Suyajña be-
got demigods, headed by Suyama, in the womb 
of his wife Dakṣiṇā. Suyajña, as the Indradeva, 
diminished very great miseries in the three 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

98 
 planetary systems [upper, lower and intermedi-
ate], and because he so diminished the miseries 
of the universe, he was later called Hari by the 
great father of mankind, n amely Svāyambhuva 
Manu  (2).  
The Lord then appeared as the Kapila incar-
nation, being the son of the prajāpati brāhmaṇa 
Kardama and his wife, Devahūti, along with 
nine other women [sisters]. He spoke to His 
mother about self -realization, by which, in that 
very lifetime, she became fully cleansed of the 
mud of the material modes and thereby 
achieved liberation, the path of Kapila  (3).  
The great sage Atri prayed for offspring, and 
the Lord, being satisfied with him, promised to 
incarnate as Atri’s son, Dattāt reya [Datta, the 
son of Atri]. And by the grace of the lotus feet 
of the Lord, many Yadus, Haihayas, etc., be-
came so purified that they obtained both mate-
rial and spiritual blessings  (4).  
To create different planetary systems I had 
to undergo austerities and penance, and the 
Lord, thus being pleased with me, incarnated in 
four sanas [Sanaka, Sanatkumāra, Sanandana 
and Sanātana]. In the previous creation the spir-
itual truth was devastated, but the four sanas 
explained it so nicely that the truth at once be-
came clearly perceived by the sages  (5).  
To exhibit His personal way of austerity and 
penance, He appeared in twin forms as 
Nārāyaṇa and Nara in the womb of Mūrti, the 
wife of Dharma and the daughter of Dakṣa. Ce-
lestial beauties, the companions of Cupid, w ent 
to try to break His vows, but they were unsuc-
cessful, for they saw that many beauties like 
them were emanating from Him, the Personal-
ity of Godhead  (6).Great stalwarts like Lord 
Śiva can, by their wrathful glances, overcome 
lust and vanquish him, yet t hey cannot be free 
from the overwhelming effects of their own 
wrath. Such wrath can never enter into the heart 
of Him [the Lord], who is above all this. So 
how can lust take shelter in His mind? (7) 
Being insulted by sharp words spoken by the 
co-wife of th e king, even in his presence, Prince 
Dhruva, though only a boy, took to severe pen-ances in the forest. And the Lord, being satis-
fied by his prayer, awarded him the Dhruva 
planet, which is worshiped by great sages, both 
upward and downward  (8).  
Mahārāja Ve na went astray from the path of 
righteousness, and the brāhmaṇas chastised 
him by the thunderbolt curse. By this King 
Vena was burnt with his good deeds and opu-
lence and was en route to hell. The Lord, by His 
causeless mercy, descended as his son, by the 
name of Pṛthu, delivered the condemned King 
Vena from hell, and exploited the earth by 
drawing all kinds of crops as produce  (9).  
The Lord appeared as the son of Sudevī, the 
wife of King Nābhi, and was known as 
Ṛṣabhadeva. He performed materialistic yoga 
to equibalance the mind. This stage is also ac-
cepted as the highest perfectional situation of 
liberation, wherein one is situated in one’s self 
and is completely satisfied  (10).  
The Lord appeared as the Hayagrīva incar-
nation in a sacrifice performed by me 
[Brahmā]. He is the personified sacrifices, and 
the hue of His body is golden. He is the person-
ified Vedas as well, and the Supersoul of all 
demigods. When He breathed, all the sweet 
sounds of the Vedic hymns came out of His 
nostrils  (11).  
At the end of t he millennium, the would -be 
Vaivasvata Manu, of the name Satyavrata, 
would see that the Lord in the fish incarnation 
is the shelter of all kinds of living entities, up to 
those in the earthly planets. Because of my fear 
of the vast water at the end of the millennium, 
the Vedas come out of my [Brahmā’s] mouth, 
and the Lord enjoys those vast waters and pro-
tects the Vedas  (12).  
The primeval Lord then assumed the tortoise 
incarnation in order to serve as a resting place 
[pivot] for the Mandara Mountain, which was 
acting as a churning rod. The demigods and de-
mons were churning the Ocean of Milk with the 
Mandara Mountain in order to extract nectar. 
The mountain moved back and forth, scratch-
ing the back of Lord Tortoise, who, while par-
tially sleeping, was experien cing an itching 
sensation  (13).  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

99 
 The Personality of Godhead assumed the in-
carnation of Nṛsiṁhadeva in order to vanquish 
the great fears of the demigods. He killed the 
king of the demons [Hiraṇyakaśipu], who chal-
lenged the Lord with a club in his hand, by 
placing the demon on His thighs an d piercing 
him with His nails, rolling His eyebrows in an-
ger and showing His fearful teeth and mouth  
(14).  
The leader of the elephants, whose leg was 
attacked in a river by a crocodile of superior 
strength, was much aggrieved. Taking a lotus 
flower in his  trunk, he addressed the Lord, say-
ing, “O original enjoyer, Lord of the universe! 
O deliverer, as famous as a place of pilgrimage! 
All are purified simply by hearing Your holy 
name , which is worthy to be chanted ” (15). The 
Personality of Godhead, after hear ing the ele-
phant’s plea, felt that the elephant needed His 
immediate help, for he was in great distress. 
Thus at once the Lord appeared there on the 
wings of the king of birds, Garuḍa, fully 
equipped with His weapon, the wheel [cakra]. 
With the wheel He cut to pieces the mouth of 
the crocodile to save the elephant, and He de-
livered the elephant by lifting him by h is trunk  
(16).  
The Lord, although transcendental to all ma-
terial modes, still surpassed all the qualities of 
the sons of Aditi, known as the Ādityas. The 
Lord appeared as the youngest son of Aditi. 
And because He surpassed all the planets of the 
universe,  He is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. On the pretense of asking for a meas-
urement of three footsteps of land, He took 
away all the lands of Bali Mahārāja. He asked 
simply because without begging, no authority 
can take one’s rightful possession  (17).Bali 
Mahārāja, who put on his head the water 
washed from the lotus feet of the Lord, did not 
think of anything besides his promise, in spite 
of being forbidden by his spiritual master. The 
king dedicated his own personal body to fulfill 
the measurement of th e Lord’s third step. For 
such a personality, even the kingdom of 
heaven, which he conquered by his strength, 
was of no value  (18).  
O Nārada, you were taught about the science of God and His transcendental loving service 
by the Personality of Godhead in Hi s incarna-
tion of Haṁsāvatāra. He was very much 
pleased with you, due to your intense propor-
tion of devotional service. He also explained 
unto you, lucidly, the full science of devotional 
service, which is especially understandable by 
persons who are souls surrendered unto Lord 
Vāsudeva, the Personality of Godhead  (19).As 
the incarnation of Manu, the Lord became the 
descendant of the Manu dynasty and ruled over 
the miscreant kingly order, subduing them by 
His powerful wheel weapon. Undeterred in all 
circumst ances, His rule was characterized by 
His glorious fame, which spread over the three 
lokas, and above them to the planetary system 
of Satyaloka, the topmost in the universe  (20).  
The Lord in His incarnation of Dhanvantari 
very quickly cures the diseases of  the ever -dis-
eased living entities simply by His fame per-
sonified, and only because of Him do the dem-
igods achieve long lives. Thus the Personality 
of Godhead becomes ever glorified. He also ex-
acted a share from the sacrifices, and it is he 
only who inaugu rated the medical science or 
the knowledge of medicine in the universe  (21).  
When the ruling administrators, who are 
known as the kṣatriyas, turned astray from the 
path of the Absolute Truth, being desirous to 
suffer in hell, the Lord, in His incarnation as the 
sage Paraśurāma, uprooted those unwanted 
kings, who appeared as the thorns of the earth. 
Thus He thrice seven times uprooted the kṣatri-
yas with His keenly sharpened chopper  (22).  
Due to His causeless mercy upon all living 
entities within the univer se, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, along with His plenary 
extensions, appeared in the family of Mahārāja 
Ikṣvāku as the Lord of His internal potency, 
Sītā. Under the order of His father, Mahārāja 
Daśaratha, He entered the forest and lived there 
for co nsiderable years with His wife and 
younger brother. Rāvaṇa, who was very mate-
rially powerful, with ten heads on his shoul-
ders, committed a great offense against Him 
and was thus ultimately vanquished  (23). The 
Personality of Godhead Rāmacandra, being ag-
grieved for His distant intimate friend [Sītā], 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

100 
 glanced over the city of the enemy Rāvaṇa with 
red-hot eyes like those of Hara [who wanted to 
burn the kingdom of heaven]. The great ocean, 
trembling in fear, gave Him His way because 
its family members, the aqu atics like the 
sharks, snakes and crocodiles, were being burnt 
by the heat of the angry red -hot eyes of the Lord  
(24).  When Rāvaṇa was engaged in the battle, 
the trunk of the elephant which carried the King 
of heaven, Indra, broke in pieces, having col-
lided with the chest of Rāvaṇa, and the scat-
tered broken parts illuminated all directions. 
Rāvaṇa therefore felt proud of his prowess and 
began to loiter in the midst of the fighting sol-
diers, thinking himself the conqueror of all di-
rections. But his laughter , overtaken by joy, 
along with his very air of life, suddenly ceased 
with the tingling sound of the bow of Rāmacan-
dra, the Personality of Godhead  (25).  
When the world is overburdened by the 
fighting strength of kings who have no faith in 
God, the Lord, ju st to diminish the distress of 
the world, descends with His plenary portion. 
The Lord comes in His original form, with 
beautiful black hair. And just to expand His 
transcendental glories, He acts extraordinarily. 
No one can properly estimate how great He i s 
(26).There is no doubt about Lord Kṛṣṇa’s be-
ing the Supreme Lord. Otherwise, how was it 
possible for Him to kill a giant demon like 
Pūtanā when He was just on the lap of His 
mother, to overturn a cart with His leg when He 
was only three months old, or to uproo t a pair 
of arjuna trees so high that they touched the 
sky, when He was only crawling? All these ac-
tivities are impossible for anyone other than the 
Lord Himself  (27).Then also when the cowherd 
boys and their animals drank the poisoned wa-
ter of the river Y amunā, and after the Lord [in 
His childhood] revived them by His merciful 
glance, just to purify the water of the river Ya-
munā He jumped into it as if playing and chas-
tised the venomous Kāliya snake, which was 
lurking there, its tongue emitting waves of po i-
son. Who can perform such herculean tasks but 
the Supreme Lord?  (28) On the very night of 
the day of the chastisement of the Kāliya snake, 
when the inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi were 
sleeping carefreely, there was a forest fire ablaze due to dry leaves, and i t appeared that all 
the inhabitants were sure to meet their death. 
But the Lord, along with Balarāma, saved them 
simply by closing His eyes. Such are the super-
human activities of the Lord  (29).  When the 
cowherd woman [Kṛṣṇa’s foster mother, 
Yaśodā] was tr ying to tie the hands of her son 
with ropes, she found the rope to be always in-
sufficient in length, and when she finally gave 
up, Lord Kṛṣṇa, by and by, opened His mouth, 
wherein the mother found all the universes sit-
uated. Seeing this, she was doubtful i n her 
mind, but she was convinced in a different 
manner of the mystic nature of her son  
(30).Lord Kṛṣṇa saved His foster father, Nanda 
Mahārāja, from the fear of the demigod Varuṇa 
and released the cowherd boys from the caves 
of the mountain, for they were  placed there by 
the son of Maya. Also, to the inhabitants of 
Vṛndāvana, who were busy working during 
daytime and sleeping soundly at night because 
of their hard labor in the day, Lord Kṛṣṇa 
awarded promotion to the highest planet in the 
spiritual sky. All  these acts are transcendental 
and certainly prove without any doubt His God-
hood  (31).When the cowherd men of 
Vṛndāvana, under instruction of Kṛṣṇa, stopped 
offering sacrifice to the heavenly King, Indra, 
the whole tract of land known as Vraja was 
threaten ed with being washed away by constant 
heavy rains for seven days. Lord Kṛṣṇa, out of 
His causeless mercy upon the inhabitants of 
Vraja, held up the hill known as Govardhana 
with one hand only, although He was only 
seven years old. He did this to protect th e ani-
mals from the onslaught of water  (32).When 
the Lord was engaged in His pastimes of the 
rāsa dance in the forest of Vṛndāvana, enliven-
ing the sexual desires of the wives of the inhab-
itants of Vṛndāvana by sweet and melodious 
songs, a demon of the name Śaṅkhacūḍa, a rich 
follower of the treasurer of heaven [Kuvera], 
kidnapped the damsels, and the Lord severed 
his head from his trunk  (33).All demonic per-
sonalities like Pralamba, Dhenuka, Baka, Keśī, 
Ariṣṭa, Cāṇūra, Muṣṭika, Kuvalayāpīḍa ele-
phant, Kaṁsa, Y avana, Narakāsura and 
Pauṇḍraka, great marshals like Śālva, Dvivida 
monkey and Balvala, Dantavakra, the seven 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

101 
 bulls, Śambara, Vidūratha and Rukmī, as also 
great warriors like Kāmboja, Matsya, Kuru, 
Sṛñjaya and Kekaya, would all fight vigor-
ously, either wit h the Lord Hari directly or with 
Him under His names of Baladeva, Arjuna, 
Bhīma, etc. And the demons, thus being killed, 
would attain either the impersonal brahmajyoti 
or His personal abode in the Vaikuṇṭha planets  
(34-35).  
The Lord Himself in His incarna tion as the 
son of Satyavatī [Vyāsadeva] will consider his 
compilation of the Vedic literature to be very 
difficult for the less intelligent persons with 
short life, and thus He will divide the tree of 
Vedic knowledge into different branches, ac-
cording to the circumstances of the particular 
age (36).  
When the atheists, after being well versed in 
the Vedic scientific knowledge, annihilate in-
habitants of different planets, flying unseen in 
the sky on well -built rockets prepared by the 
great scientist Maya, t he Lord will bewilder 
their minds by dressing Himself attractively as 
Buddha and will preach on subreligious princi-
ples (37). Thereafter, at the end of Kali -yuga, 
when there exist no topics on the subject of 
God, even at the residences of so -called saints 
and respectable gentlemen of the three higher 
castes, and when the power of government is 
transferred to the hands of ministers elected 
from the lowborn śūdra class or those less than 
them, and when nothing is known of the tech-
niques of sacrifice, even by word, at that time 
the Lord will appear as the supreme chastiser  
(38).  
At the beginning of creation there are pen-
ance, myself [Brahmā] and the Prajāpatis, the 
great sages who generate; then, during the 
maintenance of the creation, there are Lord 
Viṣṇu, th e demigods with controlling powers, 
and the kings of different planets. But at the end 
there is irreligion, and then Lord Śiva and the 
atheists full of anger, etc. All of them are dif-
ferent representative manifestations of the en-
ergy of the supreme power, the Lord  (39).Who 
can describe completely the prowess of Viṣṇu? 
Even the scientist, who might have counted the 
particles of the atoms of the universe, cannot do so. Because it is He only who in His form of 
Trivikrama moved His leg effortlessly beyond 
the topmost planet, Satyaloka, up to the neutral 
state of the three modes of material nature. And 
all were moved  (40).  Neither I nor all the sages 
born before you know fully the omnipotent Per-
sonality of Godhead. So what can others, who 
are born after us, know  about Him? Even the 
first incarnation of the Lord, namely Śeṣa, has 
not been able to reach the limit of such 
knowledge, although He is describing the qual-
ities of the Lord with ten hundred faces  
(41).But anyone who is specifically favored by 
the Supreme L ord, the Personality of Godhead, 
due to unalloyed surrender unto the service of 
the Lord, can overcome the insurmountable 
ocean of illusion and can understand the Lord. 
But those who are attached to this body, which 
is meant to be eaten at the end by dogs and jack-
als, cannot do so  (42).O Nārada, although the 
potencies of the Lord are unknowable and im-
measurable, still, because we are all surren-
dered souls, we know how He acts through 
yoga -māyā potencies. And, similarly, the po-
tencies of the Lord are also known to the all -
powerful Śiva, the great king of the atheist fam-
ily, namely Prahlāda Mahārāja, Svāyambhuva 
Manu, his wife Śatarūpā, his sons and daugh-
ters like Priyavrata, Uttānapāda, Ākūti, 
Devahūti and Prasūti, Prācīnabarhi, Ṛbhu, 
Aṅga the father of Vena, Mahārāja Dhruva, 
Ikṣvāku, Ail a, Mucukunda, Mahārāja Janaka, 
Gādhi, Raghu, Ambarīṣa, Sagara, Gaya, 
Nāhuṣa, Māndhātā, Alarka, Śatadhanve, Anu, 
Rantideva, Bhīṣma, Bali, Amūrttaraya, Dilīpa, 
Saubhari, Utaṅka, Śibi, Devala, Pippalāda, 
Sārasvata, Uddhava, Parāśara, Bhūriṣeṇa, 
Vibhīṣaṇa, Han umān, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Ar-
juna, Ārṣṭiṣeṇa, Vidura, Śrutadeva, etc  (43-
45).Surrendered souls, even from groups lead-
ing sinful lives, such as women, the laborer 
class, the mountaineers and the Siberians, or 
even the birds and beasts, can also know about 
the science of Godhead and become liberated 
from the clutches of the illusory energy by sur-
rendering unto the pure devotees of the Lord 
and by following in their footsteps in devo-
tional service  (46).  
What is realized as the Absolute Brahman is 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

102 
 full of unlimit ed bliss without grief. That is cer-
tainly the ultimate phase of the supreme en-
joyer, the Personality of Godhead. He is eter-
nally void of all disturbances and is fearless. He 
is complete consciousness as opposed to mat-
ter. Uncontaminated and without distinc tions, 
He is the principle primeval cause of all causes 
and effects, in whom there is no sacrifice for 
fruitive activities and in whom the illusory en-
ergy does not stand  (47).In such a transcenden-
tal state there is no need of artificial control of 
the mind , mental speculation or meditation, as 
performed by the jñānīs and yogīs. One gives 
up such processes, as the heavenly King, Indra, 
forgoes the trouble to dig a well  (48).The Per-
sonality of Godhead is the supreme master of 
everything auspicious because the  results of 
whatever actions are performed by the living 
being, in either the material or spiritual exist-
ence, are awarded by the Lord. As such, He is 
the ultimate benefactor. Every individual living 
entity is unborn, and therefore even after the 
annihilat ion of the material elementary body, 
the living entity exists, exactly like the air 
within the body  (49).  
My dear son, I have now explained in brief 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is 
creator of the manifested worlds. Without Him 
(Hari, the Lord),  there are no other causes of the 
phenomenal and noumenal existences  (50).O 
Nārada, this science of God, Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam, was spoken to me in summary by 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and it 
was spoken as the accumulation of His diverse 
potencies. P lease expand this science yourself  
(51).Please describe the science of Godhead 
with determination and in a manner by which it 
will be quite possible for the human being to 
develop transcendental devotional service unto 
the Personality of Godhead Hari, the Supersoul 
of every living being and the summum bonum 
source of all energies  (52). The Lord’s activi-
ties in association with His different energies 
should be described, appreciated and heard in 
accordance with the teachings of the Supreme 
Lord. If this is d one regularly with devotion and 
respect, one is sure to get out of the illusory en-
ergy of the Lord  (53).  SB 2.8: Questions by King Parīkṣit  
King Parīkṣit inquired  from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī: How did Nārada Muni, whose hear-
ers are as fortunate as those instruct ed by Lord 
Brahmā, explain the transcendental qualities of 
the Lord, who is without material qualities, and 
before whom did he speak? (1) The King said: 
I wish to know. Narrations concerning the 
Lord, who possesses wonderful potencies, are 
certainly auspic ious for living beings in all 
planets  (2).O greatly fortunate Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī, please continue narrating Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam so that I can place my mind upon 
the Supreme Soul, Lord Kṛṣṇa, and, being com-
pletely freed from material qualities, thus relin-
quish this body  (3).Persons who hear Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam regularly and are always taking 
the matter very seriously will have the Person-
ality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifested in their 
hearts within a short time  (4).The sound incar-
nation of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme So ul [i.e., 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam], enters into the heart of a 
self-realized devotee, sits on the lotus flower of 
his loving relationship, and thus cleanses the 
dust of material association, such as lust, anger 
and hankering. Thus it acts like autumnal rains 
upon pools of muddy water  (5).A pure devotee 
of the Lord whose heart has once been cleansed 
by the process of devotional service never re-
linquishes the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, for they 
fully satisfy him, as a traveler is satisfied at 
home after a troubled j ourney  (6).  
O learned brāhmaṇa, the transcendental 
spirit soul is different from the material body. 
Does he acquire the body accidentally or by 
some cause? Will you kindly explain this, for it 
is known to you  (7).If the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, fro m whose abdomen the lotus 
stem sprouted, is possessed of a gigantic body 
according to His own caliber and measurement, 
then what is the specific difference between the 
body of the Lord and those of common living 
entities? (8) Brahmā, who was not born of a 
material source but of the lotus flower coming 
out of the navel abdomen of the Lord, is the cre-
ator of all those who are materially born. Of 
course, by the grace of the Lord, Brahmā was 
able to see the form of the Lord  (9).Please also 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

103 
 explain the Personali ty of Godhead, who lies in 
every heart as the Supersoul, and as the Lord of 
all energies, but is untouched by His external 
energy  (10).O learned brāhmaṇa, it was for-
merly explained that all the planets of the uni-
verse with their respective governors are si tu-
ated in the different parts of the gigantic body 
of the virāṭ -puruṣa. I have also heard that the 
different planetary systems are supposed to be 
in the gigantic body of the virāṭ -puruṣa. But 
what is their actual position? Will you please 
explain that? (11) 
Also please explain the duration of time be-
tween creation and annihilation, and that of 
other subsidiary creations, as well as the nature 
of time, indicated by the sound of past, present 
and future. Also, please explain the duration 
and measurement of li fe of the different living 
beings known as the demigods, the human be-
ings, etc., in different planets of the universe  
(12).O purest of the brāhmaṇas, please also ex-
plain the cause of the different durations of 
time, both short and long, as well as the begin-
ning of time, following the course of action  
(13).Then again, kindly describe how the pro-
portionate accumulation of the r eactions result-
ing from the different modes of material nature 
act upon the desiring living being, promoting or 
degrading him among the different species of 
life, beginning from the demigods down to the 
most insignificant creatures  (14).O best of the 
brāhm aṇas, please also describe how the crea-
tion of the globes throughout the universe, the 
four directions of the heavens, the sky, the plan-
ets, the stars, the mountains, the rivers, the seas 
and the islands, as well as their different kinds 
of inhabitants, ta kes place  (15).Also, please de-
scribe the inner and outer space of the universe 
by specific divisions, as well as the character 
and activities of the great souls, and also the 
characteristics of the different classifications of 
the castes and orders of soci al life  (16).Please 
explain all the different ages in the duration of 
the creation, and also the duration of such ages. 
Also tell me about the different activities of the 
different incarnations of the Lord in different 
ages (17).  Please also explain what may gener-
ally be the common religious affiliations of hu-man society, as well as their specific occupa-
tional duties in religion, the classification of the 
social orders as well as the administrative royal 
orders, and the religious principles for one who 
may be in distress  (18).Kindly explain all about 
the elementary principles of creation, the num-
ber of such elementary principles, their causes, 
and their development, and also the process of 
devotional service and the method of mystic 
powers  (19).  What are t he opulences of the 
great mystics, and what is their ultimate reali-
zation? How does the perfect mystic become 
detached from the subtle astral body? What is 
the basic knowledge of the Vedic literatures, in-
cluding the branches of history and the supple-
mentar y Purāṇas? (20)  Please explain unto me 
how the living beings are generated, how they 
are maintained, and how they are annihilated. 
Tell me also of the advantages and disad-
vantages of discharging devotional service unto 
the Lord. What are the Vedic rituals  and injunc-
tions of the supplementary Vedic rites, and 
what are the procedures of religion, economic 
development and sense satisfaction? (21) 
Please also explain how, merged in the body of 
the Lord, living beings are created, and how the 
infidels appear in  the world. Also please ex-
plain how the unconditioned living entities ex-
ist (22).The independent Personality of God-
head enjoys His pastimes by His internal po-
tency and at the time of annihilation gives them 
up to the external potency, and He remains a 
witness to it all  (23).O great sage, representa-
tive of the Lord, kindly satisfy my inquisitive-
ness in all that I have inquired from you and all 
that I may not have inquired from you from the 
very beginning of my questionings. Since I am 
a soul surrendered unto  you, please impart full 
knowledge in this connection  (24).O great 
sage, you are as good as Brahmā, the original 
living being. Others follow custom only, as fol-
lowed by the previous philosophical specula-
tors (25). O learned brāhmaṇa, because of my 
drinking the nectar of the message of the infal-
lible Personality o f Godhead, which is flowing 
down from the ocean of your speeches, I do not 
feel any sort of exhaustion due to my fasting  
(26).  
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thus Śukadeva 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

104 
 Gosvāmī, being invited by Mahārāja Parīkṣit to 
speak on topics of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa with the 
devotees, was very much pleased  (27).  He be-
gan to reply to the inquiries of Mahārāja 
Parīkṣit by saying that the science of the Per-
sonality of Godhead was spoken first by the 
Lord Himself to Brahmā when he was first 
born. Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is the supplemen-
tary Vedic literature, and it is just in pursuance 
of the Vedas (28). He also prepared himself to 
reply to all that King Parīkṣit had inquired from 
him. Mahārāja Parīkṣit was the best in the dyn-
asty of the Pāṇḍus, and thus he was able to ask 
the right ques tions from the right person  (29).  
SB 2.9: Answers by Citing the Lord’s 
Version  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said : O King, un-
less one is influenced by the energy of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, there is no 
meaning to the relationship of the pure soul in 
pure consciousness with the material body. 
That relationship is just like a dreamer’s seeing 
his own body working  (1).The illusioned living 
entity appears in so many forms offered by the 
external energy of the Lord. While enjoying in 
the modes of material natu re, the encaged liv-
ing entity misconceives, thinking in terms of 
“I” and “mine.” (2).  As soon as the living entity 
becomes situated in his constitutional glory and 
begins to enjoy the transcendence beyond time 
and material energy, he at once gives up the two 
misconceptions of life [I and mine] and thus be-
comes fully manifested as the pure self  (3).O 
King, the Personality of Godhead, being very 
much pleased with Lord Brahmā because of his 
nondeceptive penance in bhakti -yoga, pre-
sented His eternal and transc endental form be-
fore Brahmā. And that is the objective goal for 
purifying the conditioned soul (4).  
Lord Brahmā, the first spiritual master, su-
preme in the universe, could not trace out the 
source of his lotus seat, and while thinking of 
creating the mater ial world, he could not under-
stand the proper direction for such creative 
work, nor could he find out the process for such 
creation  (5).  While thus engaged in thinking, 
in the water, Brahmājī heard twice from nearby two syllables joined together. One of t he sylla-
bles was taken from the sixteenth and the other 
from the twenty -first of the sparśa alphabets, 
and both joined to become the wealth of the re-
nounced order of life  (6).When he heard the 
sound, he tried to find the speaker, searching on 
all sides. Bu t when he was unable to find any-
one besides himself, he thought it wise to sit 
down on his lotus seat firmly and give his at-
tention to the execution of penance, as he was 
instructed  (7).Lord Brahmā underwent pen-
ances for one thousand years by the calcula-
tions of the demigods. He heard this transcen-
dental vibration from the sky, and he accepted 
it as divine. Thus he controlled his mind and 
senses, and the penances he executed were a 
great lesson for the living entities. Thus he is 
known as the greatest of al l ascetics  (8).  
The Personality of Godhead, being thus very 
much satisfied with the penance of Lord 
Brahmā, was pleased to manifest His personal 
abode, Vaikuṇṭha, the supreme planet above all 
others. This transcendental abode of the Lord is 
adored by all self -realized per sons freed from 
all kinds of miseries and fear of illusory exist-
ence (9).In that personal abode of the Lord, the 
material modes of ignorance and passion do not 
prevail, nor is there any of their influence in 
goodness. There is no predominance of the in-
fluence of time, so what to speak of the illusory, 
external energy; it cannot enter that region. 
Without discrimination, both the demigods and 
the demons worship the Lord as devotees  
(10).The inhabitants of the Vaikuṇṭha planets 
are described as having a glowing sky -bluish 
complexion. Their eyes resemble lotus flowers, 
their dress is of yellowish color, and their bod-
ily features very attractive. They are just the 
age of growing youths, the y all have four 
hands, they are all nicely decorated with pearl 
necklaces with ornamental medallions, and 
they all appear to be effulgent  (11).Some of 
them are effulgent like coral and diamonds in 
complexion and have garlands on their heads, 
blooming like lotus flowers, and some wear 
earrings  (12).The Vaikuṇṭha planets are also 
surrounded by various airplanes, all glowing 
and brilliantly situated. These airplanes belong 
to the great mahātmās or devotees of the Lord. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

105 
 The ladies are as beautiful as lightning because 
of their celestial complexions, an d all these 
combined together appear just like the sky dec-
orated with both clouds and lightning  (13).  
The goddess of fortune in her transcendental 
form is engaged in the loving service of the 
Lord’s lotus feet, and being moved by the black 
bees, followers  of spring, she is not only en-
gaged in variegated pleasure  service to the 
Lord, along with her constant companions  but 
is also engaged in singing the glories of the 
Lord’s activities  (14).  Lord Brahmā saw in the 
Vaikuṇṭha planets the Personality of Godhead, 
who is the Lord of the entire devotee commu-
nity, the Lord of the goddess of fortune, the 
Lord of all sacrifices, and the Lord of the uni-
verse, and who is served by the foremost servi-
tors like Nanda, Sunanda, Prabala and Arhaṇa, 
His immediate associates  (15).The Personality 
of Godhead, seen leaning favorably towards 
His loving servitors, His very sight intoxicating 
and attractive, appeared to be very much satis-
fied. He had a smiling face  decorated with an 
enchanting reddish hue. He was dressed in yel-
low robes and wore earrings and a helmet on 
his head. He had four hands, and His chest was 
marked with the lines of the goddess of fortune  
(16).The Lord was seated on His throne and 
was surrou nded by different energies like the 
four, the sixteen, the five, and the six natural 
opulences, along with other insignificant ener-
gies of the temporary character. But He was the 
factual Supreme Lord, enjoying His own abode  
(17).Lord Brahmā, thus seeing the Personality 
of Godhead in His fullness, was overwhelmed 
with joy within his heart, and thus in full tran-
scendental love and ecstasy, his eyes filled with 
tears of love. He thus bowed down before the 
Lord. That is the way of th e highest perfection 
for the living being [paramahaṁsa]  (18).  
And seeing Brahmā present before Him, the 
Lord accepted him as worthy to create living 
beings, to be controlled as He desired, and thus 
being much satisfied with him, the Lord shook 
hands with Brahmā and, slightly smiling, ad-
dressed him thus  (19).The beautiful Personality 
of Godhead addressed Lord Brahmā: O 
Brahmā, impregnated with the Vedas, I am very much pleased with your long -accumulated 
penance with the desire for creation. Hardly am 
I plea sed with the pseudo mystics  (20).I wish 
you good luck. O Brahmā, you may ask from 
Me, the giver of all benediction, all that you 
may desire. You may know that the ultimate 
benediction, as the result of all penances, is to 
see Me by realization  (21).The hig hest perfec-
tional ingenuity is the personal perception of 
My abodes, and this has been possible because 
of your submissive attitude in the performance 
of severe penance according to My order  (22).  
O sinless Brahmā, you may know from Me that 
it was I who f irst ordered you to undergo pen-
ance when you were perplexed in your duty. 
Such penance is My heart and soul, and there-
fore penance and I are nondifferent.I create this 
cosmos by such penance, I maintain it by the 
same energy, and I withdraw it all by the s ame 
energy. Therefore the potency is penance only  
(23).  
Lord Brahmā said : O Personality of God-
head, You are situated in every living entity’s 
heart as the supreme director, and therefore 
You are aware of all endeavors by Your supe-
rior intelligence, without any hindrance what-
soever  (24).In spite of that, my Lord , I am pray-
ing to You to kindly fulfill my desire. May I 
please be informed how, in spite of Your tran-
scendental form, You assume the mundane 
form, although You have no such form at all  
(25).  And [please inform me] how You, by 
Your own Self, manifest diff erent energies for 
annihilation, generation, acceptance and 
maintenance by combination and permutation  
(26).O master of all energies, please tell me 
philosophically all about them. You play like a 
spider that covers itself by its own energy, and 
Your deter mination is infallible  (27).Please tell 
me so that I may be taught in the matter by the 
instruction of the Personality of Godhead and 
may thus act instrumentally to generate living 
entities, without being conditioned by such ac-
tivities  (28).O my Lord, the unborn, You have 
shaken hands with me just as a friend does with 
a friend [as if equal in position]. I shall be en-
gaged in the creation of different types of living 
entities, and I shall be occupied in Your service. 
I shall have no perturbation, but I pray  that all 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

106 
 this may not give rise to pride, as if I were the 
Supreme  (29).  
The Personality of Godhead said : 
Knowledge about Me as described in the scrip-
tures is very confidential, and it has to be real-
ized in conjunction with devotional service. 
The necess ary paraphernalia for that process is 
being explained by Me. You may take it up 
carefully  (30). All of Me, namely My actual 
eternal form and My transcendental existence, 
color, qualities and activities  let all be awak-
ened within you by factual realization , out of 
My causeless mercy  (31).Brahmā, it is I, the 
Personality of Godhead, who was existing be-
fore the creation, when there was nothing but 
Myself. Nor was there the material nature, the 
cause of this creation. That which you see now 
is also I, the Pers onality of Godhead, and after 
annihilation what remains will also be I, the 
Personality of Godhead  (32).O Brahmā, what-
ever appears to be of any value, if it is without 
relation to Me, has no reality. Know it as My 
illusory energy, that reflection which app ears to 
be in darkness  (33). O Brahmā, please know 
that the universal elements enter into the cos-
mos and at the same time do not enter into the 
cosmos; similarly, I Myself also exist within 
everything created, and at the same t ime I am 
outside of everythin g (34). A person who is 
searching after the Supreme Absolute Truth, 
the Personality of Godhead, must certainly 
search for it up to this, in all circumstances, in 
all space and time, and both directly and indi-
rectly  (35). O Brahmā, just follow this conclu-
sion by fixed concentration of mind, and no 
pride will disturb you, neither in the partial nor 
in the final devastation  (36).  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said  to Mahārāja 
Parīkṣit: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Hari, after being seen in His transcendental 
form, instructing Brahmājī, the leader of the 
living entities, disappeared  (37).On the disap-
pearance of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Hari, who is the object of transcendental 
enjoyment for the senses of devotees, Brahmā, 
with folded hands, began to re -create the uni-
verse, full with living entities, as it was previ-ously  (38).  Thus once upon a time the forefa-
ther of living entities and the father of religious-
ness, Lord Brahmā, situated himself in acts of 
regulative principles, desiring self -interest for 
the welfare of all living entities  (39).Nārada, 
the most dear of the inheritor sons of Brahmā, 
always ready to serve his father, strictly follows 
the instructions of his father by his mannerly 
behavior, meekness and sense control.Nārada 
very much pleased his father and desired to 
know all about the energies of Viṣṇu, the mas-
ter of all energies, for Nārada was the greatest 
of all sages and greatest of all devotees, O King  
(40-41).The great sage Nārada also inquired in 
detail from his father, Brahmā, the great -grand-
father of all the universe, after seeing him well 
satisfied  (42).Thereupon the supplementary 
Vedic literature, Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, which 
was described by the Personality of Godhead 
and which contains ten characteristics, was told 
with satisfaction by th e father [Brahmā] to his 
son Nārada  (43).In succession, O King, the 
great sage Nārada instructed Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam unto the unlimitedly powerful 
Vyāsadeva, who meditated in devotional ser-
vice upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the Absolute Truth, on the bank of the river Sar-
asvatī  (44). O King, your questions as to how 
the universe became manifested from the gi-
gantic form of the Personality of Godhead, as 
well as other questions, I shall answer in detail 
by explanation of the four verses already men-
tioned  (45).  
SB 2.10: Bhāgavatam Is the Answer to 
All Questions  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said : In the Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam there are ten divisions of state-
ments regarding the following: the creation of 
the universe, subcreation, planetary systems, 
protection by the  Lord, the creative impetus, 
the change of Manus, the science of God, re-
turning home, back to Godhead, liberation, and 
the summum bonum  (1).To isolate the tran-
scendence of the summum bonum, the symp-
toms of the rest are described sometimes by Ve-
dic inferenc e, sometimes by direct explanation, 
and sometimes by summary explanations given 
by the great sages  (2).The elementary creation 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

107 
 of sixteen items of matter  namely the five ele-
ments [fire, water, land, air and sky], sound, 
form, taste, smell, touch, and the eyes, ears, 
nose, tongue, skin and mind  is known as sarga, 
whereas subsequent resultant interaction of the 
modes of material nature is called visarga  
(3).The right situation for the living entities is 
to obey the laws of the Lord and thus be in per-
fect pe ace of mind under the protection of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Manus 
and their laws are meant to give right direction 
in life. The impetus for activity is the desire for 
fruitive work  (4).The science of God describes 
the incarnations of the Pe rsonality of Godhead 
and His different activities together with the ac-
tivities of His great devotees  (5).The merging 
of the living entity, along with his conditional 
living tendency, with the mystic lying down of 
the Mahā -Viṣṇu is called the winding up of the 
cosmic manifestation. Liberation is the perma-
nent situation of the form of the living entity 
after he gives up the changeable gross and sub-
tle material bodies  (6).The supreme one who is 
celebrated as the Supreme Being or the Su-
preme Soul is the supreme  source of the cosmic 
manifestation as well as its reservoir and wind-
ing up. Thus He is the Supreme Fountainhead, 
the Absolute Truth  (7).The individual person 
possessing different instruments of senses is 
called the adhyātmic person, and the individual 
controlling deity of the senses is called ad-
hidaivic. The embodiment seen on the eyeballs 
is called the adhibhautic person  (8).All three of  
the above -mentioned stages of different living 
entities are interdependent. In the absence of 
one, another is not understood. But the Su-
preme Being who sees every one of them as the 
shelter of the shelter is independent of all, and 
therefore He is the sup reme shelter  (9).  
After separating the different universes, the 
gigantic universal form of the Lord [Mahā -
Viṣṇu], which came out of the Causal Ocean, 
the place of appearance for the first puruṣa -
avatāra, entered into each of the separate uni-
verses, desiring to lie on the cr eated transcen-
dental water [Garbhodaka]  (10).That Supreme 
Person is not impersonal and therefore is dis-
tinctively a nara, or person. Therefore the tran-
scendental water created from the Supreme Nara is known as nāra. And because He lies 
down on that water, He is known as Nārāyaṇa  
(11).One should definitely know that all mate-
rial ingredients, activities, time and modes, and 
the living entities who are meant to enjoy them 
all, exist by His mercy only, and as soon as He 
does not care for them, everything become s 
nonexistent  (12).The Lord, while lying on His 
bed of mystic slumber, generated the seminal 
symbol, golden in hue, through external energy 
out of His desire to manifest varieties of living 
entities from Himself alone  (13).Just hear from 
me how the potency  of His Lordship divides 
one into three, called the controlling entities, 
the controlled entities and the material bodies, 
in the manner mentioned above  (14).  
From the sky situated within the transcen-
dental body of the manifesting Mahā -Viṣṇu, 
sense energy, mental force and bodily strength 
are all generated, as well as the sum total of the 
fountainhead of the total living force  (15).As 
the followers of a king fol low their lord, simi-
larly when the total energy is in motion, all 
other living entities move, and when the total 
energy stops endeavoring, all other living enti-
ties stop sensual activities  (16).The living 
force, being agitated by the virāṭ -puruṣa, gen-
erate d hunger and thirst, and when He desired 
to drink and eat, the mouth opened  (17).From 
the mouth the palate became manifested, and 
thereupon the tongue was also generated. After 
this all the different tastes came into existence 
so that the tongue can relish  them  (18).  When 
the Supreme desired to speak, speeches were 
vibrated from the mouth. Then the controlling 
deity Fire was generated from the mouth. But 
when He was lying in the water, all these func-
tions remained suspended  (19). Thereafter, 
when the supre me puruṣa desired to smell 
odors, the nostrils and respiration were gener-
ated, the nasal instrument and odors came into 
existence, and the controlling deity of air, car-
rying smell, also became manifested  (20).Thus 
when everything existed in darkness, the L ord 
desired to see Himself and all that was created. 
Then the eyes, the illuminating god Sun, the 
power of vision and the object of sight all be-
came manifested  (21).By development of the 
desire of the great sages to know, the ears, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

108 
 power of hearing, th e controlling deity of hear-
ing, and the objects of hearing became mani-
fested. The great sages desired to hear about the 
Self (22).When there was a desire to perceive 
the physical characteristics of matter, such as 
softness, hardness, warmth, cold, lightnes s and 
heaviness, the background of sensation, the 
skin, the skin pores, the hairs on the body and 
their controlling deities (the trees) were gener-
ated. Within and outside the skin is a covering 
of air through which sense perception became 
prominent  (23).Thereafter when the Supreme 
Person desired to perform varieties of work, the 
two hands and their controlling strength, and 
Indra, the demigod in heaven, became mani-
fested, as also the acts dependent on both the 
hands and the demigod  (24).Thereupon, be-
cause o f His desiring to control movement, His 
legs became manifested, and from the legs the 
controlling deity named Viṣṇu was generated. 
By His personal supervision of this act, all va-
rieties of human being are busily engaged in 
dutiful occupational sacrifice  (25).Thereupon, 
for sexual pleasure, begetting offspring and 
tasting heavenly nectar, the Lord developed the 
genitals, and thus there is the genital organ and 
its controlling deity, the Prajāpati. The object 
of sexual pleasure and the controlling deity are 
under the control of the genitals of the Lord  
(26).Thereafter, when He desired to evacuate 
the refuse of eatables, the evacuating hole, 
anus, and the sensory organ thereof developed 
along with the controlling deity Mitra. The sen-
sory organ and the evacuatin g substance are 
both under the shelter of the controlling deity  
(27).Thereafter, when He desired to move from 
one body to another, the navel and the air of de-
parture and death were combinedly created. 
The navel is the shelter for both, namely death 
and the  separating force  (28).When there was a 
desire to have food and drink, the abdomen and 
the intestines and also the arteries became man-
ifested. The rivers and seas are the source of 
their sustenance and metabolism  (29).When 
there was a desire to think about  the activities 
of His own energy, then the heart (the seat of 
the mind), the mind, the moon, determination 
and all desire became manifested  (30).The 
seven elements of the body, namely the thin layer on the skin, the skin itself, the flesh, 
blood, fat, mar row and bone, are all made of 
earth, water and fire, whereas the life breath is 
produced by the sky, water and air  (31).The 
sense organs are attached to the modes of ma-
terial nature, and the modes of material nature 
are products of the false ego. The mind is sub-
jected to all kinds of material experiences (hap-
piness and distress), and the intelligence is the 
feature of the mind’s deliberation  (32).  Thus 
by all this, the external feature of the Personal-
ity of Godhead is covered by gross forms such 
as those o f planets, which were explained to 
you by me  (33).  Therefore beyond this [gross 
manifestation] is a transcendental manifesta-
tion finer than the finest form. It has no begin-
ning, no intermediate stage and no end; there-
fore it is beyond the limits of expres sion or 
mental speculation and is distinct from the ma-
terial conception  (34).  
Neither of the above forms of the Lord, as 
just described unto you from the material angle 
of vision, is accepted by the pure devotees of 
the Lord who know Him well  (35).He, the  Per-
sonality of Godhead, manifests Himself in a 
transcendental form, being the subject of His 
transcendental name, quality, pastimes, entou-
rage and transcendental variegatedness. Alt-
hough He is unaffected by all such activities, 
He appears to be so engaged  (36).O King, know 
from me that all living entities are created by 
the Supreme Lord according to their past deeds. 
This includes Brahmā and his sons like Dakṣa, 
the periodical heads like Vaivasvata Manu, the 
demigods like Indra, Candra and Varuṇa, the 
great sag es like Bhṛgu, Vyāsa and Vasiṣṭha, the 
inhabitants of Pitṛloka and Siddhaloka, the 
Cāraṇas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas, Asuras, 
Yakṣas, Kinnaras and angels, the serpentines, 
the monkey -shaped Kimpuruṣas, the human 
beings, the inhabitants of Mātṛloka, the de-
mons, Piśācas, ghosts, spirits, lunatics and evil 
spirits, the good and evil stars, the goblins, the 
animals in the forest, the birds, the household 
animals, the reptiles, the mountains, the mov-
ing and standing living entities, the living enti-
ties born from embryos, from eggs, from per-
spiration and from seeds, and all others, 
whether they be in the water, land or sky, in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

109 
 happiness, in distress or in mixed happiness and 
distress. All of them, according to their past 
deeds, are created by the Supreme Lord  (37-
40).According to the different modes of mate-
rial nature  the mode of goodness, the mode of 
passion and the mode of darkness  there are dif-
ferent living creatures, who are known as dem-
igods, human beings and hellish living entities. 
O King, even a particular  mode of nature, being 
mixed with the other two, is divided into three, 
and thus each kind of living creature is influ-
enced by the other modes and acquires its hab-
its also  (41).He, the Personality of Godhead, as 
the maintainer of all in the universe, appea rs in 
different incarnations after establishing the cre-
ation, and thus He reclaims all kinds of condi-
tioned souls amongst the humans, the nonhu-
mans and the demigods  (42).Thereafter, at the 
end of the millennium, the Lord Himself in the 
form of Rudra, the d estroyer, will annihilate the 
complete creation as the wind displaces the 
clouds  (43).  
The great transcendentalists thus describe 
the activities of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, but the pure devotees deserve to see 
more glorious things in transcende nce, beyond 
these features  (44).There is no direct engineer-
ing by the Lord for the creation and destruction 
of the material world. What is described in the 
Vedas about His direct interference is simply to 
counteract the idea that material nature is the 
creator (45). This process of creation and anni-
hilation described in summary herein is the reg-
ulative principle during the duration of 
Brahmā’s one day. It is also the regulative prin-
ciple in the creation of mahat, in which the ma-
terial nature is dispersed  (46).O King, I shall in 
due course explain the measurement of time in 
its gross and subtle features with the specific 
symptoms of each, but for the present let me 
explain unto you the Pādma -kalpa  (47).Śau-
naka Ṛṣi, after hearing all about the creation, 
inquir ed from Sūta Gosvāmī about Vidura, for 
Sūta Gosvāmī had previously informed him 
how Vidura left home, leaving aside all his rel-
atives, who were very difficult to leave  (48).  
Śaunaka Ṛṣi said : Let us know, please, 
what topics were discussed between Vidura and Maitreya, who talked on transcendental sub-
jects, and what was inquired by Vidura and re-
plied by Maitreya. Also please let us know the 
reason for Vidura’s giving up the connection of 
his family members, and why he again came 
home. Please also let us kno w the activities of 
Vidura while he was in the places of pilgrimage  
(49-50). 
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī explained : I shall now 
explain to you the very subjects explained by 
the great sage in answer to King Parīkṣit’s in-
quiries. Please hear them attentively  (51).  
Canto  3: The Status Quo  
SB 3.1: Questions by Vidura  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said : Afte r renouncing 
his prosperous home and entering the forest, 
King Vidura, the great devotee, asked this 
question of His Grace Maitreya Ṛṣi (1).  What 
else is there to say about the residential house 
of the Pā ṇḍavas? Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Lord of every-
thing, acted as  your minister. He used to enter 
that house as if it were His own, and He did not 
take any care of Duryodhana’s house  (2).  
The King asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī: Where 
and when did the meeting and discussion take 
place between Saint Vidura and His Grace 
Maitreya  Muni? Kindly oblige, my lord, and 
describe this to us  (3). Saint Vidura was a great 
and pure devotee of the Lord, and therefore his 
questions to His Grace Ṛṣi Maitreya must have 
been very purposeful, on the highest level, and 
approved by learned circles  (4).  
Śrī Suta Gosvāmī said : The great sage 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī was highly experienced 
and was pleased with the King. Thus being 
questioned by the King, he said to him, “Please 
hear the topics attentively.” (5) 
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said : King 
Dhṛtarāṣṭra became  blind under the influence of 
impious desires to nourish his dishonest sons, 
and thus he set fire to the lacquer house to burn 
his fatherless nephews, the Pā ṇḍavas (6). The 
King did not forbid his son Du ḥśāsana’s abom-
inable action of grabbing the hair of D raupadī, 
the wife of the godly King Yudhi ṣṭhira, even 
though her tears washed the red dust on her 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

110 
 breast  (7).Yudhi ṣṭhira, who was born without 
any enemy, was unfairly defeated in gambling. 
But because he had taken the vow of truthful-
ness, he went off to th e forest. When he came 
back in due course and begged the return of his 
rightful share of the kingdom, he was refused 
by Dh ṛtarāṣṭra, who was overwhelmed by illu-
sion (8).Lord K ṛṣṇa was sent by Arjuna into the 
assembly as the spiritual master of the whole 
world, and although His words were heard by 
some [like Bhī ṣma] as pure nectar, it was not so 
for the others, who were completely bereft of 
the last farthing of past pious works. The King 
[Dhṛtarāṣṭra or Duryodhana] did not take the 
words of Lord K ṛṣṇa very s eriously  (9).When 
Vidura was invited by his elder brother 
[Dhṛtarāṣṭra] for consultation, he entered the 
house and gave instructions which were exactly 
to the point. His advice is well known, and in-
structions by Vidura are approved by expert 
ministers of s tate (10).  
[Vidura said:] You must now return the le-
gitimate share to Yudhi ṣṭhira, who has no ene-
mies and who has been forbearing through un-
told sufferings due to your offenses. He is wait-
ing with his younger brothers, among whom is 
the revengeful Bhīma, breathing heavily like a 
snake. Surely you are afraid of him  (11).Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, has ac-
cepted the sons of P ṛthā as His kinsmen, and all 
the kings of the world are with Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa. 
He is present in His home with all His family 
members, the kings and princes of the Yadu 
dynasty, who have conquered an unlimited 
number of rulers, and He is their Lord  (12).You 
are maintaining offense personified, 
Duryodhana, as your infallible son, but he is en-
vious of Lord K ṛṣṇa. And because you are  thus 
maintaining a nondevotee of K ṛṣṇa, you are de-
void of all auspicious qualities. Relieve your-
self of this ill fortune as soon as possible and do 
good to the whole family!  (13) 
While speaking thus, Vidura, whose per-
sonal character was esteemed by respec table 
persons, was insulted by Duryodhana, who was 
swollen with anger and whose lips were trem-
bling. Duryodhana was in company with 
Karṇa, his younger brothers and his maternal uncle Śakuni  (14). Who asked him to come 
here, this son of a kept mistress? He is so 
crooked that he spies in the interest of the en-
emy against those on whose support he has 
grown up. Toss him out of the palace immedi-
ately and leave him with only his breath  
(15).Thus being pierced by arrows through his 
ears and afflicted to the core of his heart, 
Vidura placed his bow on the door and quit his 
brother’s palace. He was not sorry, for he con-
sidered the acts of the external energy to be su-
preme  (16).By his piety, Vidura achieved the 
advantages of the pious Kauravas. After leav-
ing Hastināpura, he took shelter of many places 
of pilgrimages, which are the Lord’s lotus feet. 
With a desire to gain a high order of pious life, 
he traveled to holy places whe re thousands of 
transcendental forms of the Lord are situated  
(17).He began to travel alone, thinking only of 
Kṛṣṇa, through various holy places like 
Ayodhyā, Dvārakā and Mathurā. He traveled 
where the grove, hill, orchard, river and lake 
are all pure and sinless and where the forms of 
the Unlimited decorate the temples. Thus he 
performed the pilgrim’s progress  (18).While so 
traversing the earth, he simply performed du-
ties to please the Supreme Lord Hari. His occu-
pation was pure and independent. He was con-
stantly sanctified by taking his bath in holy 
places, although he was in the dress of a men-
dicant and had no hair dressing nor a bed on 
which to lie. Thus he was always unseen by his 
various relatives  (19).  
Thus, when he was i n the land of 
Bhāratavar ṣa traveling to all the places of pil-
grimage, he visited Prabhāsak ṣetra. At that 
time Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira was the emperor 
and held the world under one military strength 
and one flag  (20). At the place of pilgrimage at 
Prabhāsa, it came to his knowledge that all his 
relatives had died due to violent passion, just as 
an entire forest burns due to fire produced by 
the friction of bamboos. After this he proceeded 
west, where the river Sarasvatī flows  (21). On 
the bank of the river Saras vatī there were 
eleven places of pilgrimage, namely (1) Trita, 
(2) Uśanā, (3) Manu, (4) P ṛthu, (5) Agni, (6) 
Asita, (7) Vāyu, (8) Sudāsa, (9) Go, (10) Guha 
and (11) Śrāddhadeva. Vidura visited all of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

111 
 them and duly performed rituals  (22). There 
were also ma ny other temples of various forms 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Vi ṣṇu, 
established by great sages and demigods. These 
temples were marked with the chief emblems 
of the Lord, and they reminded one always of 
the original Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa (23). Thereafter he passed through very 
wealthy provinces like Surat, Sauvīra and Mat-
sya and through western India, known as Ku-
rujāṅgala. At last he reached the bank of the 
Yamunā, where he happened to meet Uddhava, 
the great devotee of Lord K ṛṣṇa (24). Then, due 
to his great love and feeling, Vidura embraced 
him [Uddhava], who was a constant companion 
of Lord K ṛṣṇa and formerly a great student of 
Bṛhaspati’s. Vidura then asked him for news of 
the family of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Personality of 
Godhead  (25).  
[Please tell me] whether the original Person-
alities of Godhead, who incarnated Themselves 
at the request of Brahmā [who is born out of the 
lotus flower from the Lord] and who have in-
creased the prosperity of the world by elevating 
everyone, are doing wel l in the house of 
Śūrasena  (26). [Please tell me] whether the best 
friend of the Kurus, our brother -in-law 
Vasudeva, is doing well. He is very munificent. 
He is like a father to his sisters, and he is always 
pleasing to his wives  (27). O Uddhava, please 
tell me, How is Pradyumna, the commander in 
chief of the Yadus, who was Cupid in a former 
life? Rukmi ṇī bore him as her son from Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, by the grace of brāhma ṇas whom she 
pleased  (28). O my friend, [tell me] whether 
Ugrasena, the King of the Sātvatas, V ṛṣṇis, 
Bhojas and Dāśārhas, is now doing well. He 
went far away from his kingdom, leaving aside 
all hopes of his royal throne, but Lord K ṛṣṇa 
again installed him  (29). O gentle one, does 
Sāmba fare well? He exactly resembles the son 
of the Personality of G odhead. In a previous 
birth he was born as Kārttikeya in the womb of 
the wife of Lord Śiva, and now he has been 
born in the womb of Jāmbavatī, the most en-
riched wife of K ṛṣṇa (30). O Uddhava, does 
Yuyudhāna fare well? He learned the intrica-
cies of the mili tary art from Arjuna and attained 
the transcendental destination which is very difficult to reach even for great renouncers  
(31).Please tell me whether Akrūra, the son of 
Śvaphalka, is doing well. He is a faultless soul 
surrendered unto the Personality of Godhead. 
He once lost his mental equilibrium due to his 
ecstasy of transcendental love and fell down on 
the dust of a road which was marked with the 
footprints of Lord K ṛṣṇa (32).  As the Vedas are 
the reservoir of sacrificial purposes, so the 
daughter of King Devaka -bhoja conceived the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead in her womb, 
as did the mother of the demigods. Is she 
[Devakī] doing well? (33)May I inquire 
whether Aniruddha is doing well? He is the ful-
filler of all the desires of the pure devotees and 
has been considered from yore to be the cause 
of the Ṛg Veda, the creator of the mind and the 
fourth plenary expansion of Vi ṣṇu (34). O so-
ber one, others, such as H ṛdīka, Cārude ṣṇa, 
Gada and the son of Satyabhāmā, who accept 
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa as the soul of the  self and thus 
follow His path without deviation  are they 
well? (35) 
Also let me inquire whether Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira is now maintaining the kingdom 
according to religious principles and with re-
spect for the path of religion. Formerly 
Duryodhana was burni ng with envy because 
Yudhi ṣṭhira was being protected by the arms of 
Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna as if they were his own arms  
(36). [Please tell me] whether the unconquera-
ble Bhīma, who is like a cobra, has released his 
long-cherished anger upon the sinners? The 
field of battle could not tolerate even the won-
derful playing of his club when he stepped on 
the path  (37).  [Please tell me] whether Arjuna, 
whose bow bears the name Gā ṇḍīva and who is 
always famous amongst the chariot warriors for 
vanquishing his enemies, is doing well. He 
once satisfied Lord Śiva by covering him with 
arrows when Śiva came as an unidentified false 
hunter  (38). Are the twin brothers who are pro-
tected by their brothers doing well? Just as the 
eye is always protected by the eyelid, they are 
prote cted by the sons of P ṛthā, who snatched 
back their rightful kingdom from the hands of 
their enemy Duryodhana, just as Garu ḍa 
snatched nectar from the mouth of Indra, the 
thunderbolt carrier  (39).  O my lord, is P ṛthā 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

112 
 still living? She lived only for the sa ke of her 
fatherless children; otherwise it was impossible 
for her to live without King Pā ṇḍu, who was the 
greatest commander and who alone conquered 
the four directions simply with the help of a 
second bow  (40). O gentle one, I simply lament 
for him [Dh ṛtarāṣṭra] who rebelled against his 
brother after death. By him I was driven out of 
my own house, although I am his sincere well -
wisher, because he accepted the line of action 
adopted by his own sons  (41). I am not aston-
ished at this, having traveled over th e world 
without being seen by others. The activities of 
the Personality of Godhead, which are like 
those of a man in this mortal world, are bewil-
dering to others, but I know of His greatness by 
His grace, and thus I am happy in all respects  
(42). Despite H is being the Lord and being al-
ways willing to relieve the distress of sufferers, 
He [K ṛṣṇa] refrained from killing the Kurus, 
although they committed all sorts of sins and 
although He saw other kings constantly agitat-
ing the earth by their strong military move-
ments carried out under the dictation of three 
kinds of false pride  (43).The appearance of the 
Lord is manifested for the annihilation of the 
upstarts. His activities are transcendental and 
are enacted for the understanding of all persons. 
Otherwise, s ince the Lord is transcendental to 
all material modes, what purpose could He 
serve by coming to earth? (44) O my friend, 
please, therefore, chant the glories of the Lord, 
who is meant to be glorified in the places of pil-
grimage. He is unborn, and yet He ap pears by 
His causeless mercy upon the surrendered rul-
ers of all parts of the universe. Only for their 
interest did He appear in the family of His un-
alloyed devotees the Yadus  (45).  
SB 3.2: Remembrance of Lord K ṛṣṇa 
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said : When the 
great  devotee Uddhava was asked by Vidura to 
speak on the messages of the dearest [Lord 
Kṛṣṇa], Uddhava was unable to answer imme-
diately due to excessive anxiety at the remem-
brance of the Lord  (1).He was one who even in 
his childhood, at the age of five years, was so 
absorbed in the service of Lord K ṛṣṇa that when he was called by his mother for morning break-
fast, he did not wish to have it  (2).  Uddhava 
thus served the Lord continually from child-
hood, and in his old age that attitude of service 
never slackened.  As soon as he was asked about 
the message of the Lord, he at once remem-
bered all about Him  (3). For a moment he re-
mained dead silent, and his body did not move. 
He became absorbed in the nectar of remem-
bering the Lord’s lotus feet in devotional ec-
stasy, a nd he appeared to be going increasingly 
deeper into that ecstasy  (4).It was so observed 
by Vidura that Uddhava had all the transcen-
dental bodily changes due to total ecstasy, and 
he was trying to wipe away tears of separation 
from his eyes. Thus Vidura cou ld understand 
that Uddhava had completely assimilated ex-
tensive love for the Lord  (5).The great devotee 
Uddhava soon came back from the abode of the 
Lord to the human plane, and wiping his eyes, 
he awakened his reminiscence of the past and 
spoke to Vidura in a pleasing mood  (6).  
Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Vidura, the sun 
of the world, Lord K ṛṣṇa, has set, and our house 
has now been swallowed by the great snake of 
time. What can I say to you about our welfare? 
(7) This universe with all its planets is most un-
fortunate. And even more  unfortunate are the 
members of the Yadu dynasty because they 
could not identify Lord Hari as the Personality 
of Godhead, any more than the fish could iden-
tify the moon  (8). The Yadus were all experi-
enced devotees, learned and expert in psychic 
study. Over  and above this, they were always 
with the Lord in all kinds of relaxations, and 
still they were only able to know Him as the one 
Supreme who dwells everywhere  (9). Under no 
circumstances can the words of persons bewil-
dered by the illusory energy of the Lo rd deviate 
the intelligence of those who are completely 
surrendered souls  (10).Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, who 
manifested His eternal form before the vision 
of all on the earth, performed His disappear-
ance by removing His form from the sight of 
those who were unable t o see Him [as He is] 
due to not executing required penance  (11).The 
Lord appeared in the mortal world by His inter-
nal potency, yoga -māyā. He came in His eter-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

113 
 nal form, which is just suitable for His pas-
times. These pastimes were wonderful for eve-
ryone, even  for those proud of their own opu-
lence, including the Lord Himself in His form 
as the Lord of Vaiku ṇṭha. Thus His [Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa’s] transcendental body is the ornament 
of all ornaments  (12).  
All the demigods from the upper, lower and 
middle universal planetar y systems assembled 
at the altar of the rājasūya sacrifice performed 
by Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira. After seeing the 
beautiful bodily features of Lord K ṛṣṇa, they all 
contemplated that He was the ultimate dexter-
ous creation of Brahmā, the creator of human 
beings (13).The damsels of Vraja, after pas-
times of laughter, humor and exchanges of 
glances, were anguished when K ṛṣṇa left them. 
They used to follow Him with their eyes, and 
thus they sat down with stunned intelligence 
and could not finish their household dutie s 
(14).The Personality of Godhead, the all -com-
passionate controller of both the spiritual and 
material creations, is unborn, but when there is 
friction between His peaceful devotees and per-
sons who are in the material modes of nature, 
He takes birth just l ike fire, accompanied by the 
mahat -tattva  (15). When I think of Lord K ṛṣṇa  
how He was born in the prison house of 
Vasudeva although He is unborn, how He went 
away from His father’s protection to Vraja and 
lived there incognito out of fear of the enemy, 
and how, although unlimitedly powerful, He 
fled from Mathurā in fear  all these bewildering 
incidents give me distress  (16).  Lord K ṛṣṇa 
begged pardon from His parents for Their 
[Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma’s] inability to serve their 
feet, due to being away from home because of 
great fear of Ka ṁsa. He said, “O mother, O fa-
ther, please excuse Us for this inability.” All 
this behavior of the Lord gives me pain at heart  
(17). Who, after smelling the dust of His lotus 
feet even once, could ever forget it? Simply by 
expanding the leaves of His eyebrows, K ṛṣṇa 
has giv en the deathblow to those who were bur-
dening the earth  (18). You have personally seen 
how the King of Cedi [Śiśupāla] achieved suc-
cess in yoga practice, although he hated Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. Even the actual yogīs aspire after such 
success with great interest by pe rformance of their various practices. Who can tolerate sepa-
ration from Him? (19) Certainly others who 
were fighters on the Battlefield of Kuruk ṣetra 
were purified by the onslaught of Arjuna’s ar-
rows, and while seeing the lotuslike face of 
Kṛṣṇa, so pleasin g to the eyes, they achieved 
the abode of the Lord  (20). Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa is 
the Lord of all kinds of threes and is inde-
pendently supreme by achievement of all kinds 
of fortune. He is worshiped by the eternal main-
tainers of the creation, who offer Him the pa ra-
phernalia of worship by touching their millions 
of helmets to His feet  (21).Therefore, O Vidura, 
does it not pain us, His servitors, when we re-
member that He [Lord K ṛṣṇa] used to stand be-
fore King Ugrasena, who was sitting on the 
royal throne, and used t o submit explanations 
before him, saying, “O My lord, please let it be 
known to you”? (22) Alas, how shall I take 
shelter of one more merciful than He who 
granted the position of mother to a she -demon 
[Pūtanā] although she was unfaithful and she 
prepared d eadly poison to be sucked from her 
breast? (23) I consider the demons, who are in-
imical toward the Lord, to be more than the 
devotees because while fighting with the Lord, 
absorbed in thoughts of enmity, they are able to 
see the Lord carried on the shoulde r of Garu ḍa, 
the son of Tārk ṣya [Kaśyapa], and carrying the 
wheel weapon in His hand  (24).  
The Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, being prayed to by Brahmā to bring wel-
fare to the earth, was begotten by Vasudeva in 
the womb of his wife Devakī in the prison of 
the King of Bhoja  (25). Thereafter, His father, 
being afraid of Ka ṁsa, brought Him to the cow 
pastures of Mahārāja Nanda, and there He lived 
for eleven years like a covered flame with His 
elder brother, Baladeva  (26). In His childhood, 
the Almigh ty Lord was surrounded by cowherd 
boys and calves, and thus He traveled on the 
shore of the Yamunā river, through gardens 
densely covered with trees and filled with vi-
brations of chirping birds  (27).When the Lord 
displayed His activities just suitable for child-
hood, He was visible only to the residents of 
Vṛndāvana. Sometimes He would cry and 
sometimes laugh, just like a child, and while so 
doing He would appear like a lion cub  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

114 
 (28).While herding the very beautiful bulls, the 
Lord, who was the reservoir of all opulence and 
fortune, used to blow His flute, and thus He en-
livened His faithful followers, the cowherd 
boys  (29).The great wizards who were able to 
assume any form were engaged by the King of 
Bhoja, Ka ṁsa, to kill K ṛṣṇa, but in the course 
of His pasti mes the Lord killed them as easily 
as a child breaks dolls  (30).The inhabitants of 
Vṛndāvana were perplexed by great difficulties 
because a certain portion of the Yamunā was 
poisoned by the chief of the reptiles [Kāliya]. 
The Lord chastised the snake -king within the 
water and drove him away, and after coming 
out of the river, He caused the cows to drink the 
water and proved that the water was again in its 
natural state  (31).  The Supreme Lord, K ṛṣṇa, 
desired to utilize the opulent financial strength 
of Mahā rāja Nanda for worship of the cows, 
and also He wanted to give a lesson to Indra, 
the King of heaven. Thus He advised His father 
to perform worship of go, or the pasturing land 
and the cows, with the help of learned 
brāhma ṇas (32).O sober Vidura, King Indr a, 
his honor having been insulted, poured water 
incessantly on V ṛndāvana, and thus the inhab-
itants of Vraja, the land of cows, were greatly 
distressed. But the compassionate Lord K ṛṣṇa 
saved them from danger with His pastime um-
brella, the Govardhana Hill  (33). In the third 
season of the year, the Lord enjoyed as the cen-
tral beauty of the assembly of women by at-
tracting them with His pleasing songs in an au-
tumn night brightened by moonshine  (34).  
SB 3.3: The Lord’s Pastimes Out of 
Vṛndāvana  
Śrī Uddhava said : Thereafter Lord K ṛṣṇa 
went to Mathurā City with Śrī Baladeva, and to 
please Their parents They dragged Ka ṁsa, the 
leader of public enemies, down from his throne 
and killed him, pulling him along the ground 
with great strength  (1). The Lord learned all th e 
Vedas with their different branches simply by 
hearing them once from His teacher, Sāndīpani 
Muni, whom He rewarded by bringing back his 
dead son from the region of Yamaloka  (2).  At-
tracted by the beauty and fortune of Rukmi ṇī, 
the daughter of King Bhī ṣmaka, many great princes and kings assembled to marry her. But 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, stepping over the other hopeful 
candidates, carried her away as His own share, 
as Garu ḍa carried away nectar  (3).By subduing 
seven bulls whose noses were not pierced, the 
Lord achieve d the hand of Princess Nāgnijitī in 
the open competition to select her bridegroom. 
Although the Lord was victorious, His compet-
itors asked the hand of the princess, and thus 
there was a fight. Well equipped with weapons, 
the Lord killed or wounded all of t hem, but He 
Himself was not hurt  (4). Just to please His dear 
wife, the Lord brought back the pārijāta tree 
from heaven, just as an ordinary husband  would 
do. But Indra, the King of heaven, induced by 
his wives (henpecked as he was), ran after the 
Lord wit h full force to fight Him  (5).  Na-
rakāsura, the son of Dharitrī, the earth, tried to 
grasp the whole sky, and for this he was killed 
by the Lord in a fight. His mother then prayed 
to the Lord. This led to the return of the king-
dom to the son of Narakāsura,  and thus the Lord 
entered the house of the demon  (6).There in the 
house of the demon, all the princesses kid-
napped by Narakāsura at once became alert 
upon seeing the Lord, the friend of the dis-
tressed. They looked upon Him with eagerness, 
joy and shyness and offered to be His wives  (7).  
All those princesses were lodged in different 
apartments, and the Lord simultaneously as-
sumed different bodily expansions exactly 
matching each and every princess. He accepted 
their hands in perfect rituals by His internal  po-
tency  (8). Just to expand Himself according to 
His transcendental features, the Lord begot in 
each and every one of them ten offspring with 
exactly His own qualities  (9).  Kālayavana, the 
King of Magadha and Sālva attacked the city of 
Mathurā, but when the city was encircled by 
their soldiers, the Lord refrained from killing 
them personally, just to show the power of His 
own men  (10).Of kings like Śambara, Dvivida, 
Bāṇa, Mura, Balvala and many other demons, 
such as Dantavakra, some He killed Himself, 
and some He caused to be killed by others [Śrī 
Baladeva, etc.]  (11). Then, O Vidura, the Lord 
caused all the kings, both the enemies and those 
on the side of your fighting nep hews, to be 
killed in the Battle of Kuruk ṣetra. All those 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

115 
 kings were so great and strong that the earth 
seemed to shake as they traversed the warfield  
(12).Duryodhana was bereft of his fortune and 
duration of life because of the intricacy of ill 
advice giv en by Kar ṇa, Du ḥśāsana and Sau-
bala. When he lay on the ground with his fol-
lowers, his thighs broken although he was pow-
erful, the Lord was not happy to see the scene  
(13). [After the end of the Battle of Kuruk ṣetra, 
the Lord said:] The abatement of the ear th’s 
great burden, eighteen ak ṣauhiṇīs, has now 
been effected with the help of Dro ṇa, Bhī ṣma, 
Arjuna and Bhīma. But what is this? There is 
still the great strength of the Yadu dynasty, 
born of Myself, which may be a more unbeara-
ble burden  (14). When they q uarrel among 
themselves, influenced by intoxication, with 
their eyes red like copper because of drinking 
[madhu], then only will they disappear; other-
wise, it will not be possible. On My disappear-
ance, this incident will take place  (15).  
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, thus thinking to Himself, es-
tablished Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira in the position 
of supreme control of the world in order to 
show the ideal of administration on the path of 
piety  (16).The embryo of Pūru’s descendant 
begotten by the great hero Abhimanyu in the 
wom b of Uttarā, his wife, was burnt by the 
weapon of the son of Dro ṇa, but later he was 
again protected by the Lord  (17).  The Supreme 
Lord induced the son of Dharma to perform 
three horse sacrifices, and Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, constantly following K ṛṣṇa, the 
Personality of Godhead, protected and enjoyed 
the earth, assisted by his younger brothers  (18).  
Simultaneously, the Personality of Godhead 
enjoyed life in the city of Dvārakā, strictly in 
conformity with the Vedic customs of society. 
He was situated in de tachment and knowledge, 
as enunciated by the Sā ṅkhya system of philos-
ophy  (19). He was there in His transcendental 
body, the residence of the goddess of fortune, 
with His usual gentle and sweetly smiling face, 
His nectarean words and His flawless character  
(20).  The Lord enjoyed His pastimes, both in 
this world and in other worlds [higher planets], 
specifically in the association of the Yadu dyn-
asty. At leisure hours offered by night, He en-
joyed the friendship of conjugal love with women  (21).The Lord was thus engaged in 
household life for many, many years, but at last 
His detachment from ephemeral sex life was 
fully manifested  (22).  Every living entity is 
controlled by a supernatural force, and thus his 
sense enjoyment is also under the control of 
that su pernatural force. No one, therefore, can 
put his faith in Lord K ṛṣṇa’s transcendental 
sense activities but one who has become a dev-
otee of the Lord by rendering devotional ser-
vice (23).  
Once upon a time, great sages were made 
angry by the sporting activit ies of the princely 
descendants of the Yadu and Bhoja dynasties, 
and thus, as desired by the Lord, the sages 
cursed them  (24).A few months passed, and 
then, bewildered by K ṛṣṇa, all the descendants 
of Vṛṣṇi, Bhoja and Andhaka who were incar-
nations of demig ods went to Prabhāsa, while 
those who were eternal devotees of the Lord did 
not leave but remained in Dvārakā  (25). After 
arriving there, all of them took bath, and with 
the water of this place of pilgrimage they of-
fered their respects to the forefathers, demigods 
and great sages and thus satisfied them. They 
gave cows to the brāhma ṇas in royal charity  
(26).The brāhma ṇas were not only given well -
fed cows in charity, but also gold, gold coins, 
bedding, clothing, animal -skin seats, blankets, 
horses, elephants , girls and sufficient land for 
maintenance  (27).Thereafter they offered the 
brāhma ṇas highly delicious foodstuffs first of-
fered to the Personality of Godhead and offered 
their respectful obeisances by touching their 
heads to the ground. They lived perfect ly by 
protecting the cows and the brāhma ṇas (28).  
SB 3.4: Vidura Approaches Maitreya  
Thereafter, all of them [the descendants of 
Vṛṣṇi and Bhoja], being permitted by the 
brāhma ṇas, partook of the remnants of prasāda 
and also drank liquor made of rice. By drinking 
they all became delirious, and, bereft of 
knowledge, they touched the cores of each 
other’s hearts with harsh words  (1). As by the 
friction of bamboos destruction takes place, so 
also, at sunset, by the interaction of the faults 
of intoxication, a ll their minds became unbal-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

116 
 anced, and destruction took place  (2). The Per-
sonality of Godhead, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, after fore-
seeing the end [of His family] by His internal 
potency, went to the bank of the river Sarasvatī, 
sipped water, and sat down underneath a tree  
(3).The Lord is the vanquisher of the distresses 
of one wh o is surrendered unto Him. Thus He 
who desired to destroy His family told me pre-
viously to go to Badarikāśrama  (4). Yet in spite 
of my knowing His desire [to destroy the dyn-
asty], O Arindama [Vidura], I followed Him 
because it was impossible for me to bear  sepa-
ration from the lotus feet of the master  (5). Thus 
following, I saw my patron and master [Lord 
Śrī K ṛṣṇa] sitting alone and deeply thinking, 
taking shelter on the bank of the river Sarasvatī 
although He is the shelter of the goddess of for-
tune (6).The Lord’s body is blackish, but is 
eternal, full of bliss and knowledge, and very, 
very beautiful. His eyes are always peaceful, 
and they are reddish like the rising morning 
sun. I could immediately recognize Him as the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead by His four 
hands, different symbolic representations, and 
yellow silk garments  (7).The Lord was sitting, 
taking rest against a young banyan tree, with 
His right lotus foot on His left thigh, and alt-
hough He had left all household comforts, He 
looked quite cheerf ul in that posture  (8).At that 
time, after traveling in many parts of the world, 
Maitreya, a great devotee of the Lord and a 
friend and well -wisher of the great sage K ṛṣṇa-
dvaipāyana Vyāsa, reached that spot out of his 
own perfect accord  (9).  Maitreya Mun i was 
greatly attached to Him [the Lord], and he was 
listening in a pleasing attitude, with his shoul-
der lowered. With a smile and a particular 
glance upon me, having allowed me to rest, the 
Lord spoke as follows  (10).  
O Vasu, I know from within your mind  what 
you desired in the days of yore when the Vasus 
and other demigods responsible for expanding 
the universal affairs performed sacrifices. You 
particularly desired to achieve My association. 
This is very difficult for others to obtain, but I 
award it un to you  (11). O honest one, your pre-
sent life is the last and the supermost because 
in this term of life you have been awarded My ultimate favor. Now you can go to My tran-
scendental abode, Vaiku ṇṭha, by leaving this 
universe of conditioned living entities. Your 
visit to Me in this lonely place because of your 
pure and unflinching devotional service is a 
great boon for you  (12). O Uddhava, in the lo-
tus millennium in the days of yore, at the be-
ginning of the creation, I spoke unto Brahmā, 
who is situated on th e lotus that grows out of 
My navel, about My transcendental glories, 
which the great sages describe as Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam  (13). 
Uddhava said: O Vidura, when I was thus 
favored at every moment by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and addressed by Him 
with g reat affection, my words failed in tears, 
and the hairs on my body erupted. After smear-
ing my tears, I, with folded hands, spoke like 
this (14). O my Lord, devotees who engage in 
the transcendental loving service of Your lotus 
feet have no difficulty in ac hieving anything 
within the realm of the four principles of relig-
iosity, economic development, sense gratifica-
tion and liberation. But, O great one, as far as I 
am concerned, I have preferred only to engage 
in the loving service of Your lotus feet  (15). My 
Lord, even the learned sages become disturbed 
in their intelligence when they see that Your 
Greatness engages in fruitive work although 
You are free from all desires, that You take 
birth although You are unborn, that You flee 
out of fear of the enemy and take shelter in a 
fort although You are the controller of invinci-
ble time, and that You enjoy householder life 
surrounded by many women although You en-
joy in Your Self  (16). O my Lord, Your eternal 
Self is never divided by the influence of time, 
and there is no limitation to Your perfect 
knowledge. Thus You were sufficiently able to 
consult with Yourself, yet You called upon me 
for consultation, as if bewildered, although 
You are never bewildered. And this act of 
Yours bewilders me  (17). My Lord, kindly ex-
plain to us, if You thi nk us competent to receive 
it, that transcendental knowledge which gives 
enlightenment about Yourself and which You 
explained before to Brahmājī  (18).  
When I thus expressed my heartfelt desires 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

117 
 unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
lotus -eyed Lord instructed me about His tran-
scendental situation  (19). I have studied the 
path of understanding self -knowledge from my 
spiritual master, the Personality of Godhead, 
and thus after circumambulating Him I have 
come to this place, very much aggrieved due to 
separation  (20).My dear Vidura, now I am mad 
for want of the pleasure of seeing Him, and just 
to mitigate this I am now proceeding to Bada-
rikāśrama in the Himālayas for association, as I 
have been instructed by Him  (21). There in Ba-
darikāśrama the Personality of Godhead,  in His 
incarnation as the sages Nara and Nārāya ṇa, 
has been undergoing great penance since time 
immemorial for the welfare of all amiable liv-
ing entities  (22).  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After hearing 
from Uddhava all about the annihilation of his 
friends  and relatives, the learned Vidura paci-
fied his overwhelming bereavement by dint of 
his transcendental knowledge  (23).  While Ud-
dhava, the chief and most confidential amongst 
the devotees of the Lord, was going away, 
Vidura, in affection and confidence, qu estioned 
him (24).  
Vidura said:  O Uddhava, because the serv-
ants of Vi ṣṇu, the Lord, wander in the interest 
of serving others, it is quite fit that you kindly 
describe the self -knowledge with which you 
have been enlightened by the Lord Himself  
(25).  
Śrī Uddhava said : You may take lesson s 
from the great learned sage Maitreya, who is 
nearby and who is worshipable for reception of 
transcendental knowledge. He was directly in-
structed by the Personality of Godhead while 
He was about to quit this mortal world  (26).  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said : O Ki ng, after thus 
discussing with Vidura the transcendental 
name, fame, qualities, etc., on the bank of the 
Yamunā, Uddhava was overwhelmed with 
great affliction. He passed the night as if it were 
a moment, and thereafter he went away  (27).  
The King inquired : At the end of the pas-
times of the Lord of the three worlds, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, 
and after the disappearance of the members of the V ṛṣṇi and Bhoja dynasties, who were the 
best of the great commanders, why did Ud-
dhava alone remain? (28) 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied:  My dear King, 
the cursing of the brāhma ṇas was only a plea, 
but the actual fact was the supreme desire of the 
Lord. He wanted to disappear from the face of 
the earth after dispatching His excessively nu-
merous family members. He thought to Him-
self as follows  (29). Now I shall leave the vi-
sion of this mundane world, and I see that Ud-
dhava, the foremost of My devotees, is the only 
one who can be directly entrusted with 
knowledge about Me  (30).Uddhava is not infe-
rior to Me in any way because he is never af-
fected by the modes of material nature. There-
fore he may remain in this world in order to dis-
seminate specific knowledge of the Personality 
of Godhead  (31).Śukadeva Gosvāmī informed 
the King that Uddhava, being thus instructed by 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is 
the source of all Vedic knowledge and the spir-
itual master of the three worlds, reached the pil-
grimage site of Badarikāśrama and engaged 
himself there in trance to satisfy the Lord  (32). 
Vidura also heard from Uddhava about the ap-
pearance and disappearance of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the 
Supersoul, in the mortal world, which is a sub-
ject matter sought after with great perseverance 
by the great sages  (33). The Lord’s glorious 
acts and His acceptance of various transcenden-
tal forms for the performance of extraordinary 
pastimes in the mortal world are very difficult 
for anyone other than His devotees to under-
stand, and for the beasts they are simply a men-
tal disturbance  (34).Understanding that he was 
remembered by Lord K ṛṣṇa [while quitting this 
world], Vidura began to cry loudly, over-
whelmed by the ecstasy of love  (35). After 
passing a few days on the bank of the river Ya-
munā, Vidura, the self -realized soul, reached 
the bank  of the Ganges, where the great sage 
Maitreya was situated  (36).  
SB 3.5: Vidura’s Talks with Maitreya  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said : Vidura, the best 
amongst the Kuru dynasty, who was perfect in 
devotional service to the Lord, thus reached the 
source of the celes tial Ganges river [Hardwar], 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

118 
 where Maitreya, the great, fathomless learned 
sage of the world, was seated. Vidura, who was 
perfect in gentleness and satisfied in transcend-
ence, inquired from him  (1).  
Vidura said : O great sage, everyone in this 
world engage s in fruitive activities to attain 
happiness, but one finds neither satiation nor 
the mitigation of distress. On the contrary, one 
is only aggravated by such activities. Please, 
therefore, give us directions on how one should 
live for real happiness  (2). O my lord, great 
philanthropic souls travel on the earth on behalf 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead to show 
compassion to the fallen souls who are averse 
to the sense of subordination to the Lord  
(3).Therefore, O great sage, please give me in-
struction on the transcendental devotional ser-
vice of the Lord, so that He who is situated in 
the heart of everyone can be pleased to impart, 
from within, knowledge of the Absolute Truth 
in terms of the ancient Vedic principles deliv-
ered only to those who are purifi ed by the pro-
cess of devotional service  (4).O great sage, 
kindly narrate how the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is the independent, desireless 
Lord of the three worlds and the controller of 
all energies, accepts incarnations and creates 
the cosmic man ifestation with perfectly ar-
ranged regulative principles for its maintenance  
(5).He lies down on His own heart spread in the 
form of the sky, and thus placing the whole cre-
ation in that space, He expands Himself into 
many living entities, which are manifes ted as 
different species of life. He does not have to en-
deavor for His maintenance, because He is the 
master of all mystic powers and the proprietor 
of everything. Thus He is distinct from the liv-
ing entities  (6).You may narrate also about the 
auspicious c haracteristics of the Lord in His 
different incarnations for the welfare of the 
twice -born, the cows and the demigods. Our 
minds are never satisfied completely, although 
we continuously hear of His transcendental ac-
tivities  (7).  
The Supreme King of all ki ngs has created 
different planets and places of h abitation where 
living entities are situated in terms of the modes 
of nature and work, and He has created their different kings and rulers  (8).O chief amongst 
the brāhma ṇas, please also describe how 
Nārāya ṇa, the creator of the universe and the 
self-sufficient Lord, has differently created the 
natures, activities, forms, features and names of 
the different living creatures  (9).O my lord, I 
have repeatedly heard about these higher and 
lower statuses of human so ciety from the 
mouth of Vyāsadeva, and I am quite satiated 
with all these lesser subject matters and their 
happiness. They have not satisfied me with the 
nectar of topics about K ṛṣṇa (10). Who in hu-
man society can be satisfied without hearing 
sufficient ta lk of the Lord, whose lotus feet are 
the sum total of all places of pilgrimage and 
who is worshiped by great sages and devotees? 
Such topics can cut off one’s bondage to family 
affection simply by entering the holes of one’s 
ears (11).  Your friend the gre at sage K ṛṣṇa-
dvaipāyana Vyāsa has already described the 
transcendental qualities of the Lord in his great 
work the Mahābhārata. But the whole idea is to 
draw the attention of the mass of people to 
kṛṣṇa-kathā [Bhagavad -gītā] through their 
strong affinity for hearing mundane topics  
(12).For one who is anxious to engage con-
stantly in hearing such topics, k ṛṣṇa-kathā 
gradually increases his indifference towards all 
other things. Such constant remembrance of the 
lotus feet of Lord K ṛṣṇa by the devotee who has 
achieved transcendental bliss vanquishes all his 
miseries without delay  (13).O sage, persons 
who because of their sinful activities are averse 
to the topics of Transcendence and thus igno-
rant of the purpose of the Mahābhārata [Bhaga-
vad-gītā] are pitied by the pitiable. I also pity 
them because I see how their duration of life is 
spoiled by eternal time while they involve 
themselves in presentations of philosophical 
speculation, theoretical ultimate goals of life, 
and different modes of ritual  (14). O Maitre ya, 
O friend of the distressed, the glories of the Su-
preme Lord can alone do good for people all 
over the world. Therefore, just as bees collect 
honey from flowers, kindly describe the es-
sence of all topics  the topics of the Lord  (15). 
Kindly chant all th ose superhuman transcen-
dental activities of the supreme controller, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

119 
 Personality of Godhead, who accepted incarna-
tions fully equipped with all potency for the full 
manifestation and maintenance of the cosmic 
creation  (16).  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said : The gr eat sage 
Maitreya Muni, after honoring Vidura very 
greatly, began to speak, at Vidura’s request, for 
the greatest welfare of all people  (17). 
Śrī Maitreya said:  O Vidura, all glory unto 
you. You have inquired from me of the greatest 
of all goodness, and th us you have shown your 
mercy both to the world and to me because your 
mind is always absorbed in thoughts of the 
Transcendence  (18). O Vidura, it is not at all 
wonderful that you have so accepted the Lord 
without deviation of thought, for you were born 
from the semen of Vyāsadeva  (19).I know that 
you are now Vidura due to the cursing of 
Māṇḍavya Muni and that formerly you were 
King Yamarāja, the great controller of living 
entities after their death. You were begotten by 
the son of Satyavatī, Vyāsadeva, in t he kept 
wife of his brother  (20).Your good self is one 
of the eternal associates of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead for whose sake the Lord, 
while going back to His abode, left instructions 
with me  (21).I shall therefore describe to you 
the pastimes by which the Personality of God-
head extends His transcendental potency for the 
creation, maintenance and dissolution of the 
cosmic world as they occur one after another  
(22).  
The Personality of Godhead, the master of 
all living entities, existed prior to the  creation 
as one without a second. It is by His will only 
that creation is made possible and again every-
thing merges in Him. This Supreme Self is 
symptomized by different names  (23).The 
Lord, the undisputed proprietor of everything, 
was the only seer. The cosmic manifestation 
was not present at that time, and thus He felt 
imperfect without His plenary and separated 
parts and parcels. The material energy was 
dormant, whereas the internal potency was 
manifested  (24). The Lord is the seer, and the 
external ene rgy, which is seen, works as both 
cause and effect in the cosmic manifestation. O 
greatly fortunate Vidura, this external energy is known as māyā or illusion, and through her 
agency only is the entire material manifestation 
made possible  (25).The Supreme L iving Being 
in His feature as the transcendental puru ṣa in-
carnation, who is the Lord’s plenary expansion, 
impregnates the material nature of three modes, 
and thus by the influence of eternal time the liv-
ing entities appear  (26). Thereafter, influenced 
by the interactions of eternal time, the supreme 
sum total of matter, called the mahat -tattva, be-
came manifested, and in this mahat -tattva the 
unalloyed goodness, the Supreme Lord, sowed 
the seeds of universal manifestation out of His 
own body  (27).Thereafter the mahat -tattva dif-
ferentiated itself into many different forms as 
the reservoir of the would -be entities. The ma-
hat-tattva is chiefly in the mode of ignorance, 
and it generates the false ego. It is a plenary ex-
pansion of the Personality of Godhead, with 
full consciousness of creative principles and 
time for fructification  (28).Mahat -tattva, or the 
great causal truth, transforms into false ego, 
which is manifested in three phases  cause, ef-
fect and the doer. All such activities are on the 
mental plane and are based on the material ele-
ments, gro ss senses and mental speculatio . The 
false ego is represented in three different modes  
goodness, passion and ignorance  (29).The false 
ego is transformed into mind by interaction 
with the mode of goodness. All the dem igods 
who control the phenomenal world are also 
products of the same principle, namely the in-
teraction of false ego and the mode of goodness  
(30).The senses are certainly products of the 
mode of passion in false ego, and therefore 
philosophical speculative  knowledge and frui-
tive activities are predominantly products of the 
mode of passion  (31).  The sky is a product of 
sound, and sound is the transformation of ego-
istic ignorance. In other words, the sky is the 
symbolic representation of the Supreme Soul.  
Thereafter the Personality of Godhead glanced 
over the sky, partly mixed with eternal time and 
external energy, and thus developed the touch 
sensation, from which the air in the sky was 
produced  (32).Thereafter the extremely power-
ful air, interacting with t he sky, generated the 
form of sense perception, and the perception of 
form transformed into electricity, the light to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

120 
 see the world  (33).When electricity was sur-
charged in the air and was glanced over by the 
Supreme, at that time, by a mixture of eternal 
time and external energy, there occurred the 
creation of water and taste  (34).Thereafter the 
water produced from electricity was glanced 
over by the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
and mixed with eternal time and external en-
ergy. Thus it was transformed into  the earth, 
which is qualified primarily by smell  (35).O 
gentle one, of all the physical elements, begin-
ning from the sky down to the earth, all the in-
ferior and superior qualities are due only to the 
final touch of the glance of the Supreme Per-
sonality of  Godhead  (36). The controlling dei-
ties of all the above -mentioned physical ele-
ments are empowered expansions of Lord 
Viṣṇu. They are embodied by eternal time un-
der the external energy, and they are His parts 
and parcels. Because they were entrusted with 
different functions of universal duties and were 
unable to perform them, they offered fascinat-
ing prayers to the Lord as follows  (37). 
The demigods said : O Lord, Your lotus feet 
are like an umbrella for the surrendered souls, 
protecting them from all the mis eries of mate-
rial existence. All the sages under that shelter 
throw off all material miseries. We therefore 
offer our respectful obeisances unto Your lotus 
feet (38).O Father, O Lord, O Personality of 
Godhead, the living entities in the material 
world can never have any happiness because 
they are overwhelmed by the three kinds of 
miseries. Therefore they take shelter of the 
shade of Your lotus feet, which are full of 
knowledge, and we also thus take shelter of 
them  (39).The lotus feet of the Lord are by 
themselves the shelter of all places of pilgrim-
age. The great clear -minded sages, carried by 
the wings of the Vedas, always search after the 
nest of Your lotuslike face. Some of them sur-
render to Your lotus feet at every step by taking 
shelter of the best of rivers [the Ganges], which 
can deliver one from all sinful reactions  (40)  
Simply by hearing about Your lotus feet with 
eagerness and devotion and by meditating upon 
them within the heart, one at once becomes en-
lightened with knowledge, and on the strength  
of detachment one becomes pacified. We must therefore take shelter of the sanctuary of Your 
lotus feet  (41).O Lord, You assume incarna-
tions for the creation, maintenance and dissolu-
tion of the cosmic manifestation, and therefore 
we all take shelter of You r lotus feet because 
they always award remembrance and courage 
to Your devotees  (42).O Lord, persons who are 
entangled by undesirable eagerness for the tem-
porary body and kinsmen, and who are bound 
by thoughts of “mine” and “I,” are unable to see 
Your lotu s feet, although Your lotus feet are sit-
uated within their own bodies. But let us take 
shelter of Your lotus feet  (43). O great Supreme 
Lord, offensive persons whose internal vision 
has been too affected by external materialistic 
activities cannot see Your  lotus feet, but they 
are seen by Your pure devotees, whose one and 
only aim is to transcendentally enjoy Your ac-
tivities  (44).O Lord, persons who, because of 
their serious attitude, attain the stage of enlight-
ened devotional service achieve the complete 
meaning of renunciation and knowledge and at-
tain the Vaiku ṇṭhaloka in the spiritual sky 
simply by drinking the nectar of Your topics  
(45). Others, who are pacified by means of tran-
scendental self -realization and have conquered 
over the modes of nature by di nt of strong 
power and knowledge, also enter into You, but 
for them there is much pain, whereas the devo-
tee simply discharges devotional service and 
thus feels no such pain  (46). 
O Original Person, we are therefore but 
Yours only. Although we are Your crea tures, 
we are born one after another under the influ-
ence of the three modes of nature, and for this 
reason we are separated in action. Therefore, 
after the creation we could not act concertedly 
for Your transcendental pleasure  (47).O unborn 
one, please enl ighten us regarding the ways and 
means by which we can offer You all enjoyable 
grains and commodities so that both we and all 
other living entities in this world can maintain 
ourselves without disturbance and can easily 
accumulate the necessities of life b oth for You 
and for ourselves  (48).  You are the original 
personal founder of all the demigods and the 
orders of different gradations, yet You are the 
oldest and are unchanged. O Lord, You have no 
source or superior. You have impregnated the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

121 
 external energ y with the semen of the total liv-
ing entities, yet You are unborn  (49).O Su-
preme Self, please give us, who are created in 
the beginning from the mahat -tattva, the total 
cosmic energy, Your kind directions on how we 
shall act. Kindly award us Your perfect 
knowledge and potency so that we can render 
You service in the different departments of sub-
sequent creation  (50).  
SB 3.6: Creation of the Universal Form  
The Ṛṣi Maitreya said : The Lord thus 
heard about the suspension of the progressive 
creative functions of the universe due to the 
noncombination of His potencies, such as the 
mahat -tattva  (1). The Supreme Powerful Lord 
then simultaneously entered into the t wenty -
three elements with the goddess Kālī, His ex-
ternal energy, who alone amalgamates all the 
different elements  (2).Thus when the Personal-
ity of Godhead entered into the elements by His 
energy, all the living entities were enlivened 
into different activi ties, just as one is engaged 
in his work after awakening from sleep  
(3).When the twenty -three principal elements 
were set in action by the will of the Supreme, 
the gigantic universal form, or the viśvarūpa 
body of the Lord, came into existence  (4).As 
the L ord, in His plenary portion, entered into 
the elements of the universal creation, they 
transformed into the gigantic form in which all 
the planetary systems and all movable and im-
movable creations rest  (5).The gigantic virā ṭ-
puruṣa, known as Hira ṇmaya, liv ed for one 
thousand celestial years on the water of the uni-
verse, and all the living entities lay with Him  
(6).The total energy of the mahat -tattva, in the 
form of the gigantic virā ṭ-rūpa, divided Himself 
by Himself into the consciousness of the living 
entities, the life of activity, and self -identifica-
tion, which are subdivided into one, ten and 
three respectively  (7).The gigantic universal 
form of the Supreme Lord is the first incarna-
tion and plenary portion of the Supersoul. He is 
the Self of an unlimite d number of living enti-
ties, and in Him rests the aggregate creation, 
which thus flourishes  (8).The gigantic univer-
sal form is represented by three, ten and one in 
the sense that He is the body and the mind and the senses, He is the dynamic force for all 
movements by ten kinds of life energy, and He 
is the one heart where life energy is generated  
(9).  
The Supreme Lord is the Supersoul of all the 
demigods entrusted with the task of construct-
ing the cosmic manifestation. Being thus 
prayed to [by the demigods ], He thought to 
Himself and thus manifested the gigantic form 
for their understanding  (10).Maitreya said: You 
may now hear from me how the Supreme Lord 
separated Himself into the diverse forms of the 
demigods after the manifestation of the gigan-
tic univer sal form  (11).Agni, or heat, separated 
from His mouth, and all the directors of mate-
rial affairs entered into it in their respective po-
sitions. By that energy the living entity ex-
presses himself in words  (12).When the palate 
of the gigantic form was separa tely manifested, 
Varu ṇa, the director of water in the planetary 
systems, entered therein, and thus the living en-
tity has the facility to taste everything with his 
tongue  (13). When the Lord’s two nostrils sep-
arately manifested themselves, the dual Aśvinī -
kumāras entered them in their proper positions, 
and because of this the living entities can smell 
the aromas of everything  (14).Thereafter, the 
two eyes of the gigantic form of the Lord were 
separately manifested. The sun, the director of 
light, entered the m with the partial representa-
tion of eyesight, and thus the living entities can 
have vision of forms  (15).When there was a 
manifestation of skin separated from the gigan-
tic form, Anila, the deity directing the wind, en-
tered with partial touch, and thus the  living en-
tities can realize tactile knowledge  (16).When 
the ears of the gigantic form became mani-
fested, all the controlling deities of the direc-
tions entered into them with the hearing princi-
ples, by which all the living entities hear and 
take advantage of sound  (17).  When there was 
a separate manifestation of skin, the controlling 
deities of sensations and their different parts 
entered into it, and thus the living entities feel 
itching and happiness due to touch  (18).When 
the genitals of the gigantic fo rm separately be-
came manifest, then Prajāpati, the original liv-
ing creature, entered into them with his partial 
semen, and thus the living entities can enjoy 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

122 
 sex pleasure  (19).The evacuating channel sep-
arately became manifest, and the director 
named Mitra ente red into it with partial organs 
of evacuation. Thus the living entities are able 
to pass stool and urine  (20). Thereafter, when 
the hands of the gigantic form separately be-
came manifested, Indra, the ruler of the heav-
enly planets, entered into them, and th us the liv-
ing entity is able to transact business for his 
livelihood  (21).Thereafter the legs of the gigan-
tic form separately became manifest, and the 
demigod named Vi ṣṇu [not the Personality of 
Godhead] entered with partial movement. This 
helps the living entity move to his destination  
(22).  When the intelligence of the gigan tic 
form separately became manifest, Brahmā, the 
lord of the Vedas, entered into it with the partial 
power of understanding, and thus an object of 
understanding is experienced by the living en-
tities  (23). After that, the heart of the gigantic 
form separate ly manifested itself, and into it en-
tered the moon demigod with partial mental ac-
tivity. Thus the living entity can conduct his 
mental speculations  (24).Thereafter the materi-
alistic ego of the gigantic form separately man-
ifested itself, and into it entered  Rudra, the con-
troller of false ego, with his own partial activi-
ties, by which the living entity transacts his ob-
jective actions  (25). Thereafter, when His con-
sciousness separately manifested itself, the to-
tal energy, mahat -tattva, entered with His con-
scious part. Thus the living entity is able to con-
ceive specific knowledge  (26).Thereafter, from 
the head of the gigantic form, the heavenly 
planets were manifested, and from His legs the 
earthly planets and from His abdomen the sky 
separately manifested thems elves. Within them 
the demigods and others also were manifested 
in terms of the modes of material nature  
(27).The demigods, qualified by the superex-
cellent quality of the mode of goodness, are sit-
uated in the heavenly planets, whereas the hu-
man beings, bec ause of their nature in the mode 
of passion, live on the earth in company with 
their subordinates  (28).Living entities who are 
associates of Rudra develop in the third mode 
of material nature, or ignorance. They are situ-
ated in the sky between the earthly planets and 
the heavenly planets  (29).  O chief of the Kuru dynasty, the Vedic wis-
dom became manifested from the mouth of the 
virāṭ, the gigantic form. Those who are inclined 
to this Vedic knowledge are called brāhma ṇas, 
and they are the natural teachers and spiritual 
masters of all the orders o f society  (30). There-
after the power of protection was generated 
from the arms of the gigantic virā ṭ form, and in 
relation to such power the k ṣatriyas also came 
into existence by following the k ṣatriya princi-
ple of protecting society from the disturbance 
of thieves and miscreants  (31).The means of 
livelihood of all persons, namely production of 
grains and their distribution to the prajās, was 
generated from the thighs of the Lord’s gigantic 
form. The mercantile men who take charge of 
such execution are call ed vaiśyas  (32).Thereaf-
ter, service was manifested from the legs of the 
Personality of Godhead for the sake of perfect-
ing the religious function. Situated on the legs 
are the śūdras, who satisfy the Lord by service  
(33).All these different social divisions  are 
born, with their occupational duties and living 
conditions, from the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. Thus for unconditional life and self -
realization one has to worship the Supreme 
Lord under the direction of the spiritual master  
(34).O Vidura, who ca n estimate or measure 
the transcendental time, work and potency of 
the gigantic form manifested by the internal po-
tency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? 
(35) In spite of my inability, whatever I have 
been able to hear [from the spiritual master] and 
whatever I could assimilate I am now describ-
ing in glorification of the Lord by pure speech, 
for otherwise my power of speaking would re-
main unchaste  (36).The highest perfectional 
gain of humanity is to engage in discussions of 
the activities and glories o f the Pious Actor. 
Such activities are so nicely arranged in writing 
by the greatly learned sages that the actual pur-
pose of the ear is served just by being near them  
(37). O my son, the original poet, Brahmā, after 
mature meditation for one thousand celestial 
years, could know only that the glories of the 
Supreme Soul are inconceivable  (38).The won-
derful potency of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is bewildering even to the jugglers. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

123 
 That potency is unknown even to the self -suffi-
cient Lord, so it is certainly unknown to others  
(39).Words, mind and ego, with their respec-
tive controlling demigods, have failed to 
achieve success in knowing the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.  Therefore, we simply 
have to offer our respectful obeisances unto 
Him as a matter of sanity  (40).  
SB 3.7: Further Inquires by Vidura  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, while 
Maitreya, the great sage, was thus speaking, 
Vidura, the learned son of Dvaipāyana Vyāsa, 
expressed a request in a pleasing manner by 
asking this question  (1).  
Śrī Vidura said:  O great brāhma ṇa, since 
the Supreme Pe rsonality of Godhead is the 
complete spiritual whole and is unchangeable, 
how is He connected with the material modes 
of nature and their activities? If this is His pas-
time, how do the activities of the unchangeable 
take place and exhibit qualities without  the 
modes of nature? (2)  Boys are enthusiastic to 
play with other boys or with various diversions 
because they are encouraged by desire. But 
there is no possibility of such desire for the 
Lord because He is self -satisfied and detached 
from everything at all times  (3).By His self -
sheltered potency of the three modes of mate-
rial nature, the Lord has caused the creation of 
this universe. By her He maintains the creation 
and conversely dissolves it, again and again  
(4).The pure soul is pure consciousness and is 
never out of consciousness, either due to cir-
cumstances, time, situations, dreams or other 
causes. How then does he become engaged in 
nescience? (5) The Lord, as the Supersoul, is 
situated in every living being’s heart. Why then 
do the living entities’ activities result in misfor-
tune and misery? (6) O great and learned one, 
my mind is greatly illusioned by the distress of 
this nescience, and I therefore request you to 
clear it up  (7).  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, Mait-
reya, being thus agitated by th e inquisitive 
Vidura, at first seemed astonished, but then he 
replied to him without hesitation, since he was 
fully God conscious  (8). Śrī Maitreya said : Certain conditioned 
souls put forward the theory that the Supreme 
Brahman, or the Personality of Godhe ad, is 
overcome by illusion, or māyā, and at the same 
time they maintain that He is unconditioned. 
This is against all logic  (9). The living entity is 
in distress regarding his self -identity. He has no 
factual background, like a man who dreams that 
he sees  his head cut off  (10). As the moon re-
flected on water appears to the seer to tremble 
due to being associated with the quality of the 
water, so the self associated with matter ap-
pears to be qualified as matter  (11).But that 
misconception of self -identity c an be dimin-
ished graduall y by the mercy of the Personality 
of Godhead, Vāsudeva, through the process of 
devotional service to the Lord in the mode of 
detachment  (12).When the senses are satisfied 
in the seer -Supersoul, the Personality of God-
head, and merge in Him, all miseries are  com-
pletely vanquished, as after a sound sleep  (13).  
Simply by chanting and hearing of the tran-
scendental name, form, etc., of the Personality 
of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, one can achieve the ces-
sation of unlimited miserable conditions. 
Therefore what to speak of those who have at-
tained attraction for serving the flavor of the 
dust of the Lord’s lotus feet? (14) 
Vidura said:  O powerful sage, my lord, all 
my doubts about the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and the living entities have now been 
removed by your conv incing words. My mind 
is now perfectly entering into them  (15). O 
learned sage, your explanations are very good, 
as they should be. Disturbances to the condi-
tioned soul have no other basis than the move-
ment of the external energy of the Lord  (16).  
Both th e lowest of fools and he who is transcen-
dental to all intelligence enjoy happiness, 
whereas persons between them suffer the mate-
rial pangs  (17).But, my dear sir, I am obliged to 
you because now I can understand that this ma-
terial manifestation is without s ubstance, alt-
hough it appears real. I am confident that by 
serving your feet it will be possible for me to 
give up the false idea  (18). By serving the feet 
of the spiritual master, one is enabled to de-
velop transcendental ecstasy in the service of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

124 
 the Pers onality of Godhead, who is the un-
changeable enemy of the Madhu demon and 
whose service vanquishes one’s material dis-
tresses  (19).Persons whose austerity is meager 
can hardly obtain the service of the pure devo-
tees who are progressing on the path back to th e 
kingdom of Godhead, the Vaiku ṇṭhas. Pure 
devotees engage one hundred percent in glori-
fying the Supreme Lord, who is the Lord of the 
demigods and the controller of all living enti-
ties (20).  
After creating the total material energy, the 
mahat -tattva, and thereby manifesting the gi-
gantic universal form with senses and sense or-
gans, the Supreme Lord entered within it  
(21).The puru ṣa incarnation lying on the Causal 
Ocean is called the original puru ṣa in the mate-
rial creations, and in His virā ṭ form, in whom 
all the planets and their inhabitants live, He has 
many thousands of legs and hands  (22). O great 
brāhma ṇa, you have told me that the gigantic 
virāṭ form and His senses, sense objects and ten 
kinds of life air exist with three kinds of life 
vigor. Now, if y ou will, kindly explain to me 
the different powers of the specific divisions  
(23).O my lord, I think that the process mani-
fest in the forms of sons, grandsons and family 
members has spread all over the universe in dif-
ferent varieties and species  (24).  O l earned 
brāhma ṇa, please describe how the leader of all 
the demigods, namely the Prajāpati, Brahmā, 
decided to establish the various Manus, the 
heads of the ages. Please describe the Manus 
also, and please describe the descendants of 
those Manus  (25).O son of Mitrā, kindly de-
scribe how the planets are situated above the 
earth as well as underneath it, and also please 
mention their measurement as well as that of 
the earthly planets  (26).  Also please describe 
the living beings under different classifications:  
subhumans, humans, those born of the embryo, 
those born of perspiration, those who are twice -
born [birds], and the plants and vegetables. 
Kindly describe their generations and subdivi-
sions also  (27).Please also describe the incarna-
tions of the material mo des of nature  Brahmā, 
Viṣṇu and Maheśvara  and please describe the 
incarnation of the Supreme Personality of God-
head and His magnanimous activities  (28).O great sage, kindly describe the divisions and or-
ders of human society in terms of symptoms, 
behavior  and the characteristics of mental equi-
librium and sense control. Also please describe 
the births of the great sages and the categorical 
divisions of the Vedas  (29).Please also describe 
the expansions of different sacrifices and the 
paths of mystic powers,  analytical study of 
knowledge, and devotional service, all with 
their respective regulations  (30). Please also 
describe the imperfections and contradictions 
of the faithless atheists, the situation of cros S-
Breeding, and the movements of the living en-
tities in various species of life according to their 
particular modes of nature and work  (31).  
You may also describe the noncontradictory 
causes of religiosity, economic development, 
sense gratification and salvation and also the 
different means of livelihood and different pro-
cesses of law and order as mentioned in the re-
vealed scriptures  (32). Please also explain the 
regulations for offering respects to the forefa-
thers, the creation of the Pit ṛloka, the time 
schedule in the planets, stars and luminaries, 
and their respective situations  (33). Please also 
describe the fruitive results of charity  and pen-
ance and of digging reservoirs of water. Please 
describe the situation of persons who are away 
from home and also the duty of a man in an 
awkward position  (34).O sinless one, because 
the Personality of Godhead, the controller of all 
living entities , is the father of all religion and 
all those who are candidates for religious activ-
ities, kindly describe how He can be completely 
satisfied  (35).O best among the brāhma ṇas, 
those who are spiritual masters are very kind to 
the needy. They are always kind to their follow-
ers, disciples and sons, and without being asked 
by them, the spiritual master describes all that 
is knowledge  (36). Please describ e how many 
dissolutions there are for the elements of mate-
rial nature and who survives after the dissolu-
tions to serve the Lord while He is asleep  
(37).What are the truths regarding the living en-
tities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead? 
What are their  identities? What are the specific 
values in the knowledge in the Vedas, and what 
are the necessities for the spiritual master and 
his disciples? (38) Spotless devotees of the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

125 
 Lord have mentioned the source of such 
knowledge. How could one have knowledge o f 
devotional service and detachment without the 
help of such devotees? (39) My dear sage, I 
have put all these questions before you with a 
view to knowing the pastimes of Hari, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. You are the 
friend of all, so kindly describ e them for all 
those who have lost their vision  (40).O spotless 
one, your answers to all these questions will 
grant immunity from all material miseries. 
Such charity is greater than all Vedic charities, 
sacrifices, penances, etc  (41). 
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus the chief 
of the sages, who was always enthusiastic about 
describing topics regarding the Personality of 
Godhead, began to narrate the descriptive ex-
planation of the Purā ṇas, being so infused by 
Vidura. He was very much enliv ened by speak-
ing on the transcendental activities of the Lord  
(42).  
SB 3.8: Manifestation of Brahmā from 
Garbhodakaśāyī Vi ṣṇu 
The great sage Maitreya Muni said  to 
Vidura: The royal dynasty of King Pūru is wor-
thy to serve the pure devotees because all the 
descendants of that family are devoted to the 
Personality of Godhead. You are also born in 
that family, and it is wonderful that because of 
your attempt the transcendental pastimes of the 
Lord are becoming newer and newer at every 
moment  (1).Let me now beg in speaking on the 
Bhāgavata Purā ṇa, which was directly spoken 
to the great sages by the Personality of God-
head for the benefit of those who are entangled 
in extreme miseries for the sake of very little 
pleasure  (2).  
Some time ago, being inquisitive to kn ow, 
Sanat -kumāra, the chief of the boy -saints, ac-
companied by other great sages, inquired ex-
actly like you about the truths regarding 
Vāsudeva, the Supreme, from Lord 
Saṅkarṣaṇa, who is seated at the bottom of the 
universe  (3). At that time Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa was 
meditating upon His Supreme Lord, whom the 
learned esteem as Lord Vāsudeva, but for the 
sake of the advancement of the great learned 
sages He slightly opened His lotus like eyes and began to speak  (4).  
The sages came from the highest planets 
down to the lower region through the water of 
the Ganges, and therefore the hair on their 
heads was wet. They touched the lotus feet of 
the Lord, which are worshiped with various 
paraphernalia by the daughters of the serpent -
king when they desire good husband s (5).  
The four Kumāras, headed by Sanat -
kumāra, who all knew the transcendental pas-
times of the Lord, glorified the Lord in rhyth-
mic accents with selected words full of affec-
tion and love. At that time Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, 
with His thousands of raised hoods, began t o 
radiate an effulgence from the glowing stones 
on His head  (6). Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa thus spoke 
the purport of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam to the great 
sage Sanat -kumāra, who had already taken the 
vow of renunciation. Sanat -kumāra also, in his 
turn, when inquired of by Sāṅkhyāyana Muni, 
explained Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam as he had heard 
it from Sa ṅkarṣaṇa (7).The great sage 
Sāṅkhyāyana was the chief amongst the tran-
scendentalists, and when he was describing the 
glories of the Lord in terms of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam, it so happened t hat my spiritual 
master, Parāśara, and B ṛhaspati both heard him  
(8).The great sage Parāśara, as aforementioned, 
being so advised by the great sage Pulastya, 
spoke unto me the foremost of the Purā ṇas 
[Bhāgavatam]. I shall also describe this before 
you, my d ear son, in terms of my hearing, be-
cause you are always my faithful follower  (9).  
At that time when the three worlds were sub-
merged in water, Garbhodakaśāyī Vi ṣṇu was 
alone, lying on His bedstead, the great snake 
Ananta, and although He appeared to be in 
slumber in His own internal potency, free from 
the action of the external energy, His eyes were 
not completely closed  (10). Just like the 
strength of fire within fuel wood, the Lord re-
mained within the water of dissolution, sub-
merging all the living entiti es in their subtle 
bodies. He lay in the self -invigorated energy 
called kāla  (11). The Lord lay down for a thou-
sand cycles of four yugas in His internal po-
tency, and by His external energy He appeared 
to be sleeping within the water. When the living 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

126 
 entiti es were coming out for further develop-
ment of their fruitive activities, actuated by the 
energy called kāla -śakti, He saw His transcen-
dental body as bluish  (12).The subtle subject 
matter of creation, on which the Lord’s atten-
tion was fixed, was agitated by  the material 
mode of passion, and thus the subtle form of 
creation pierced through His abdomen  (13).  
Piercing through, this sum total form of the fru-
itive activity of the living entities took the 
shape of the bud of a lotus flower generated 
from the Pers onality of Vi ṣṇu, and by His su-
preme will it illuminated everything, like the 
sun, and dried up the vast waters of devastation  
(14). Into that universal lotus flower Lord 
Viṣṇu personally entered as the Supersoul, and 
when it was thus impregnated with all the 
modes of material nature, the personality of Ve-
dic wisdom, whom we call the self -born, was 
generated  (15). Brahmā, born out of the lotus 
flower, could not see the world, although he 
was situated in the whorl. He therefore circum-
ambulated all of space, and while moving his 
eyes in all directions he achieved four heads in 
terms of the four directions  (16). Lord Brahmā, 
situated in that lotus, could not perfectly under-
stand the creation, the lotus or himself. At the 
end of the millennium the air of devasta tion be-
gan to move the water and the lotus in great cir-
cular waves  (17).  
Lord Brahmā, in his ignorance, contem-
plated: Who am I that am situated on the top of 
this lotus? Wherefrom has it sprouted? There 
must be something downwards, and that from 
which thi s lotus has grown must be within the 
water  (18).  
Lord Brahmā, thus contemplating, entered 
the water through the channel of the stem of the 
lotus. But in spite of entering the stem and go-
ing nearer to the navel of Vi ṣṇu, he could not 
trace out the root  (19).O Vidura, while search-
ing in that way about his existence, Brahmā 
reached his ultimate time, which is the eternal 
wheel in the hand of Vi ṣṇu and which generates 
fear in the mind of the living entity like the fear 
of death  (20). Thereafter, being unable t o 
achieve the desired destination, he retired from 
such searching and came back again to the top of the lotus. Thus, controlling all objectives, he 
concentrated his mind on the Supreme Lord  
(21). At the end of Brahmā’s one hundred 
years, when his meditatio n was complete, he 
developed the required knowledge, and as a re-
sult he could see in his heart the Supreme 
within himself, whom he could not see before 
with the greatest endeavor  (22).Brahmā could 
see that on the water there was a gigantic lo-
tuslike white bedstead, the body of Śe ṣa-nāga, 
on which the Personality of Godhead was lying 
alone. The whole atmosphere was illuminated 
by the rays of the jewels bedecking the hood of 
Śeṣa-nāga, and that illumination dissipated all 
the darkness of those regions (23).The luster of 
the transcendental body of the Lord mocked the 
beauty of the coral mountain. The coral moun-
tain is very beautifully dressed by the evening 
sky, but the yellow dress of the Lord mocked 
its beauty. There is gold on the summit of the 
mountain, but the Lord’s helmet, bedecked 
with jewels, m ocked it. The mountain’s water-
falls, herbs, etc., with a panorama of flowers, 
seem like garlands, but the Lord’s gigantic 
body, and His hands and legs, decorated with 
jewels, pearls, tulasī leaves and flower gar-
lands, mocked the scene on the mountain  
(24).His transcendental body, unlimited in 
length and breadth, occupied the three plane-
tary systems, upper, middle and lower. His 
body was self -illuminated by unparalleled 
dress and variegatedness and was properly or-
namented  (25).  The Lord showed His lotus fee t 
by raising them. His lotus feet are the source of 
all awards achieved by devotional service free 
from material contamination. Such awards are 
for those who worship Him in pure devotion. 
The splendor of the transcendental rays from 
His moonlike toenails a nd fingernails appeared 
like the petals of a flower  (26).He also 
acknowledged the service of the devotees and 
vanquished their distress by His beautiful 
smile. The reflection of His face, decorated 
with earrings, was so pleasing because it daz-
zled with the  rays from His lips and the beauty 
of His nose and eyebrows  (27). O my dear 
Vidura, the Lord’s waist was covered with yel-
low cloth resembling the saffron dust of the ka-
damba flower, and it was encircled by a well -
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

127 
 decorated belt. His chest was decorated wit h 
the śrīvatsa marking and a necklace of unlim-
ited value  (28).As a sandalwood tree is deco-
rated with fragrant flowers and branches, the 
Lord’s body was decorated with valuable jew-
els and pearls. He was the self -situated tree, the 
Lord of all others in the universe. And as a san-
dalwood tree is covered with many snakes, so 
the Lord’s body was also covered by the hoods 
of Ananta  (29). Like a great mountain, the Lord 
stands as the abode for all moving and nonmov-
ing living entities. He is the friend of the snake s 
because Lord Ananta is His friend. As a moun-
tain has thousands of golden peaks, so the Lord 
was seen with the thousands of golden -hel-
meted hoods of Ananta -nāga; and as a moun-
tain is sometimes filled with jewels, so also His 
transcendental body was fully decorated with 
valuable jewels. As a mountains is sometimes 
submerged in the ocean water, so the Lord is 
sometimes submerged in the water of devasta-
tion (30). Lord Brahmā, thus looking upon the 
Lord in the shape of a mountain, concluded that 
He was Hari, t he Personality of Godhead. He 
saw that the garland of flowers on His chest 
glorified Him with Vedic wisdom in sweet 
songs and looked very beautiful. He was pro-
tected by the Sudarśana wheel for fighting, and 
even the sun, moon, air, fire, etc., could not 
have access to Him  (31).  
When Lord Brahmā, the maker of the uni-
versal destination, thus saw the Lord, he simul-
taneously glanced over creation. Lord Brahmā 
saw the lake in Lord Vi ṣṇu’s navel, and the lo-
tus flower, as well as the devastating water, the 
drying  air and the sky. All became visible to 
him (32).  Lord Brahmā, thus being surcharged 
with the mode of passion, became inclined to 
create, and after seeing the five causes of crea-
tion indicated by the Personality of Godhead, 
he began to offer his respectfu l prayers on the 
path of the creative mentality  (33).  
SB 3.9: Brahmā’s Prayers for Creative 
Energy  
Lord Brahmā said:  O my Lord, today, after 
many, many years of penance, I have come to 
know about You. Oh, how unfortunate the em-
bodied living entities are t hat they are unable to know Your personality! My Lord, You are the 
only knowable object because there is nothing 
supreme beyond You. If there is anything sup-
posedly superior to You, it is not the Absolute. 
You exist as the Supreme by exhibiting the cre-
ative energy of matter  (1). The form which I see 
is eternally freed from material contamination 
and has advented to show mercy to the devotees 
as a manifestation of internal potency. This in-
carnation is the origin of many other incarna-
tions, and I am born from  the lotus flower 
grown from Your navel home  (2). O my Lord, 
I do not see a form superior to Your present 
form of eternal bliss and knowledge. In Your 
impersonal Brahman effulgence in the spiritual 
sky, there is no occasional change and no dete-
rioration of  internal potency. I surrender unto 
You because whereas I am proud of my mate-
rial body and senses, Your Lordship is the 
cause of the cosmic manifestation and yet You 
are untouched by matter  (3).  This present form, 
or any transcendental form expanded by th e Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, is 
equally auspicious for all the universes. Since 
You have manifested this eternal personal form 
upon whom Your devotees meditate, I there-
fore offer my respectful obeisances unto You. 
Those who are destined to be dispatched to the 
path of hell neglect Your personal form be-
cause of speculating on material topics  (4). O 
my Lord, persons who smell the aroma of Your 
lotus feet, carried by the air of Vedic sound 
through the holes of the ears, accept Your de-
votional s ervice. For them You are never sepa-
rated from the lotus of their hearts  (5). O my 
Lord, the people of the world are embarrassed 
by all material anxieties  they are always afraid. 
They always try to protect wealth, body and 
friends, they are filled with lam entation and un-
lawful desires and paraphernalia, and they ava-
riciously base their undertakings on the perish-
able conceptions of “my” and “mine.” As long 
as they do not take shelter of Your safe lotus 
feet, they are full of such anxieties  (6). O my 
Lord, pe rsons who are bereft of the all -auspi-
cious performance of chanting and hearing 
about Your transcendental activities are cer-
tainly unfortunate and are also bereft of good 
sense. They engage in inauspicious activities, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

128 
 enjoying sense gratification for a very  little 
while  (7).O great actor, my Lord, all these poor 
creatures are constantly perplexed by hunger, 
thirst, severe cold, secretion and bile, attacked 
by coughing winter, blasting summer, rains and 
many other disturbing elements, and over-
whelmed by stron g sex urges and indefatigable 
anger. I take pity on them, and I am very much 
aggrieved for them  (8).O my Lord, the material 
miseries are without factual existence for the 
soul. Yet as long as the conditioned soul sees 
the body as meant for sense enjoyment,  he can-
not get out of the entanglement of material mis-
eries, being influenced by Your external energy  
(9).  
Such nondevotees engage their senses in 
very troublesome and extensive work, and they 
suffer insomnia at night because their intelli-
gence constantly  breaks their sleep with various 
mental speculations. They are frustrated in all 
their various plans by supernatural power. Even 
great sages, if they are against Your transcen-
dental topics, must rotate in this material world  
(10). O my Lord, Your devotees can see You 
through the ears by the process of bona fide 
hearing, and thus their hearts become cleansed, 
and You take Your seat there. You are so mer-
ciful to Your devotees that You manifest Your-
self in the particular eternal form of transcend-
ence in which they always think of You  (11). 
My Lord, You are not very much satisfied by 
the worship of the demigods, who arrange for 
Your worship very pompously, with various 
paraphernalia, but who are full of material 
hankerings. You are situated in everyone’s 
heart a s the Supersoul just to show Your cause-
less mercy, and You are the eternal well -
wisher, but You are unavailable for the nondev-
otee (12). But the pious activities of the people, 
such as performance of Vedic rituals, charity, 
austere penances and transcenden tal service, 
performed with a view to worship You and sat-
isfy You by offering You the fruitive results, 
are also beneficial. Such acts of religion never 
go in vain  (13).Let me offer my obeisances 
unto the Supreme Transcendence, who is eter-
nally distinguish ed by His internal potency. His 
indistinguishable impersonal feature is realized 
by intelligence for self -realization. I offer my obeisances unto Him who by His pastimes en-
joys the creation, maintenance and dissolution 
of the cosmic manifestation  (14).Let me take 
shelter of the lotus feet of Him whose incarna-
tions, qualities and activities are mysterious im-
itations of worldly affairs. One who invokes 
His transcendental names, even unconsciously, 
at the time he quits this life, is certainly washed 
immediatel y of the sins of many, many births 
and attains Him without fail  (15). Your Lord-
ship is the prime root of the tree of the planetary 
systems. This tree has grown by first penetrat-
ing the material nature in three trunks  as me, 
Śiva and You, the Almighty  for  creation, 
maintenance and dissolution, and we three have 
grown with many branches. Therefore I offer 
my obeisances unto You, the tree of the cosmic 
manifestation  (16). People in general all engage 
in foolish acts, not in the really beneficial activ-
ities e nunciated directly by You for their guid-
ance. As long as their tendency for foolish work 
remains powerful, all their plans in the struggle 
for existence will be cut to pieces. I therefore 
offer my obeisances unto Him who acts as eter-
nal time  (17). Your Lor dship, I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You who are indefati-
gable time and the enjoyer of all sacrifices. Alt-
hough I am situated in an abode which will con-
tinue to exist for a time duration of two 
parārdhas, although I am the leader of all other 
plane ts in the universe, and although I have un-
dergone many, many years of penance for self -
realization, still I offer my respects unto You  
(18).O my Lord, by Your own will You appear 
in the various species of living entities, among 
animals lower than human bei ngs as well as 
among the demigods, to perform Your tran-
scendental pastimes. You are not affected by 
material contamination. You come just to fulfill 
the obligations of Your own principles of reli-
gion, and therefore, O Supreme Personality, I 
offer my obeisa nces unto You for manifesting 
such different forms  (19). My Lord, You accept 
the pleasure of sleeping in the water of devas-
tation, where there are violent waves, and You 
enjoy pleasure on the bed of snakes, showing 
the happiness of Your sleep to intelligen t per-
sons. At that time, all the universal planets are 
stationed within Your abdomen  (20).O object 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

129 
 of my worship, I am born from the house of 
Your lotus navel for the purpose of creating the 
universe by Your mercy. All these planets of 
the universe were st ationed within Your tran-
scendental abdomen while You were enjoying 
sleep. Now, Your sleep having ended, Your 
eyes are open like blossoming lotuses in the 
morning  (21).Let the Supreme Lord be merci-
ful towards me. He is the one friend and soul of 
all living entities in the world, and He main-
tains all, for their ultimate happiness, by His six 
transcendental opulences. May He be merciful 
towards me so that I, as before, may be empow-
ered with the introspection to create, for I am 
also one of the surrendered soul s who are dear 
to the Lord  (22).  The Supreme Lord, the Per-
sonality of Godhead, is always the benefactor 
of the surrendered souls. His activities are al-
ways enacted through His internal potency, 
Ramā, or the goddess of fortune. I pray only to 
engage in His  service in the creation of the ma-
terial world, and I pray that I not be materially 
affected by my works, for thus I may be able to 
give up the false prestige of being the creator  
(23).The Lord’s potencies are innumerable. As 
He lies down in the water of d evastation, I am 
born as the total universal energy from the na-
vel lake in which the lotus sprouts. I am now 
engaged in manifesting His diverse energies in 
the form of the cosmic manifestation. I there-
fore pray that in the course of my material ac-
tivities I may not be deviated from the vibration 
of the Vedic hymns  (24). The Lord, who is su-
preme and is the oldest of all, is unlimitedly 
merciful. I wish that He may smilingly bestow 
His benediction upon me by opening His lotus 
eyes. He can uplift the entire co smic creation 
and remove our dejection by kindly speaking 
His directions  (25).  
The sage Maitreya said : O Vidura, after 
observing the source of his appearance, namely 
the Personality of Godhead, Brahmā prayed for 
His mercy as far as his mind and words would 
permit him. Thus having prayed, he became si-
lent, as if tired from his activities of penance, 
knowle dge and mental concentration  (26).The 
Lord saw that Brahmā was very anxious about 
the planning and construction of the different planetary systems and was depressed upon see-
ing the devastating water. He could understand 
the intention of Brahmā, and thus He  spoke in 
deep, thoughtful words, removing all the illu-
sion that had arisen  (27-28).  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
then said : O Brahmā, O depth of Vedic wis-
dom, be neither depressed nor anxious about 
the execution of creation. What you are beg-
ging fr om Me has already been granted before  
(29). O Brahmā, situate yourself in penance and 
meditation and follow the principles of 
knowledge to receive My favor. By these ac-
tions you will be able to understand everything 
from within your heart  (30).O Brahmā, wh en 
you are absorbed in devotional service, in the 
course of your creative activities, you will see 
Me in you and throughout the universe, and you 
will see that you yourself, the universe and the 
living entities are all in Me  (31). You will see 
Me in all li ving entities as well as all over the 
universe, just as fire is situated in wood. Only 
in that state of transcendental vision will you be 
able to be free from all kinds of illusion  
(32).When you are free from the conception of 
gross and subtle bodies and w hen your senses 
are free from all influences of the modes of ma-
terial nature, you will realize your pure form in 
My association. At that time you will be situ-
ated in pure consciousness  (33).  Since you 
have desired to increase the population innu-
merably an d expand your varieties of service, 
you shall never be deprived in this matter be-
cause My causeless mercy upon you will al-
ways increase for all time  (34).You are the 
original ṛṣi, and because your mind is always 
fixed on Me, even though you will be engaged 
in generating various progeny the vicious mode 
of passion will never encroach upon you  (35). 
Although I am not easily knowable by the con-
ditioned soul, you have known Me today be-
cause you know that My personality is not con-
stituted of anything material, and specifically 
not of the five gross and three subtle elements  
(36).When you were contemplating whether 
there was a source to the stem of the lotus of 
your birth and you even entered into that stem, 
you could not trace out anything. But at that 
time I manifested My form from within  (37). 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

130 
 O Brahmā, the prayers that you have 
chanted praising the glories of My transcenden-
tal activities, the penances you have undertaken 
to understand Me, and your firm faith in Me  all 
these are to be considered My causeless mercy  
(38). I am very much pleased b y your descrip-
tion of Me in terms of My transcendental qual-
ities, which appear mundane to the mundaners. 
I grant you all benedictions in your desire to 
glorify all the planets by your activities  (39).  
Any human being who prays like Brahmā, and 
who thus wo rships Me, shall very soon be 
blessed with the fulfillment of all his desires, 
for I am the Lord of all benediction  (40).  It is 
the opinion of expert transcendentalists that the 
ultimate goal of performing all traditional good 
works, penances, sacrifices,  charities, mystic 
activities, trances, etc., is to invoke My satis-
faction  (41).I am the Supersoul of every indi-
vidual. I am the supreme director and the dear-
est. People are wrongly attached to the gross 
and subtle bodies, but they should be attached 
to Me  only (42).  By following My instructions 
you can now generate the living entities as be-
fore, by dint of your complete Vedic wisdom 
and the body you have directly received from 
Me, the supreme cause of everything  (43).  
The sage Maitreya said : After instru cting 
Brahmā, the creator of the universe, to expand, 
the primeval Lord, the Personality of Godhead 
in His personal form as Nārāya ṇa, disappeared  
(44).  
SB 3.10: Divisions of the Creation  
Śrī Vidura said:  O great sage, please let me 
know how Brahmā, the gr andfather of the plan-
etary inhabitants, created the bodies of the liv-
ing entities from his own body and mind after 
the disappearance of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead  (1).O greatly learned one, kindly 
eradicate all my doubts, and let me know of all 
that I have inquired from you from the begin-
ning to the end  (2).  
Sūta Gosvāmī said:  O son of Bh ṛgu, the 
great sage Maitreya Muni, thus hearing from 
Vidura, felt very much enlivened. Everything 
was in his heart, and thus he began to reply to 
the questions one after another  (3).  The greatly learned sage Maitreya said : O 
Vidura, Brahmā thus engaged himself in pen-
ances for one hundred celestial years, as ad-
vised by the Personality of Godhead, and ap-
plied himself in devotional service to the Lord  
(4).  Thereafter Brahmā saw that both the lotus 
on which he was situated and th e water on 
which the lotus was growing were trembling 
due to a strong, violent wind  (5).Long penance 
and transcendental knowledge of self -realiza-
tion had matured Brahmā in practical 
knowledge, and thus he drank the wind com-
pletely, along with the water  (6).Thereafter he 
saw that the lotus on which he was situated was 
spread throughout the universe, and he contem-
plated how to create all the planets, which were 
previously merged in that very same lotus  (7). 
Thus engaged in the service of the Supreme 
Personali ty of Godhead, Lord Brahmā entered 
into the whorl of the lotus, and as it spread all 
over the universe he divided it into three divi-
sions of worlds and later into fourteen divisions  
(8). Lord Brahmā is the most exalted personal-
ity in the universe because o f his causeless de-
votional service unto the Lord in mature tran-
scendental knowledge. He therefore created all 
the fourteen planetary divisions for inhabitation 
by the different types of living entities  (9).  
Vidura inquired  from Maitreya: O my lord, 
O grea tly learned sage, kindly describe eternal 
time, which is another form of the Supreme 
Lord, the wonderful actor. What are the symp-
toms of that eternal time? Please describe them 
to us in detail  (10).  
Maitreya said : Eternal time is the primeval 
source of th e interactions of the three modes of 
material nature. It is unchangeable and limit-
less, and it works as the instrument of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead for His pastimes 
in the material creation  (11).This cosmic mani-
festation is separated from the Supr eme Lord as 
material energy by means of kāla, which is the 
unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Lord. 
It is situated as the objective manifestation of 
the Lord under the influence of the same mate-
rial energy of Vi ṣṇu (12).This cosmic manifes-
tation is as  it is now, it was the same in the past, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

131 
 and it will continue in the same way in the fu-
ture (13).There are nine different kinds of cre-
ations besides the one which naturally occurs 
due to the interactions of the modes. There are 
three kinds of annihilations  due to eternal time, 
the material elements and the quality of one’s 
work  (14).Of the nine creations, the first one is 
the creation of the mahat -tattva, or the sum total 
of the material ingredients, wherein the modes 
interact due to the presence of the Sup reme 
Lord. In the second, the false ego is generated, 
in which the material ingredients, material 
knowledge and material activities arise  
(15).The sense perceptions are created in the 
third creation, and from these the elements are 
generated. The fourth cr eation is the creation of 
knowledge and of working capacity  (16). The 
fifth creation is that of the controlling deities by 
the interaction of the mode of goodness, of 
which the mind is the sum total. The sixth cre-
ation is the ignorant darkness of the livin g en-
tity, by which the master acts as a fool  (17).  
All the above are natural creations by the ex-
ternal energy of the Lord. Now hear from me 
about the creations by Brahmā, who is an incar-
nation of the mode of passion and who, in the 
matter of creation, has  a brain like that of the 
Personality of Godhead  (18).The seventh crea-
tion is that of the immovable entities, which are 
of six kinds: the fruit trees without flowers, 
trees and plants which exist until the fruit is 
ripe, creepers, pipe plants, creepers whi ch have 
no support, and trees with flowers and fruits  
(19). All the immovable trees and plants seek 
their subsistence upwards. They are almost un-
conscious but have feelings of pain within. 
They are manifested in variegatedness  (20).The 
eighth creation is t hat of the lower species of 
life, and they are of different varieties, number-
ing twenty -eight. They are all extensively fool-
ish and ignorant. They know their desirables by 
smell, but are unable to remember anything 
within the heart  (21).O purest Vidura, of  the 
lower animals the cow, goat, buffalo, k ṛṣṇa 
stag, hog, gavaya animal, deer, lamb and camel 
all have cloven hooves  (22).The horse, mule, 
ass, gaura, śarabha bison and wild cow all have 
only one hoof. Now you may hear from me 
about the animals who have five nails  (23).The dog, jackal, tiger, fox, cat, rabbit, sajāru, lion, 
monkey, elephant, tortoise, alligator, gosāpa, 
etc., all have five nails in their claws. They are 
known as pañca -nakhas, or animals having five 
nails  (24).  The heron, vulture, crane, hawk, 
bhāsa, bhallūka, peacock, swan, sārasa, 
cakravāka, crow, owl and others are the birds  
(25).The creation of the human beings, who are 
of one species only and who stock their eatables 
in the belly, is the ninth in the rotation. In the 
human race, the m ode of passion is very prom-
inent. Humans are always busy in the midst of 
miserable life, but they think themselves happy 
in all respects  (26).  
O good Vidura, these last three creations and 
the creation of demigods (the tenth creation) 
are vaik ṛta creation s, which are different from 
the previously described prāk ṛta (natural) crea-
tions. The appearance of the Kumāras is both  
(27).The creation of the demigods is of eight 
varieties: (1) the demigods, (2) the forefathers, 
(3) the asuras, or demons, (4) the Gandh arvas 
and Apsarās, or angels, (5) the Yak ṣas and 
Rākṣasas, (6) the Siddhas, Cāra ṇas and 
Vidyādharas, (7) the Bhūtas, Pretas and 
Piśācas, and (8) the superhuman beings, celes-
tial singers, etc. All are created by Brahmā, the 
creator of the universe  (28).Now I shall de-
scribe the descendants of the Manus. The crea-
tor, Brahmā, as the incarnation of the passion 
mode of the Personality of Godhead, creates the 
universal affairs with unfailing desires in every 
millennium by the force of the Lord’s energy  
(29).  
SB 3.11: Calculation of Time, from the 
Atom  
The material manifestation’s ultimate parti-
cle, which is indivisible and not formed into a 
body, is called the atom. It exists always as an 
invisible identity, even after the dissolution of 
all forms. The material bo dy is but a combina-
tion of such atoms, but it is misunderstood by 
the common man  (1).Atoms are the ultimate 
state of the manifest universe. When they stay 
in their own forms without forming different 
bodies, they are called the unlimited oneness. 
There are  certainly different bodies in physical 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

132 
 forms, but the atoms themselves form the com-
plete manifestation  (2). One can estimate time 
by measuring the movement of the atomic com-
bination of bodies. Time is the potency of the 
almighty Personality of Godhead, Ha ri, who 
controls all physical movement although He is 
not visible in the physical world  (3). Atomic 
time is measured according to its covering a 
particular atomic space. That time which co-
vers the unmanifest aggregate of atoms is 
called the great time  (4).  
The division of gross time is calculated as 
follows: two atoms make one double atom, and 
three double atoms make one hexatom. This 
hexatom is visible in the sunshine which enters 
through the holes of a window screen. One can 
clearly see that the hexatom goes up towards 
the sky  (5).  The time duration needed for the 
integration of three trasare ṇus is called a tru ṭi, 
and one hundred tru ṭis make one vedha. Three 
vedhas make one lava  (6).The duration of time 
of three lavas is equal to one nime ṣa, the com-
bination of three nime ṣas makes one k ṣaṇa, five 
kṣaṇas combined together make one kā ṣṭhā, 
and fifteen kā ṣṭhās make one laghu  (7).Fifteen 
laghus make one nā ḍikā, which is also called a 
daṇḍa. Two da ṇḍas make one muhūrta, and six 
or seven da ṇḍas make one fourth of a day or 
night, according  to human calculation  (8).The 
measuring pot for one nā ḍikā, or da ṇḍa, can be 
prepared with a six -pala-weight [fourteen 
ounce] pot of copper, in which a hole is bored 
with a gold probe weighing four mā ṣa and 
measuring four fingers long. When the pot is 
placed on water, the time before the water over-
flows in the pot is called one da ṇḍa (9).It is cal-
culated that there are four praharas, which are 
also called yāmas, in the day and four in the 
night of the human being. Similarly, fifteen 
days and nights are a fo rtnight, and there are 
two fortnights, white and black, in a month  
(10). The aggregate of two fortnights is one 
month, and that period is one complete day and 
night for the Pitā planets. Two of such months 
comprise one season, and six months comprise 
one c omplete movement of the sun from south 
to north  (11).  Two solar movements make one 
day and night of the demigods, and that combi-nation of day and night is one complete calen-
dar year for the human being. The human being 
has a duration of life of one hundre d years  (12).  
Influential stars, planets, luminaries and atoms 
all over the universe are rotating in their respec-
tive orbits under the direction of the Supreme, 
represented by eternal kāla  (13).  There are five 
different names for the orbits of the sun, moon, 
stars a nd luminaries in the firmament, and they 
each have their own sa ṁvatsara  (14). O Vidura, 
the sun enlivens all living entities with his un-
limited heat and light. He diminishes the dura-
tion of life of all living entities in order to re-
lease them from their il lusion of material at-
tachment, and he enlarges the path of elevation 
to the heavenly kingdom. He thus moves in the 
firmament with great velocity, and therefore 
everyone should offer him respects once every 
five years with all ingredients of worship  (15).  
I now understand the life durations of the 
residents of the Pitā planets and heavenly plan-
ets as well as that of the human beings. Now 
kindly inform me of the durations of life of 
those greatly learned living entities who are be-
yond the range of a kalpa  (16). O spiritually 
powerful one, you can understand the move-
ments of eternal time, which is the controlling 
form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Because you are a self -realized person, you can 
see everything by the power of mystic vision  
(17).  
Maitr eya said:  O Vidura, the four millenni-
ums are called the Satya -, Tretā -, Dvāpara - and 
Kali-yuga. The aggregate number of years of 
all of these combined is equal to twelve thou-
sand years of the demigods.The duration of the 
Satya millennium equals 4,800 years of the 
years of the demigods; the duration of the Tretā 
millennium equals 3,600 years of the demi-
gods; the duration of the Dvāpara millennium 
equals 2,400 years; and that of the Kali millen-
nium is 1,200 years of the demigods  (19).The 
transitional periods before an d after every mil-
lennium, which are a few hundred years as 
aforementioned, are known as yuga -sandhyās, 
or the conjunctions of two millenniums, ac-
cording to the expert astronomers. In those pe-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

133 
 riods all kinds of religious activities are per-
formed  (20). O Vid ura, in the Satya millennium 
mankind properly and completely maintained 
the principles of religion, but in other millenni-
ums religion gradually decreased by one part as 
irreligion was proportionately admitted  (21). 
Outside of the three planetary systems [S varga, 
Martya and Pātāla], the four yugas multiplied 
by one thousand comprise one day on the planet 
of Brahmā. A similar period comprises a night 
of Brahmā, in which the creator of the universe 
goes to sleep  (22). After the end of Brahmā’s 
night, the creat ion of the three worlds begins 
again in the daytime of Brahmā, and they con-
tinue to exist through the life durations of four-
teen consecutive Manus, or fathers of mankind  
(23).Each and every Manu enjoys a life of a lit-
tle more than seventy -one sets of four millenni-
ums (24).After the dissolution of each and 
every Manu, the next Manu comes in order, 
along with his descendants, who rule over the 
different planets; but the seven famous sages, 
and demigods like Indra and their followers, 
such as the Gandharvas, a ll appear simultane-
ously with Manu  (25).In the creation, during 
Brahmā’s day, the three planetary systems  
Svarga, Martya and Pātāla  revolve, and the in-
habitants, including the lower animals, human 
beings, demigods and Pitās, appear and disap-
pear in terms of their fruitive activities  (26). In 
each and every change of Manu, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead appears by manifesting 
His internal potency in different incarnations, 
as Manu and others. Thus He maintains the uni-
verse by discovered power  (27). At the end of 
the day, under the insignifi cant portion of the 
mode of darkness, the powerful manifestation 
of the universe merges in the darkness of night. 
By the influence of eternal time, the innumera-
ble living entities remain merged in that disso-
lution, and everything is silent  (28).When the 
night of Brahmā ensues, all the three worlds are 
out of sight, and the sun and the moon are with-
out glare, just as in the due course of an ordi-
nary night  (29). The devastation takes place due 
to the fire emanating from the mouth of 
Saṅkarṣaṇa, and thus great  sages like Bh ṛgu 
and other inhabitants of Maharloka transport 
themselves to Janaloka, being distressed by the warmth of the blazing fire which rages through 
the three worlds below  (30). At the beginning 
of the devastation all the seas overflow, and 
hurric ane winds blow very violently. Thus the 
waves of the seas become ferocious, and in no 
time at all the three worlds are full of water  
(31).The Supreme Lord, the Personality of 
Godhead, lies down in the water on the seat of 
Ananta, with His eyes closed, and the inhabit-
ants of the Janaloka planets offer unto the Lord 
their glorious prayers with folded hands  (32). 
Thus the process of the exhaustion of the du-
ration of life exists for every one of the living 
beings, includin g Lord Brahmā. One’s life en-
dures for only one hundred years, in terms of 
the times in the different planets  (33).The one 
hundred years of Brahmā’s life are divided into 
two parts, the first half and the second half. The 
first half of the duration of Brahm ā’s life is al-
ready over, and the second half is now current  
(34). In the beginning of the first half of 
Brahmā’s life, there was a millennium called 
Brāhma -kalpa, wherein Lord Brahmā ap-
peared. The birth of the Vedas was simultane-
ous with Brahmā’s birth  (35). The millennium 
which followed the first Brāhma millennium is 
known as the Pādma -kalpa because in that mil-
lennium the universal lotus flower grew out of 
the navel reservoir of water of the Personality 
of Godhead, Hari  (36).O descendant of Bha-
rata, the f irst millennium in the second half of 
the life of Brahmā is also known as the Vārāha 
millennium because the Personality of God-
head appeared in that millennium as the hog in-
carnation  (37). The duration of the two parts of 
Brahmā’s life, as above mentioned, is calcu-
lated to be equal to one nime ṣa [less than a sec-
ond] for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is unchanging and unlimited and is the 
cause of all causes of the universe  (38).  
Eternal time is certainly the controller of dif-
ferent dimensions, fro m that of the atom up to 
the superdivisions of the duration of Brahmā’s 
life; but, nevertheless, it is controlled by the Su-
preme. Time can control only those who are 
body conscious, even up to the Satyaloka or the 
other higher planets of the universe  (39).This 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

134 
 phenomenal material world is expanded to a di-
ameter of four billion miles, as a combination 
of eight material elements transformed into six-
teen further categories, within and without, as 
follows  (40). The layers or elements covering 
the universes are each ten times thicker than the 
one before, and all the universes clustered to-
gether appear like atoms in a huge combinati on. 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, is therefore said to be the original cause 
of all causes. Thus the spiritual abode of Vi ṣṇu 
is eternal without a doubt, and it is also the 
abode of Mahā -Viṣṇu, the origin of all manifes-
tations  (41).  
SB 3.12: Creation of the Kumāras and 
Others  
Śrī Maitreya said : O learned Vidura, so far 
I have explained to you the glories of the form 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His 
feature of kāla. Now you can hear from me 
about the creation of Brahmā, the reservoi r of 
all Vedic knowledge  (1). Brahmā first created 
the nescient engagements like self -deception, 
the sense of death, anger after frustration, the 
sense of false ownership, and the illusory bod-
ily conception, or forgetfulness of one’s real 
identity  (2).Seei ng such a misleading creation 
as a sinful task, Brahmā did not feel much 
pleasure in his activity, and therefore he puri-
fied himself by meditation on the Personality of 
Godhead. Then he began another term of crea-
tion (3).In the beginning, Brahmā created fo ur 
great sages named Sanaka, Sananda, Sanātana 
and Sanat -kumāra. All of them were unwilling 
to adopt materialistic activities because they 
were highly elevated due to their semen’s flow-
ing upwards  (4).Brahmā spoke to his sons after 
generating them. “My dea r sons,” he said, “now 
generate progeny.” But due to their being at-
tached to Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, they aimed at liberation, and there-
fore they expressed their unwillingness  (5).On 
the refusal of the sons to obey the order of their 
father, there was much anger generated in the 
mind of Brahmā, which he tried to control and 
not express  (6).Although he tried to curb his an-
ger, it came out from between his eyebrows, and a child mixed blue and red was immedi-
ately generated  (7).After his b irth he began to 
cry: O destiny maker, teacher of the universe, 
kindly designate my name and place  (8).  
The all -powerful Brahmā, who was born 
from the lotus flower, pacified the boy with 
gentle words, accepting his request, and said: 
Do not cry. I shall c ertainly do as you desire  
(9).Thereafter Brahmā said: O chief of the dem-
igods, you shall be called by the name Rudra by 
all people because you have so anxiously cried  
(10).My dear boy, I have already selected the 
following places for your residence: the he art, 
the senses, the air of life, the sky, the air, the 
fire, the water, the earth, the sun, the moon and 
austerity  (11).Lord Brahmā said: My dear boy 
Rudra, you have eleven other names: Manyu, 
Manu, Mahinasa, Mahān, Śiva, Ṛtadhvaja, 
Ugraretā, Bhava, Kāla,  Vāmadeva and Dh ṛtav-
rata (12).O Rudra, you also have eleven wives, 
called the Rudrā ṇīs, and they are as follows: 
Dhī, Dh ṛti, Rasalā, Umā, Niyut, Sarpi, Ilā, Am-
bikā, Irāvatī, Svadhā and Dīk ṣā (13). My dear 
boy, you may now accept all the names and 
places de signated for you and your different 
wives, and since you are now one of the masters 
of the living entities, you may increase the pop-
ulation on a large scale  (14).  
The most powerful Rudra, whose bodily 
color was blue mixed with red, created many 
offspring exactly resembling him in features, 
strength and furious nature  (15).  The sons and 
grandsons generated by Rudra were unlimit ed 
in number, and when they assembled together 
they attempted to devour the entire universe. 
When Brahmā, the father of the living entities, 
saw this, he became afraid of the situation  
(16).Brahmā told Rudra: O best among the 
demigods, there is no need for  you to generate 
living entities of this nature. They have begun 
to devastate everything on all sides with the 
fiery flames from their eyes, and they have 
even attacked me  (17). My dear son, you had 
better situate yourself in penance, which is aus-
picious f or all living entities and which will 
bring all benediction upon you. By penance 
only shall you be able to create the universe as 
it was before  (18).By penance only can one 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

135 
 even approach the Personality of Godhead, 
who is within the heart of every living e ntity 
and at the same time beyond the reach of all 
senses  (19).  
Śrī Maitreya said:  Thus Rudra, having 
been ordered by Brahmā, circumambulated his 
father, the master of the Vedas. Addressing him 
with words of assent, he entered the forest to 
perform auster e penances  (20).  
Brahmā, who was empowered by the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, thought of gen-
erating living entities and begot ten sons for the 
extension of the generations  (21).  Marīci, Atri, 
Aṅgirā, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bh ṛgu, Va-
siṣṭha, Dak ṣa, and the tenth son, Nārada, were 
thus born  (22).Nārada was born from the delib-
eration of Brahmā, which is the best part of the 
body. Vasi ṣṭha was born from his breathing, 
Dakṣa from a thumb, Bh ṛgu from his touch, and 
Kratu from his hand  (23).Pulastya was gen er-
ated from the ears, A ṅgirā from the mouth, Atri 
from the eyes, Marīci from the mind and Pulaha 
from the navel of Brahmā  (24).  Religion was 
manifested from the breast of Brahmā, wherein 
is seated the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
Nārāya ṇa, and irreligio n appeared from his 
back, where horrible death takes place for the 
living entity  (25). Lust and desire became man-
ifested from the heart of Brahmā, anger from 
between his eyebrows, greed from between his 
lips, the power of speaking from his mouth, the 
ocean  from his penis, and low and abominable 
activities from his anus, the source of all sins  
(26).Sage Kardama, husband  of the great 
Devahūti, was manifested from the shadow of 
Brahmā. Thus all became manifested from ei-
ther the body or the mind of Brahmā  (27). 
O Vidura, we have heard that Brahmā had a 
daughter named Vāk who was born from his 
body and who attracted his mind toward sex, 
although she was not sexually inclined towards 
him (28).Thus, finding their father so deluded 
in an act of immorality, the sages  headed by 
Marīci, all sons of Brahmā, spoke as follows 
with great respect  (29).O father, this perfor-
mance in which you are endeavoring to compli-
cate yourself was never attempted by any other Brahmā, nor by anyone else, nor by you in pre-
vious kalpas, nor w ill anyone dare to attempt it 
in the future. You are the supreme being in the 
universe, so how is it that you want to have sex 
with your daughter and cannot control your de-
sire? (30) Even though you are the most pow-
erful being, this act does not suit you b ecause 
your character is followed for spiritual im-
provement by people in general  (31).Let us of-
fer our respectful obeisances unto the Personal-
ity of Godhead, who, by His own effulgence, 
while situated in Himself, has manifested this 
cosmos. May He also pro tect religion for all 
goodness  (32). The father of all Prajāpatis, 
Brahmā, thus seeing all his Prajāpati sons 
speaking in that way, became very much 
ashamed and at once gave up the body he had 
accepted. Later that body appeared in all direc-
tions as the dan gerous fog in darkness  (33).  
Once upon a time, when Brahmā was think-
ing of how to create the worlds as in the past 
millennium, the four Vedas, which contain all 
varieties of knowledge, became manifested 
from his four mouths  (34).The four kinds of 
parapher nalia for conducting the fire sacrifice 
became manifest: the performer [the chanter], 
the offerer, the fire, and the action performed in 
terms of the supplementary Vedas. Also the 
four principles of religiosity [truth, austerity, 
mercy and cleanliness] and  the duties in the 
four social orders all became manifest  (35).  
Vidura said:  O great sage whose only 
wealth is penance, kindly explain to me how 
and with whose help Brahmā established the 
Vedic knowledge which emanated from his 
mouth  (36).  
Maitreya said:  Beginning from the front 
face of Brahmā, gradually the four Vedas  Ṛk, 
Yajur , Sāma and Atharva  became manifest. 
Thereafter, Vedic hymns which had not been 
pronounced before, priestly rituals, the subject 
matters of the recitation, and transcendental ac-
tivities were all established, one after another  
(37).He also created the medic al science, mili-
tary art, musical art and architectural science, 
all from the Vedas. They all emanated one after 
another, beginning from the front face  
(38).Then he created the fifth Veda  the Purā ṇas 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

136 
 and the histories  from all his mouths, since he 
could see all the past, present and future  
(39).All the different varieties of fire sacrifices 
[ṣoḍaśī, uktha, purī ṣi, agni ṣṭoma, āptoryāma, 
atirātra, vājapeya and gosava] became mani-
fested from the eastern mouth of Brahmā  (40).  
Education, charity, penance and truth are said 
to be the four legs of religion, and to learn this 
there are four orders of life with different clas-
sifications of castes according to vocation. 
Brahmā created all these in systematic order  
(41).Then the thread ceremony for the twice -
born wa s inaugurated, as were the rules to be 
followed for at least one year after acceptance 
of the Vedas, rules for observing complete ab-
stinence from sex life, vocations in terms of 
Vedic injunctions, various professional duties 
in household life, and the meth od of maintain-
ing a livelihood without anyone’s cooperation 
by picking up rejected grains  (42).The four di-
visions of retired life are the vaikhānasas, 
vālakhilyas, audumbaras and phenapas. The 
four divisions of the renounced order of life are 
the ku ṭīcakas, bahvodas, ha ṁsas and ni ṣkriyas. 
All these were manifested from Brahmā  (43).  
The science of logical argument, the Vedic 
goals of life, and also law and order, moral 
codes and the celebrated hymns bhū ḥ, bhuva ḥ 
and sva ḥ all became manifested from the 
mouths of Brahmā, and the pra ṇava o ṁkāra 
was manifested from his heart  (44).Thereafter 
the art of l iterary expression, u ṣṇik, was gener-
ated from the hairs on the body of the almighty 
Prajāpati. The principal Vedic hymn, gāyatrī, 
was generated from the skin, tri ṣṭup from the 
flesh, anu ṣṭup from the veins, and jagatī from 
the bones of the lord of the livi ng entities  
(45).The art of writing verse, pa ṅkti, became 
manifested from the bone marrow, and that of 
bṛhatī, another type of verse, was generated 
from the life -breath of the lord of the living en-
tities  (46).Brahmā’s soul was manifested as the 
touch alpha bets, his body as the vowels, his 
senses as the sibilant alphabets, his strength as 
the intermediate alphabets and his sensual ac-
tivities as the seven notes of music  (47).Brahmā 
is the personal representation of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead as the so urce of tran-
scendental sound and is therefore above the conception of manifested and unmanifested. 
Brahmā is the complete form of the Absolute 
Truth and is invested with multifarious ener-
gies (48).  
Thereafter Brahmā accepted another body, 
in which sex lif e was not forbidden, and thus he 
engaged himself in the matter of further crea-
tion.O son of the Kurus, when Brahmā saw that 
in spite of the presence of sages of great po-
tency there was no sufficient increase in popu-
lation, he seriously began to consider ho w the 
population could be increased.Brahmā thought 
to himself: Alas, it is wonderful that in spite of 
my being scattered all over, there is still insuf-
ficient population throughout the universe. 
There is no other cause for this misfortune but 
destiny.While  he was thus absorbed in contem-
plation and was observing the supernatural 
power, two other forms were generated from 
his body. They are still celebrated as the body 
of Brahmā.The two newly separated bodies 
united together in a sexual relationship  (49-
52).Out of them, the one who had the male 
form became known as the Manu named 
Svāyambhuva, and the woman became known 
as Śatarūpā, the queen of the great soul Manu  
(53).Thereafter, by sex indulgence, they gradu-
ally increased generations of population one af-
ter another  (54).O son of Bharata, in due course 
of time he [Manu] begot in Śatarūpā five chil-
dren  two sons, Priyavrata and Uttānapāda, and 
three daughters, Ākūti, Devahūti and Prasūti  
(55). The father, Manu, handed over his first 
daughter, Ākūti, to the sage  Ruci, the middle 
daughter, Devahūti, to the sage Kardama, and 
the youngest, Prasūti, to Dak ṣa. From them, all 
the world filled with population  (56).  
SB 3.13: The Appearance of Lord 
Varāha  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said : O King, after 
hearing all these most vir tuous topics from the 
sage Maitreya, Vidura inquired further on the 
topics of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
which he adored to hear  (1).  
Vidura said:  O great sage, what did 
Svāyambhuva, the dear son of Brahmā, do after 
obtaining his very loving wife ? (2)O best of the 
virtuous, the original king of kings [Manu] was 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

137 
 a great devotee of the Personality of Godhead 
Hari, and thus it is worth hearing of his sublime 
character and activities. Please describe them. I 
am very eager to hear  (3).Persons who hear 
from a spiritual master with great labor and for 
a long time must hear from the mouths of pure 
devotees about the character and activities of 
pure devotees. Pure devotees always think 
within their hearts of the lotus feet of the Per-
sonality of Godhead, who  awards His devotees 
liberation  (4).  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said : The Personal-
ity of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, was pleased to place 
His lotus feet on the lap of Vidura because 
Vidura was very meek and gentle. The sage 
Maitreya was very pleased with Vidura’s 
words,  and, being influenced by his spirit, he 
attempted to speak  (5). 
The sage Maitreya said  to Vidura: After 
his appearance, Manu, the father of mankind, 
along with his wife, thus addressed the reser-
voir of Vedic wisdom, Brahmā, with obei-
sances and folded hand s (6).You are the father 
of all living entities and the source of their sub-
sistence because they are all born of you. Please 
order us how we may be able to render service 
unto you  (7).O worshipful one, please give us 
your direction for the execution of dut y within 
our working capacity so that we can follow it 
for fame in this life and progress in the next  (8).  
Lord Brahmā said:  My dear son, O lord of 
the world, I am very pleased with you, and I 
desire all blessings for both you and your wife. 
You have without reservation surrendered 
yourself unto me with your heart for my in-
structions  (9).O hero, your example is  quite be-
fitting a son in relationship with his father. This 
sort of adoration for the superior is required. 
One who is beyond the limit of envy and who 
is sane accepts the order of his father with great 
delight and executes it to his full capacity  
(10).Since you are my very obedient son, I ask 
you to beget children qualified like yourself in 
the womb of your wife. Rule the world in pur-
suance of the principles of devotional service 
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and 
thus worship the Lord by perfor mances of yajña  (11).O King, if you can give proper pro-
tection to the living beings in the material 
world, that will be the best service for me. 
When the Supreme Lord sees you to be a good 
protector of the conditioned souls, certainly the 
master of the sen ses will be very pleased with 
you (12).The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Janārdana [Lord K ṛṣṇa], is the form to accept 
all the results of sacrifice. If He is not satisfied, 
then one’s labor for advancement is futile. He 
is the ultimate Self, and therefore one who does 
not satisfy Him certain ly neglects his own in-
terests  (13).  
Śrī Manu said:  O all -powerful lord, O killer 
of all sins, I shall abide by your order. Now 
please let me know my place and that of the liv-
ing entities born of me  (14).O master of the 
demigods, please attempt to lift the  earth, 
which is merged in the great water, because it 
is the dwelling place for all the living entities. 
It can be done by your endeavor and by the 
mercy of the Lord  (15).  
Śrī Maitreya said:  Thus, seeing the earth 
merged in the water, Brahmā gave his att ention 
for a long time to how it could be lifted  
(16).Brahmā thought: While I have been en-
gaged in the process of creation, the earth has 
been inundated by a deluge and has gone down 
into the depths of the ocean. What can we do 
who are engaged in this matt er of creation? It is 
best to let the Almighty Lord direct us  (17).  
O sinless Vidura, all of a sudden, while 
Brahmā was engaged in thinking, a small form 
of a boar came out of his nostril. The measure-
ment of the creature was not more than the up-
per portio n of a thumb  (18). O descendant of 
Bharata, while Brahmā was observing Him, 
that boar became situated in the sky in a won-
derful manifestation as gigantic as a great ele-
phant  (19). Struck with wonder at observing the 
wonderful boarlike form in the sky, Brah mā, 
with great brāhma ṇas like Marīci, as well as the 
Kumāras and Manu, began to argue in various 
ways  (20).Is this some extraordinary entity 
come in the pretense of a boar? It is very won-
derful that He has come from my nose (21).  
First of all this boar was  seen no bigger than the 
tip of a thumb, and within a moment He was as 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

138 
 large as a stone. My mind is perturbed. Is He 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Viṣṇu?(22)While Brahmā was deliberating 
with his sons, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Vi ṣṇu, roare d tumultuously like a great 
mountain  (23).The omnipotent Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead enlivened Brahmā and the 
other highly elevated brāhma ṇas by again roar-
ing with His uncommon voice, which echoed in 
all directions  (24).When the great sages and 
thinkers  who are residents of Janaloka, Tapo-
loka and Satyaloka heard the tumultuous voice 
of Lord Boar, which was the all -auspicious 
sound of the all -merciful Lord, they chanted 
auspicious chants from the three Vedas  
(25).Playing like an elephant, He entered into 
the water after roaring again in reply to the Ve-
dic prayers by the great devotees. The Lord is 
the object of the Vedic prayers, and thus He un-
derstood that the devotees’ prayers were meant 
for Him  (26).Before entering the water to res-
cue the earth, Lord Bo ar flew in the sky, slash-
ing His tail, His hard hairs quivering. His very 
glance was luminous, and He scattered the 
clouds in the sky with His hooves and His glit-
tering white tusks  (27).He was personally the 
Supreme Lord Vi ṣṇu and was therefore tran-
scenden tal, yet because He had the body of a 
hog, He searched after the earth by smell. His 
tusks were fearful, and He glanced over the 
devotee -brāhma ṇas engaged in offering pray-
ers. Thus He entered the water  (28).Diving into 
the water like a giant mountain, Lord  Boar di-
vided the middle of the ocean, and two high 
waves appeared as the arms of the ocean, which 
cried loudly as if praying to the Lord, “O Lord 
of all sacrifices, please do not cut me in two! 
Kindly give me protection!” (29) Lord Boar 
penetrated the wat er with His hooves, which 
were like sharp arrows, and found the limits of 
the ocean, although it was unlimited. He saw 
the earth, the resting place for all living beings, 
lying as it was in the beginning of creatio n, and 
He personally lifted it (30).  
Lord Boar very easily took the earth on His 
tusks and got it out of the water. Thus He ap-
peared very splendid. Then, His anger glowing 
like the Sudarśana wheel, He immediately 
killed the demon [Hira ṇyākṣa], although he tried to fight with the Lord  (31).Thereupo n 
Lord Boar killed the demon within the water, 
just as a lion kills an elephant. The cheeks and 
tongue of the Lord became smeared with the 
blood of the demon, just as an elephant be-
comes reddish from digging in the purple earth  
(32).Then the Lord, playing like an elephant, 
suspended the earth on the edge of His curved 
white tusks. He assumed a bluish complexion 
like that of a tamāla tree, and thus the sages, 
headed by Brahmā, could understand Him to be 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and of-
fered respectf ul obeisances unto the Lord  (33).  
All the sages uttered with great respect:  O 
unconquerable enjoyer of all sacrifices, all glo-
ries and all victories unto You! You are moving 
in Your form of the personified Vedas, and in 
the hair holes of Your body the oce ans are sub-
merged. For certain reasons [to uplift the earth] 
You have now assumed the form of a boar  
(34).O Lord, Your form is worshipable by per-
formances of sacrifice, but souls who are 
simply  miscreants are unable to see it. All the 
Vedic hymns, Gāyatrī and others, are in the 
touch of Your skin. In Your bodily hairs is the 
kuśa grass, in Your eyes is the clarified butter, 
and in Your four legs are the four kinds of fru-
itive activities  (35).O L ord, Your tongue is a 
plate of sacrifice, Your nostril is another plate 
of sacrifice, in Your belly is the eating plate of 
sacrifice, and another plate of sacrifice is the 
holes of Your ears. In Your mouth is the 
Brahmā plate of sacrifice, Your throat is t he 
plate of sacrifice known as soma, and whatever 
You chew is known as agni -hotra  (36).Moreo-
ver, O Lord, the repetition of Your appearance 
is the desire for all kinds of initiation. Your 
neck is the place for three desires, and Your 
tusks are the result of  initiation and the end of 
all desires. Your tongue is the prior activities of 
initiation, Your head is the fire without sacri-
fice as well as the fire of worship, and Your liv-
ing forces are the aggregate of all desires  (37). 
O Lord, Your semen is the sacri fice called 
soma -yajña. Your growth is the ritualistic per-
formances of the morning. Your skin and touch 
sensations are the seven elements of the ag-
niṣṭoma sacrifice. Your bodily joints are sym-
bols of various other sacrifices performed in  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

139 
 twelve days. There fore You are the object of all 
sacrifices called soma and asoma, and You are 
bound by yajñas only  (38).O Lord, You are the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead and are wor-
shipable by universal prayers, Vedic hymns 
and sacrificial ingredients. We offer our obei-
sances unto You. You can be realized by the 
pure mind freed from all visible and invisible 
material contamination. We offer our respect-
ful obeisances to You as the supreme spiritual 
master of knowledge in devotional service  
(39).O lifter of the earth, the ear th with its 
mountains, which You have lifted with Your 
tusks, is situated as beautifully as a lotus flower 
with leaves sustained by an infuriated elephant 
just coming out of the water  (40). O Lord, as 
the peaks of great mountains become beautiful 
when deco rated with clouds, Your transcen-
dental body has become beautiful because of 
Your lifting the earth on the edge of Your tusks  
(41).O Lord, for the residential purposes of all 
inhabitants, both moving and nonmoving, this 
earth is Your wife, and You are the s upreme fa-
ther. We offer our respectful obeisances unto 
You, along with mother earth, in whom You 
have invested Your own potency, just as an ex-
pert sacrificer puts fire in the ara ṇi wood  
(42).Who else but You, the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, could deliv er the earth from 
within the water? It is not very wonderful for 
You, however, because You acted most won-
derfully in the creation of the universe. By 
Your energy You have created this wonderful 
cosmic manifestation  (43).O Supreme Lord, 
undoubtedly we are i nhabitants of the most pi-
ous planets  the Jana, Tapas and Satya lokas  
but still we have been purified by the drops of 
water sprinkled from Your shoulder hairs by 
the shaking of Your body  (44).O Lord, there is 
no limit to Your wonderful activities. Anyone 
who desires to know the limit of Your activities 
is certainly nonsensical. Everyone in this world 
is conditioned by the powerful mystic poten-
cies. Please bestow Your causeless mercy upon 
these conditioned souls  (45).  
The sage Maitreya said:  The Lord, bein g 
thus worshiped by all the great sages and tran-
scendentalists, touched the earth with His 
hooves and placed it on the water  (46). In this manner the Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Viṣṇu, the maintainer of all living entities, 
raised the earth from within the water, and hav-
ing placed it afloat on the water, He returned to 
His own abode  (47).If one hears and describes 
in a devotional s ervice attitude this auspicious 
narration of Lord Boar, which is worthy of de-
scription, the Lord, who is within the heart of 
everyone, is very pleased  (48).Nothing remains 
unachieved when the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is pleased with someone. By tran-
scendental achievement one understands eve-
rything else to be insignificant. One who en-
gages in transcendental loving service is ele-
vated to the highest perfectional stage by the 
Lord Himself, who is seated in everyone’s heart  
(49).Who, other than one who is  not a human 
being, can exist in this world and not be inter-
ested in the ultimate goal of life? Who can re-
fuse the nectar of narrations about the Person-
ality of Godhead’s activities, which by itself 
can deliver one from all material pangs? (50) 
SB 3.14: Pr egnancy of Diti in the Even-
ing 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After hearing 
from the great sage Maitreya about the Lord’s 
incarnation as Varāha, Vidura, who had taken a 
vow, begged him with folded hands to please 
narrate further transcendental activities of the 
Lord, since he [Vidura] did not y et feel satisfied  
(1).  
Śrī Vidura said:  O chief amongst the great 
sages, I have heard by disciplic succession that 
Hiraṇyākṣa, the original demon, was slain by 
the same form of sacrifices, the Personality of 
Godhead [Lord Boar]  (2).What was the reason, 
O brāhma ṇa, for the fight between the demon 
king and Lord Boar while the Lord was li fting 
the earth as His pastime? My mind has become 
very inquisitive, and therefore I am not satisfied 
with hearing the narration of the Lord’s appear-
ance. Please, therefore, speak more and more to 
a devotee who is faithful  (3).  
The great sage Maitreya said:  O warrior, 
the inquiry made by you is just befitting a dev-
otee because it concerns the incarnation of the 
Personality of Godhead. He is the source of lib-
eration from the c hain of birth and death for all 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

140 
 those who are otherwise destined to die  (4).By 
hearing these  topics from the sage [Nārada], the 
son of King Uttānapāda [Dhruva] was enlight-
ened regarding the Personality of Godhead, and 
he ascended to the abode of the Lord, placing 
his feet over the head of death  (5).This history 
of the fight between the Lord as a boar and the 
demon Hira ṇyākṣa was heard by me in a year 
long ago as it was described by the foremost of 
the demigods, Brahmā, when he was ques-
tioned by the other demigods  (6).Diti, daughter 
of Dak ṣa, being afflicted with sex desire, 
begged her husband , Kaś yapa, the son of 
Marīci, to have intercourse with her in the 
evening in order to beget a child  (7).The sun 
was setting, and the sage was sitting in trance 
after offering oblations to the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, whose tongue is the 
sacrificia l fire  (8).  
In that place the beautiful Diti expressed 
her desire : O learned one, Cupid is taking his 
arrows and distressing me forcibly, as a mad el-
ephant troubles a banana tree  (9). Therefore 
you should be kind towards me by showing me 
complete mercy. I  desire to have sons, and I am 
much distressed by seeing the opulence of my 
co-wives. By performing this act, you will be-
come happy  (10). A woman is honored in the 
world by the benediction of her husband , and a 
husband  like you will become famous by hav-
ing children because you are meant for the ex-
pansion of living entities  (11).In days long ago, 
our father, the most opulent Dak ṣa, who was af-
fectionate to his daughters, asked each of us 
separately whom we would prefer to select as 
our husband  (12).Our well -wishing father, 
Dakṣa, after knowing our intentions, handed 
over thirteen of his daughters unto you, and 
since then we have all been faithful  (13).O lo-
tus-eyed one, kindly bless me by fulfilling my 
desire. When someone in distress approaches a 
great person,  his pleas should never go in vain  
(14).  
O hero [Vidura], Diti, being thus afflicted by 
the contamination of lust, and therefore poor 
and talkative, was pacified by the son of Marīci 
in suitable words  (15).O afflicted one, I shall 
forthwith gratify whatev er desire is dear to you, for who else but you is the source of the three 
perfections of liberation? (16) As one can cross 
over the ocean with seagoing vessels, one can 
cross the dangerous situation of the material 
ocean by living with a wife  (17). O respe ctful 
one, a wife is so helpful that she is called the 
better half of a man’s body because of her shar-
ing in all auspicious activities. A man can move 
without anxiety entrusting all responsibilities to 
his wife  (18).As a fort commander very easily 
conquers  invading plunderers, by taking shelter 
of a wife one can conquer the senses, which are 
unconquerable in the other social orders  (19). 
O queen of the home, we are not able to act like 
you, nor could we repay you for what you have 
done, even if we worked fo r our entire life or 
even after death. To repay you is not possible, 
even for those who are admirers of personal 
qualities  (20). Even though it is not possible to 
repay you, I shall satisfy your sex desire imme-
diately for the sake of begetting children. Bu t 
you must wait for only a few seconds so that 
others may not reproach me  (21).This particu-
lar time is most inauspicious because at this 
time the horrible -looking ghosts and constant 
companions of the lord of the ghosts are visible  
(22).Lord Śiva, the king  of the ghosts, sitting 
on the back of his bull carrier, travels at this 
time, accompanied by ghosts who follow him 
for their welfare  (23).Lord Śiva’s body is red-
dish, and he is unstained, but he is covered with 
ashes. His hair is dusty from the whirlwind dust 
of the burning crematorium. He is the younger 
brother of your husband , and he sees with his 
three eyes  (24).Lord Śiva regards no one as his 
relative, yet there is no one who is not con-
nected with him. He does not regard anyone as 
very favorable or abo minable. We respectfully 
worship the remnants of his foodstuff, and we 
vow to accept what is rejected by him  (25).Alt-
hough no one in the material world is equal to 
or greater than Lord Śiva, and although his un-
impeachable character is followed by great 
souls to dismantle the mass of nescience, he 
nevertheless remains as if a devil to give salva-
tion to all devotees of the Lord  (26). Unfortu-
nate, foolish persons, not knowing that he is en-
gaged in his own self, laugh at him. Such fool-
ish persons engage in main taining the body  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

141 
 which is eatable by dogs  with dresses, orna-
ments, garlands and ointments  (27). Demigods 
like Brahmā also follow the religious rites ob-
served by him. He is the controller of the mate-
rial energy, which causes the creation of the 
material world. He is great, and therefore his 
devilish characteristics are simply imitation  
(28).  
Maitre ya said:  Diti was thus informed by 
her husband , but she was pressed by Cupid for 
sexual satisfaction. She caught hold of the 
clothing of the great brāhma ṇa sage, just like  a 
shameless public prostitute (29).  Understand-
ing his wife’s purpose, he was obliged  to per-
form the forbidden act, and thus after offering 
his obeisances unto worshipable fate, he lay 
with her in a secluded place  (30).Thereafter the 
brāhma ṇa took his bath in the water and con-
trolled his speech by practicing trance, meditat-
ing on the etern al effulgence and chanting the 
holy Gāyatrī hymns within his mouth  (31).O 
son of the Bharata family, Diti, after this, went 
nearer to her husband , her face lowered because 
of her faulty action. She spoke as follows  (32).  
The beautiful Diti said:  My dear 
brāhma ṇa, kindly see that my embryo is not 
killed by Lord Śiva, the lord of all living enti-
ties, because of the great offense I have com-
mitted against him  (33).Let me offer my obei-
sances unto the angry Lord Śiva, who is simul-
taneously the very ferocious gre at demigod and 
the fulfiller of all material desires. He is all -aus-
picious and forgiving, but his anger can imme-
diately move him to chastise  (34). Let him be 
pleased with us, since he is my brother -in-law, 
the husband  of my sister Satī. He is also the 
wors hipable lord of all women. He is the per-
sonality of all opulences and can show mercy 
towards women, who are excused even by the 
uncivilized hunters (35).  
Maitreya said:  The great sage Kaśyapa thus 
addressed his wife, who was trembling because 
of fear that her husband  was offended. She un-
derstood that he had been dissuaded from his 
daily duties of offering evening prayers, yet she 
desired the welfare of her children in the world  
(36).  
The learned Kaśyapa said:  Because of your mind’s being polluted, because of defile-
ment of the particular time, because of your 
negligence of my directions, and because of 
your being apathetic to the demigods, every-
thing was inauspicious  (37).O haughty one, 
you will have two contemptuous sons born of 
your condemned womb. Unlucky  woman, they 
will cause constant lamentation to all the three 
worlds!  (38) They will kill poor, faultless living 
entities, torture women and enrage the great 
souls  (39).At that time the Lord of the universe, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is 
the w ell-wisher of all living entities, will de-
scend and kill them, just as Indra smashes the 
mountains with his thunderbolts  (40).  
Diti said:  It is very good that my sons will 
be magnanimously killed by the arms of the 
Personality of Godhead with His Sudarśan a 
weapon. O my husband , may they never be 
killed by the wrath of the brāhma ṇa devotees  
(41).A person who is condemned by a 
brāhma ṇa or is always fearful to other living 
entities is not favored either by those who are 
already in hell or by those in the spec ies in 
which he is born  (42).  
The learned Kaśyapa said:  Because of 
your lamentation, penitence and proper delib-
eration, and also because of your unflinching 
faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
and your adoration for Lord Śiva and me, one 
of the so ns [Prahlāda] of your son 
[Hira ṇyakaśipu] will be an approved devotee of 
the Lord, and his fame will be broadcast 
equally with that of the Personality of Godhead  
(43-44). In order to follow in his footsteps, 
saintly persons will try to emulate his characte r 
by practicing freedom from animosity, just as 
the purifying processes rectify gold of inferior 
quality  (45).Everyone will be pleased with him 
because the Personality of Godhead, the su-
preme controller of the universe, is always sat-
isfied with a devotee w ho does not wish for an-
ything beyond Him  (46).That topmost devotee 
of the Lord will have expanded intelligence and 
expanded influence and will be the greatest of 
the great souls. Due to matured devotional ser-
vice, he will certainly be situated in transcen-
dental ecstasy and will enter the spiritual sky 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

142 
 after quitting this material world  (47).He will 
be a virtuously qualified reservoir of all good 
qualities; he will be jolly and happy in others’ 
happiness, distressed in others’ distress, and 
will have no enem ies. He will be a destroyer of 
the lamentation of all the universes, like the 
pleasant moon after the summer sun  (48).Your 
grandson will be able to see, inside and outside, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose 
wife is the beautiful goddess of fortune.  The 
Lord can assume the form desired by the devo-
tee, and His face is always beautifully deco-
rated with earrings  (49).  
The sage Maitreya said:  Hearing that her 
grandson would be a great devotee and that her 
sons would be killed by K ṛṣṇa, Diti was highly 
pleased in mind  (50).  
SB 3.15: Description of the Kingdom of 
God 
Śrī Maitreya said:  My dear Vidura, Diti, 
the wife of the sage Kaśyapa, could understand 
that the sons within her womb would be a cause 
of disturbance to the demigods. As such, she 
continuousl y bore the powerful semen of 
Kaśyapa Muni, which was meant to give trou-
ble to others, for one hundred years  (1).By the 
force of the pregnancy of Diti, the light of the 
sun and moon was impaired in all the planets, 
and the demigods of various planets, being  dis-
turbed by that force, asked the creator of the 
universe, Brahmā, “What is this expansion of 
darkness in all directions?” (2) 
The fortunate demigods said:  O great one, 
just see this darkness, which you know very 
well and which is causing us anxieties. B ecause 
the influence of time cannot touch you, there is 
nothing unmanifest before you  (3). O god of the 
demigods, sustainer of the universe, head jewel 
of all the demigods in other planets, you know 
the intentions of all living entities, in both the 
spirit ual and material worlds  (4). O original 
source of strength and scientific knowledge, all 
obeisances unto you! You have accepted the 
differentiated mode of passion from the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. With the help 
of external energy you are born of the  unmani-
fested source. All obeisances unto you! (5) O 
lord, all these planets exist within your self, and all the living entities are generated from you. 
Therefore you are the cause of this universe, 
and anyone who meditates upon you without 
deviation attai ns devotional service  (6).There is 
no defeat in this material world for persons who 
control the mind and senses by controlling the 
breathing process and who are therefore expe-
rienced, mature mystics. This is because by 
such perfection in yoga they have att ained your 
mercy  (7).  All the living entities within the uni-
verse are conducted by the Vedic directions, as 
a bull is directed by the rope attached to its 
nose. No one can violate the rules laid down in 
the Vedic literatures. To the chief person, who 
has contributed the Vedas, we offer our respect! 
(8) The demigods prayed to Brahmā: Please 
look upon us mercifully, for we have fallen into 
a miserable condition; because of the darkness, 
all our work has been suspended  (9).As fuel 
overloads a fire, so the embryo created by the 
semen of Kaśyapa in the womb of Diti has 
caused complete darkness throughout the uni-
verse  (10).  
Śrī Maitreya said:  Thus Lord Brahmā, who 
is understood by transcendental vibration, tried 
to satisfy the demigods, being pleased with 
their words of prayer  (11).  
Lord Brahmā said:  My four  sons Sanaka, 
Sanātana, Sanandana and Sanat -kumāra, who 
were born from my mind, are your predeces-
sors. Sometimes they travel throughout the ma-
terial and spiritual skies without any definite 
desire  (12).After thus traveling all over the uni-
verses, they also  entered into the spiritual sky, 
for they were freed from all material contami-
nation. In the spiritual sky there are spiritual 
planets known as Vaiku ṇṭhas, which are the 
residence of the Supreme Personality of God-
head and His pure devotees and are worshipe d 
by the residents of all the material planets  (13). 
In the Vaiku ṇṭha planets all the residents are 
similar in form to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. They all engage in devotional service 
to the Lord without desires for sense gratifica-
tion (14).In the  Vaiku ṇṭha planets is the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is the orig-
inal person and who can be understood through 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

143 
 the Vedic literature. He is full of the uncontam-
inated mode of goodness, with no place for pas-
sion or ignorance. He contributes religious  pro-
gress for the devotees  (15).In those Vaiku ṇṭha 
planets there are many forests which are very 
auspicious. In those forests the trees are desire 
trees, and in all seasons they are filled with 
flowers and fruits because everything in the 
Vaiku ṇṭha planets  is spiritual and personal  
(16).  
In the Vaiku ṇṭha planets the inhabitants fly 
in their airplanes, accompanied by their wives 
and consorts, and eternally sing of the character 
and activities of the Lord, which are always de-
void of all inauspicious qualitie s. While singing 
the glories of the Lord, they deride even the 
presence of the blossoming mādhavī flowers, 
which are fragrant and laden with honey  
(17).When the king of bees hums in a high 
pitch, singing the glories of the Lord, there is a 
temporary lull i n the noise of the pigeon, the 
cuckoo, the crane, the cakravāka, the swan, the 
parrot, the partridge and the peacock. Such 
transcendental birds stop their own singing 
simply to hear the glories of the Lord  (18).Alt-
hough flowering plants like the mandāra, 
kunda, kurabaka, utpala, campaka, ar ṇa, 
punnāga, nāgakeśara, bakula, lily and pārijāta 
are full of transcendental fragrance, they are 
still conscious of the austerities performed by 
tulasī, for tulasī is given special preference by 
the Lord, who garlands Hi mself with tulasī 
leaves  (19).The inhabitants of Vaiku ṇṭha travel 
in their airplanes made of lapis lazuli, emerald 
and gold. Although crowded by their consorts, 
who have large hips and beautiful smiling 
faces, they cannot be stimulated to passion by 
their mirth and beautiful charms  (20).  
The ladies in the Vaiku ṇṭha planets are as 
beautiful as the goddess of fortune herself. 
Such transcendentally beautiful ladies, their 
hands playing with lotuses and their leg bangles 
tinkling, are sometimes seen sweeping t he mar-
ble walls, which are bedecked at intervals with 
golden borders, in order to receive the grace of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead  (21).The 
goddesses of fortune worship the Lord in their 
own gardens by offering tulasī leaves on the coral -paved banks  of transcendental reservoirs 
of water. While offering worship to the Lord, 
they can see on the water the reflection of their 
beautiful faces with raised noses, and it appears 
that they have become more beautiful because 
of the Lord’s kissing their faces  (22). It is very 
much regrettable that unfortunate people do not 
discuss the description of the Vaiku ṇṭha planets 
but engage in topics which are unworthy to hear 
and which bewilder one’s intelligence. Those 
who give up the topics of Vaiku ṇṭha and take 
to talk of the material world are thrown into the 
darkest region of ignorance  (23).Lord Brahmā 
said: My dear demigods, the human form of life 
is of such importance that we also desire to 
have such life, for in the human form one can 
attain perfect religious truth and knowledge. If 
one in this human form of life does not under-
stand the Supreme Personality of Godhead and 
His abode, it is to be understood that he is very 
much affected by the influence of external na-
ture (24).Persons whose bodily features change 
in ecs tasy and who breathe heavily and perspire 
due to hearing the glories of the Lord are pro-
moted to the kingdom of God, even though they 
do not care for meditation and other austerities. 
The kingdom of God is above the material uni-
verses, and it is desired by  Brahmā and other 
demigods  (25).Thus the great sages Sanaka, 
Sanātana, Sanandana and Sanat -kumāra, upon 
reaching the above -mentioned Vaiku ṇṭha in the 
spiritual world by dint of their mystic yoga per-
formance, perceived unprecedented happiness. 
They found th at the spiritual sky was illumi-
nated by highly decorated airplanes piloted by 
the best devotees of Vaiku ṇṭha and was pre-
dominated by the Supreme Personality of God-
head  (26).  
After passing through the six entrances of 
Vaiku ṇṭha-purī, the Lord’s residence, without 
feeling astonishment at all the decorations, they 
saw at the seventh gate two shining beings of 
the same age, armed with maces and adorned 
with most valuable jewelry, earrings, dia-
monds, helmets, garments, etc  (27).The two 
doormen were garlanded wi th fresh flowers 
which attracted intoxicated bees and which 
were placed around their necks and between 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

144 
 their four blue arms. From their arched eye-
brows, discontented nostrils and reddish eyes, 
they appeared somewhat agitated  (28). The 
great sages, headed b y Sanaka, had opened 
doors everywhere. They had no idea of “ours” 
and “theirs.” With open minds, they entered the 
seventh door out of their own will, just as they 
had passed through the six other doors, which 
were made of gold and diamonds  (29).The four 
boy-sages, who had nothing to cover their bod-
ies but the atmosphere, looked only five years 
old, even though they were the oldest of all liv-
ing creatures and had realized the truth of the 
self. But when the porters, who happened to 
possess a disposition quit e unpalatable to the 
Lord, saw the sages, they blocked their way 
with their staffs, despising their glories, alt-
hough the sages did not deserve such treatment 
at their hands  (30).When the Kumāras, alt-
hough by far the fittest persons, were thus for-
bidden en trance by the two chief doorkeepers 
of Śrī Hari while other divinities looked on, 
their eyes suddenly turned red because of anger 
due to their great eagerness to see their most 
beloved master, Śrī Hari, the Personality of 
Godhead  (31).  
The sages said:  Who  are these two persons 
who have developed such a discordant mental-
ity even though they are posted in the service 
of the Lord in the highest position and are ex-
pected to have developed the same qualities as 
the Lord? How are these two persons living in 
Vaik uṇṭha? Where is the possibility of an en-
emy’s coming into this kingdom of God? The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead has no en-
emy. Who could be envious of Him? Probably 
these two persons are imposters; therefore they 
suspect others to be like themselves  (32).In the 
Vaiku ṇṭha world there is complete harmony be-
tween the residents and the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, just as there is complete har-
mony within space between the big and the 
small skies. Why then is there a seed of fear in 
this field of harmony? Th ese two persons are 
dressed like inhabitants of Vaiku ṇṭha, but 
wherefrom can their disharmony come into ex-
istence? (33) Therefore let us consider how 
these two contaminated persons should be pun-
ished. The punishment should be apt, for thus benefit can even tually be bestowed upon them. 
Since they find duality in the existence of 
Vaiku ṇṭha life, they are contaminated and 
should be removed from this place to the mate-
rial world, where the living entities have three 
kinds of enemies  (34).  
When the doormen of Va ikuṇṭhaloka, who 
were certainly devotees of the Lord, found that 
they were going to be cursed by the brāhma ṇas, 
they at once became very much afraid and fell 
down at the feet of the brāhma ṇas in great anx-
iety, for a brāhma ṇa’s curse cannot be counter-
acted by any kind of weapon  (35).After being 
cursed by the sages, the doormen said: It is 
quite apt that you have punished us for neglect-
ing to respect sages like you. But we pray that 
due to your compassion at our repentance, the 
illusion of forgetting the Supr eme Personality 
of Godhead will not come upon us as we go 
progressively downward  (36). 
At that very moment, the Lord, who is called 
Padmanābha because of the lotus grown from 
His navel and who is the delight of the right-
eous, learned about the insult offered by His 
own servants to the saints. Accompanied by His 
spouse, the goddess of fortune , He went to the 
spot on those very feet sought for by recluses 
and great sages  (37). The sages, headed by 
Sanaka Ṛṣi, saw that the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, who was formerly visible 
only within their hearts in ecstatic trance, had 
now actuall y become visible to their eyes. As 
He came forward, accompanied by His own as-
sociates bearing all paraphernalia, such as an 
umbrella and a cāmara fan, the white bunches 
of hair moved very gently, like two swans, and 
due to their favorable breeze the pearls  garland-
ing the umbrella also moved, like drops of nec-
tar falling from the white full moon or ice melt-
ing due to a gust of wind  (38).  The Lord is the 
reservoir of all pleasure. His auspicious pres-
ence is meant for everyone’s benediction, and 
His affection ate smiling and glancing touch the 
core of the heart. The Lord’s beautiful bodily 
color is blackish, and His broad chest is the 
resting place of the goddess of fortune, who 
glorifies the entire spiritual world, the summit 
of all heavenly planets. Thus it a ppeared that 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

145 
 the Lord was personally spreading the beauty 
and good fortune of the spiritual world  (39).He 
was adorned with a girdle that shone brightly 
on the yellow cloth covering His large hips, and 
He wore a garland of fresh flowers which was 
distinguis hed by humming bees. His lovely 
wrists were graced with bracelets, and He 
rested one of His hands on the shoulder of 
Garu ḍa, His carrier, and twirled a lotus with an-
other hand  (40).His countenance was distin-
guished by cheeks that enhanced the beauty of 
His alligator -shaped pendants, which outshone 
lightning. His nose was prominent, and His 
head was covered with a gem -studded crown. 
A charming necklace hung between His stout 
arms, and His neck was adorned with the gem 
known by the name Kaustubha  (41).The ex-
quisite beauty of Nārāya ṇa, being many times 
magnified by the intelligence of His devotees, 
was so attractive that it defeated the pride of the 
goddess of fortune in being the most beautiful. 
My dear demigods, the Lord who thus mani-
fested Himself is worship able by me, by Lord 
Śiva and by all of you. The sages regarded Him 
with unsated eyes and joyously bowed their 
heads at His lotus feet  (42).  
When the breeze carrying the aroma of tulasī 
leaves from the toes of the lotus feet of the Per-
sonality of Godhead e ntered the nostrils of 
those sages, they experienced a change both in 
body and in mind, even though they were at-
tached to the impersonal Brahman understand-
ing (43).  The Lord’s beautiful face appeared to 
them like the inside of a blue lotus, and the 
Lord’s  smile appeared to be a blossoming jas-
mine flower. After seeing the face of the Lord, 
the sages were fully satisfied, and when they 
wanted to see Him further, they looked upon 
the nails of His lotus feet, which resembled ru-
bies. Thus they viewed the Lord’s  transcenden-
tal body again and again, and so they finally 
achieved meditation on the Lord’s personal fea-
ture (44).  This is the form of the Lord which is 
meditated upon by the followers of the yoga 
process, and it is pleasing to the yogīs in medi-
tation. It is not imaginary but factual, as proved 
by great yogīs. The Lord is full in eight kinds 
of achievement, but for others these achieve-
ments are not possible in full perfe ction  (45).  The Kumāras said:  Our dear Lord, You are 
not manifested to rascals, even though You are 
seated within the heart of everyone. But as far 
as we are concerned, we see You face to face, 
although You are unlimited. The statements we 
have heard abou t You from our father, Brahmā, 
through the ears have now been actually real-
ized by Your kind appearance  (46).We know 
that You are the Supreme Absolute Truth, the 
Personality of Godhead, who manifests His 
transcendental form in the uncontaminated 
mode of pu re goodness. This transcendental, 
eternal form of Your personality can be under-
stood only by Your mercy, through unflinching 
devotional service, by great sages whose hearts 
have been purified in the devotional way  (47). 
Persons who are very expert and most  intelli-
gent in understanding things as they are engage 
in hearing narrations of the auspicious activi-
ties and pastimes of the Lord, which are worth 
chanting and worth hearing. Such persons do 
not care even for the highest material benedic-
tion, namely libe ration, to say nothing of other 
less important benedictions like the material 
happiness of the heavenly kingdom  (48).O 
Lord, we pray that You let us be born in any 
hellish condition of life, just as long as our 
hearts and minds are always engaged in the se r-
vice of Your lotus feet, our wo rds are made 
beautiful [by speaking of Your activities] just 
as tulasī leaves are beautified when offered 
unto Your lotus feet, and as long as our ears are 
always filled with the chanting of Your tran-
scendental qualities  (49). O Lord, we therefore 
offer ou r respectful obeisances unto Your eter-
nal form as the Personality of Godhead, which 
You have so kindly manifested before us. Your 
supreme, eternal form cannot be seen by unfor-
tunate, less intelligent persons, but we are so 
much satisfied in our mind and vi sion to see it  
(50).  

SB 3.16:The Two Doorkeepers of 
Vaiku ṇṭha, Jaya and Vijaya, Cursed by the 
Sages  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

146 
 Lord Brahmā said:  After thus congratulat-
ing the sages for their nice words, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, whose abode is in the 
kingdom of God, spoke as follows  (1).  
The Per sonality of Godhead said : These 
attendants of Mine, Jaya and Vijaya by name, 
have committed a great offense against you be-
cause of ignoring Me  (2).O great sages, I ap-
prove of the punishment that you who are de-
voted to Me have meted out to them  (3).To Me, 
the brāhma ṇa is the highest and most beloved 
personality. The disrespect shown by My at-
tendants has actually been displayed by Me be-
cause the doormen are My servitors. I take this 
to be an offense by Myself; therefore I seek 
your forgiveness for the inciden t that has arisen  
(4).A wrong act committed by a servant leads 
people in general to blame his master, just as a 
spot of white leprosy on any part of the body 
pollutes all of the skin  (5).Anyone in the entire 
world, even down to the ca ṇḍāla, who lives by 
cooking and eating the flesh of the dog, is im-
mediately purified if he takes bath in hearing 
through the ear the glorification of My name, 
fame, etc. Now you have realized Me without 
doubt; therefore I will not hesitate to lop off My 
own arm if its conduct i s found hostile to you  
(6).The Lord continued: Because I am the ser-
vitor of My devotees, My lotus feet have be-
come so sacred that they immediately wipe out 
all sin and I have acquired such a disposition 
that the goddess of fortune does not leave Me, 
even t hough I have no attachment for her, while 
others praise her beauty and observe sacred 
vows to secure from her even a slight favor  (7).I 
do not enjoy the oblations offered by the sacri-
ficers in the sacrificial fire, which is one of My 
own mouths, with the s ame relish as I do the 
delicacies overflowing with ghee which are of-
fered to the mouths of the brāhma ṇas who have 
dedicated to Me the results of their activities 
and who are ever satisfied with My prasāda  
(8).I am the master of My unobstructed internal 
energy, and the water of the Ganges is the rem-
nant left after My feet are washed. That water 
sanctifies the three worlds, along with Lord 
Śiva, who bears it on his head. If I can take the 
dust of the feet of the Vai ṣṇava on My head, 
who will refuse to do the same? (9) The brāhma ṇas, the cows and the defenseless crea-
tures are My own body. Those whose faculty of 
judgment has been impaired by their own sin 
look upon these as distinct from Me. They are 
just like furious serpents, and they are angrily 
torn apart by  the bills of the vulturelike messen-
gers of Yamarāja, the superintendent of sinful 
persons  (10).On the other hand, they captivate 
My heart who are gladdened in heart and who, 
their lotus faces enlightened by nectarean 
smiles, respect the brāhma ṇas, even th ough the 
brāhma ṇas utter harsh words. They look upon 
the brāhma ṇas as My own Self and pacify them 
by praising them in loving words, even as a son 
would appease an angry father or as I am paci-
fying you  (11).These servants of Mine have 
transgressed against y ou, not knowing the mind 
of their master. I shall therefore deem it a favor 
done to Me if you order that, although reaping 
the fruit of their transgression, they may return 
to My presence soon and the time of their exile 
from My abode may expire before lon g (12).  
Brahmā continued: Even though the sages 
had been bitten by the serpent of anger, their 
souls were not satiated with hearing the Lord’s 
lovely and illuminating speech, which was like 
a series of Vedic hymns  (13).The Lord’s excel-
lent speech was difficult to comprehend be-
cause of its momentous import and its most 
profound significance. The sages heard it with 
wide -open ears and pondered it as well. But alt-
hough hearing, they could not understand what 
He intended to do  (14).The four brāhma ṇa 
sages were neverthe less extremely delighted to 
behold Him, and they experienced a thrill 
throughout their bodies. They then spoke as fol-
lows to the Lord, who had revealed the multi-
glories of the Supreme Personality through His 
internal potency, yoga -māyā  (15).  
The sages sai d: O Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, we are unable to know what You in-
tend for us to do, for even though You are the 
supreme ruler of all, You speak in our favor as 
if we had done something good for You  (16).O 
Lord, You are the supreme director of the brah-
minical culture. Your considering the 
brāhma ṇas to be in the highest position is Your 
example for teaching others. Actually You are 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

147 
 the supreme worshipable Deity, not only for the 
gods but for the brāhma ṇas also  (17).You are 
the source of the eternal occup ation of all living 
entities, and by Your multimanifestations of 
Personalities of Godhead, You have always 
protected religion. You are the supreme objec-
tive of religious principles, and in our opinion 
You are inexhaustible and unchangeable eter-
nally  (18).Mystics and transcendentalists, by 
the mercy of the Lord, cross beyond nescience 
by ceasing all material desires. It is not possi-
ble, therefore, that the Supreme Lord can be fa-
vored by others  (19).The goddess of fortune,  
Lakṣmī, the dust of whose feet is worn on the 
head by others, waits upon You, as appointed, 
for she is anxious to secure a place in the abode 
of the king of bees, who hovers on the fresh 
wreath of tulasī leaves offered at Your feet by 
some blessed devotee  (20).  O Lord, You are 
exceedingly attached to the activities of Your 
pure devotees, yet You are never attached to the 
goddesses of fortune who constantly engage in 
Your transcendental loving service. How can 
You be purified, therefore, by the dust of the  
path traversed by the brāhma ṇas, and how can 
You be glorified or made fortunate by the 
marks of Śrīvatsa on Your chest? (21) 
O Lord, You are the personification of all re-
ligion. Therefore You manifest Yourself in 
three millenniums, and thus You protect th is 
universe, which consists of animate and inani-
mate beings. By Your grace, which is of pure 
goodness and is the bestower of all blessings, 
kindly drive away the elements of rajas and ta-
mas for the sake of the demigods and twice -
born (22).O Lord, You are t he protector of the 
highest of the twice -born. If You do not protect 
them by offering worship and mild words, then 
certainly the auspicious path of worship will be 
rejected by people in general, who act on the 
strength and authority of Your Lordship  
(23).Dear Lord, You never want the auspicious 
path to be destroyed, for You are the reservoir 
of all goodness. Just to benefit people in gen-
eral, You destroy the evil element by Your 
mighty potency. You are the proprietor of the 
three creations and the maintaine r of the entire 
universe. Therefore Your potency is not re-
duced by Your submissive behavior. Rather, by submission You exhibit Your transcendental 
pastimes  (24).O Lord, whatever punishment 
You wish to award to these two innocent per-
sons, or also to us, we shall accept without du-
plicity. We understand that we have cursed two 
faultless persons  (25).  
The Lord replied:  O brāhma ṇas, know that 
the punishment you inflicted on them was orig-
inally ordained by Me, and therefore they will 
fall to a birth in a demonia c family. But they 
will be firmly united with Me in thought 
through mental concentration intensified by an-
ger, and they will return to My presence shortly  
(26). 
Lord Brahmā said:  After seeing the Lord 
of Vaiku ṇṭha, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, in th e self -illuminated Vaiku ṇṭha planet, 
the sages left that transcendental abode  
(27).The sages circumambulated the Supreme 
Lord, offered their obeisances and returned, ex-
tremely delighted at learning of the divine opu-
lences of the Vai ṣṇava (28).The Lord then  said 
to His attendants, Jaya and Vijaya: Depart this 
place, but fear not. All glories unto you. 
Though I am capable of nullifying the 
brāhma ṇas’ curse, I would not do so. On the 
contrary, it has My approval  (29).This depar-
ture from Vaiku ṇṭha was foretold by Lak ṣmī, 
the goddess of fortune. She was very angry be-
cause when she left My abode and then re-
turned, you stopped her at the gate while I was 
sleeping  (30).The Lord assured the two 
Vaiku ṇṭha inhabitants, Jaya and Vijaya: By 
practicing the mystic yoga sys tem in anger, you 
will be cleansed of the sin of disobeying the 
brāhma ṇas and within a very short time return 
to Me  (31).After thus speaking at the door of 
Vaiku ṇṭha, the Lord returned to His abode, 
where there are many celestial airplanes and 
all-surpassi ng wealth and splendor  (32).But 
those two gatekeepers, the best of the demi-
gods, their beauty and luster diminished by the 
curse of the brāhma ṇas, became morose and 
fell from Vaiku ṇṭha, the abode of the Supreme 
Lord  (33).Then, as Jaya and Vijaya fell from 
the Lord’s abode, a great roar of disappoint-
ment arose from all the demigods, who were 
sitting in their splendid airplanes  (34).Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

148 
 Brahmā continued: Those two principal door-
keepers of the Personality of Godhead have 
now entered the womb of Diti, the powe rful se-
men of Kaśyapa Muni having covered them  
(35).It is the prowess of these twin asuras [de-
mons] that has disturbed you, for it has mini-
mized your power. There is no remedy within 
my power, however, for it is the Lord Himself 
who desires to do all this  (36).My dear sons, the 
Lord is the controller of the three modes of na-
ture and is responsible for the creation, preser-
vation and dissolution of the universe. His won-
derful creative power, yoga -māyā, cannot be 
easily understood even by the masters of yoga. 
That most ancient person, the Personality of 
Godhead, will alone come to our rescue. What 
purpose can we serve on His behalf by deliber-
ating on the subject? (37) 
SB 3.17: Victory of Hira ṇyākṣa Over All 
the Directions of the Universe  
Śrī Maitreya said:  The demigods, the in-
habitants of the higher planets, were freed from 
all fear upon hearing the cause of the darkness 
explained by Brahmā, who was born from 
Viṣṇu. Thus they all returned to their respective 
planets  (1). 
The virtuous lady Diti had been very appr e-
hensive of trouble to the gods from the children 
in her womb, and her husband  predicted the 
same. She brought forth twin sons after a full 
one hundred years of pregnancy  (2).On the 
birth of the two demons there were many natu-
ral disturbances, all very fea rful and wonderful, 
in the heavenly planets, the earthly planets and 
in between them  (3).There were earthquakes 
along the mountains on the earth, and it ap-
peared that there was fire everywhere. Many in-
auspicious planets like Saturn appeared, along 
with com ets, meteors and thunderbolts  
(4).There blew winds which were most uninvit-
ing to the touch, hissing again and again and 
uprooting gigantic trees. They had storms for 
their armies and clouds of dust for their ensigns  
(5).The luminaries in the heavens were 
screened by masses of clouds, in which light-
ning sometimes flashed as though laughing. 
Darkness reigned everywhere, and nothing 
could be seen  (6).The ocean with its high waves wailed aloud as if stricken with sorrow, and 
there was a commotion among the crea tures in-
habiting the ocean. The rivers and lakes were 
also agitated, and lotuses withered  (7).Misty 
halos appeared around the sun and the moon 
during solar and lunar eclipses again and again. 
Claps of thunder were heard even without 
clouds, and sounds like  those of rattling chari-
ots emerged from the mountain caves  (8).In the 
interior of the villages she -jackals yelled por-
tentously, vomiting strong fire from their 
mouths, and jackals and owls also joined them 
with their cries  (9). Raising their necks, dogs 
cried here and there, now in the manner of sing-
ing and now of wailing  (10). O Vidura, the 
asses ran hither and thither in herds, striking the 
earth with their hard hooves and wildly braying  
(11).  Frightened by the braying of the asses, 
birds flew shrieking  from their nests, while cat-
tle in the cowsheds as well as in the woods 
passed dung and urine  (12).Cows, terrified, 
yielded blood in place of milk, clouds rained 
pus, the images of the gods in the temples shed 
tears, and trees fell down without a blast of 
wind  (13).Ominous planets such as Mars and 
Saturn shone brighter and surpassed the auspi-
cious ones such as Mercury, Jupiter and Venus 
as well as a number of lunar mansions. Taking 
seemingly retrograde courses, the planets came 
in conflict with one another  (14).  Marking 
these and many other omens of evil times, eve-
ryone but the four sage sons of Brahmā, who 
were aware of the fall of Jaya and Vijaya and 
of their birth as Diti’s sons, was seized with 
fear. They did not know the secrets of these 
portents and thoug ht that the dissolution of the 
universe was at hand  (15).  
These two demons who appeared in ancient 
times soon began to exhibit uncommon bodily 
features; they had steel -like frames which be-
gan to grow just like two great mountains  
(16).Their bodies became so tall that they 
seemed to kiss the sky with the crests of their 
gold crowns. They blocked the view of all di-
rections and while walking shook the earth at 
every step. Their arms were adorned with bril-
liant bracelets, and they stood as if covering the 
sun with their waists, which were bound with 
excellent and beautiful girdles  (17).Prajāpati 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

149 
 Kaśyapa, the creator of the living entities, gave 
his twin sons their names; the one who was 
born first he named Hira ṇyākṣa, and the one 
who was first conceived by Diti  he named 
Hiraṇyakaśipu  (18). 
The elder child, Hira ṇyakaśipu, was un-
afraid of death from anyone within the three 
worlds because he received a benediction from 
Lord Brahmā. He was proud and puffed up due 
to this benediction and was able to bring all 
three p lanetary systems under his control  
(19).His younger brother, Hira ṇyākṣa, was al-
ways ready to satisfy his elder brother by his 
activities. Hira ṇyākṣa took a club on his shoul-
der and traveled all over the universe with a 
fighting spirit just to satisfy Hira ṇyakaśipu  
(20).Hira ṇyākṣa’s temper was difficult to con-
trol. He had anklets of gold tinkling about his 
feet, he was adorned with a gigantic garland, 
and he rested his huge mace on one of his 
shoulders  (21). His mental and bodily strength 
as well as the boon  conferred upon him had 
made him proud. He feared death at the hands 
of no one, and there was no checking him. The 
gods, therefore, were seized with fear at his 
very sight, and they hid themselves even as 
snakes hide themselves for fear of Garu ḍa 
(22).On n ot finding Indra and the other demi-
gods, who had previously been intoxicated with 
power, the chief of the Daityas, seeing that they 
had all vanished before his might, roared loudly  
(23).After returning from the heavenly king-
dom, the mighty demon, who was l ike an ele-
phant in wrath, for the sake of sport dived into 
the deep ocean, which was roaring terribly  
(24).On his entering the ocean, the aquatic ani-
mals who formed the host of Varu ṇa were 
stricken with fear and ran far away. Thus 
Hiraṇyākṣa showed his splendor without deal-
ing a blow  (25).Moving about in the ocean for 
many, many years, the mighty Hira ṇyākṣa 
smote the gigantic wind -tossed waves again 
and again with his iron mace and reached 
Vibhāvarī, the capital of Varu ṇa (26).Vibhāvarī 
is the home of Varu ṇa, lord of the aquatic crea-
tures and guardian of the lower regions of the 
universe, where the demons gener ally reside. 
There Hira ṇyākṣa fell at Varu ṇa’s feet like a 
lowborn man, and to make fun of him he said with a smile, “Give me battle, O Supreme 
Lord!” (27)  You are the guardian of an entire 
sphere and a ruler of wide fame. Having 
crushed the might of arro gant and conceited 
warriors and having conquered all the Daityas 
and Dānavas in the world, you once performed 
a Rājasūya sacrifice to the Lord  (28).  
Thus mocked by an enemy whose vanity 
knew no bounds, the worshipful lord of the wa-
ters waxed angry, but by  dint of his reason he 
managed to curb the anger that had sprung up 
in him, and he replied: O dear one, we have 
now desisted from warfare, having grown too 
old for combat  (29).  You are so skilled in war 
that I do not see anyone else but the most an-
cient p erson, Lord Vi ṣṇu, who can give satis-
faction in battle to you. Therefore, O chief of 
the asuras, approach Him, whom even heroes 
like you mention with praise  (30).Varu ṇa con-
tinued: On reaching Him you will be rid of your 
pride at once and will lie down on t he field of 
battle, surrounded by dogs, for eternal sleep. It 
is in order to exterminate wicked fellows like 
you and to show His grace to the virtuous that 
He assumes His various incarnations like 
Varāha  (31).  
SB 3.18: The Battle Between Lord Boar 
and the  Demon Hira ṇyākṣa 
Maitreya continued:  The proud and falsely 
glorious Daitya paid little heed to the words of 
Varu ṇa. O dear Vidura, he learned from Nārada 
the whereabouts of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and hurriedly betook himself to the 
depths of t he ocean  (1).He saw there the all -
powerful Personality of Godhead in His boar 
incarnation, bearing the earth upward on the 
ends of His tusks and robbing him of his splen-
dor with His reddish eyes. The demon laughed: 
Oh, an amphibious beast! (2) The demon ad-
dressed the Lord: O best of the demigods, 
dressed in the form of a boar, just hear me. This 
earth is entrusted to us, the inhabitants of the 
lower regions, and You cannot take it from my 
presence and not be hurt by me  (3).You rascal, 
You have been nourishe d by our enemies to kill 
us, and You have killed some demons by re-
maining invisible. O fool, Your power is only 
mystic, so today I shall enliven my kinsmen by 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

150 
 killing You  (4).The demon continued: When 
You fall dead with Your skull smashed by the 
mace hurle d by my arms, the demigods and 
sages who offer You oblations and sacrifice in 
devotional service will also automatically cease 
to exist, like trees without roots  (5).  
Although the Lord was pained by the shaft-
like abusive words of the demon, He bore the 
pain. But seeing that the earth on the ends of 
His tusks was frightened, He rose out of the wa-
ter just as an elephant emerges with its female 
companion when assailed by an alligator  
(6).The demon, who had golden hair on his 
head and fearful tusks, gave chase  to the Lord 
while He was rising from the water, even as an 
alligator would chase an elephant. Roaring like 
thunder, he said: Are You not ashamed of run-
ning away before a challenging adversary? 
There is nothing reproachable for shameless 
creatures! (7) 
The Lord placed the earth within His sight 
on the surface of the water and transferred to 
her His own energy in the form of the ability to 
float on the water. While the enemy stood look-
ing on, Brahmā, the creator of the universe, ex-
tolled the Lord, and the ot her demigods rained 
flowers on Him  (8).The demon, who had a 
wealth of ornaments, bangles and beautiful 
golden armor on his body, chased the Lord 
from behind with a great mace. The Lord toler-
ated his piercing ill words, but in order to reply 
to him, He expr essed His terrible anger  (9).  
The Personality of Godhead said:  Indeed, 
We are creatures of the jungle, and We are 
searching after hunting dogs like you. One who 
is freed from the entanglement of death has no 
fear from the loose talk in which you are in-
dulging, for you are bound up by the laws of 
death  (10).  Certainly We have stolen the 
charge of the inhabitants of Rasātala and have 
lost all shame. Although bitten by your power-
ful mace, I shall stay here in the water for some 
time because, having created e nmity with a 
powerful enemy, I now have no place to go  
(11).You are supposed to be the commander of 
many foot soldiers, and now you may take 
prompt steps to overthrow Us. Give up all your 
foolish talk and wipe out the cares of your kith and kin by slaying Us. One may be proud, yet 
he does not deserve a seat in an assembly if he 
fails to fulfill his promised word  (12).  
Śrī Maitreya said : The demon, being thus 
challenged by the Personality of Godhead, be-
came angry and agitated, and he trembled in an-
ger like a challenged cobra  (13).  Hissing indig-
nantly, all his senses shaken by wrath, the de-
mon quickly sprang upon the Lord and dealt 
Him a blow with his powerful mace  (14).The 
Lord, however, by moving slightly aside, 
dodged the violent mace -blow aimed at His 
breast by the enemy, just as an accomplished 
yogī would elude death  (15).The Personality of 
Godhead now exhibited His anger and rushed 
to meet the demon, who bit his lip in rage, took 
up his mace again and began to repeatedly 
brandish it about  (16).Then with  His mace the 
Lord struck the enemy on the right of his brow, 
but since the demon was expert in fighting, O 
gentle Vidura, he protected himself by a ma-
neuver of his own mace  (17).In this way, the 
demon Haryak ṣa and the Lord, the Personality 
of Godhead, str uck each other with their huge 
maces, each enraged and seeking his own vic-
tory (18).There was keen rivalry between the 
two combatants; both had sustained injuries on 
their bodies from the blows of each other’s 
pointed maces, and each grew more and more 
enraged at the smell of blood on his person. In 
their eagerness to win, they performed maneu-
vers of various kinds, and their contest looked 
like an encounter between two forceful bulls 
for the sake of a cow  (19). O descendant of 
Kuru, Brahmā, the most indepen dent demigod 
of the universe, accompanied by his followers, 
came to see the terrible fight for the sake of the 
world between the demon and the Personality 
of Godhead, who appeared in the form of a boar  
(20).After arriving at the place of combat, 
Brahmā, th e leader of thousands of sages and 
transcendentalists, saw the demon, who had at-
tained such unprecedented power that no one 
could fight with him. Brahmā then addressed 
Nārāya ṇa, who was assuming the form of a 
boar for the first time  (21).  
Lord Brahmā said : My dear Lord, this de-
mon has proved to be a constant pinprick to the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

151 
 demigods, the brāhma ṇas, the cows and inno-
cent persons who are spotless and always de-
pendent upon worshiping Your lotus feet. He 
has become a source of fear by unnecessarily 
harassing t hem. Since he has attained a boon 
from me, he has become a demon, always 
searching for a proper combatant, wandering 
all over the universe for this infamous purpose  
(22-23).Lord Brahmā continued: My dear 
Lord, there is no need to play with this serpen-
tine demon, who is always very skilled in con-
juring tricks and is arrogant, self -sufficient and 
most wicked  (24).Brahmā continued: My dear 
Lord, You are infallible. Please kill this sinful 
demon before the demoniac hour arrives and he 
presents another formidabl e approach favora-
ble to him. You can kill him by Your internal 
potency without doubt  (25).My Lord, the dark-
est evening, which covers the world, is fast ap-
proaching. Since You are the Soul of all souls, 
kindly kill him and win victory for the demi-
gods  (26).The auspicious period known as ab-
hijit, which is most opportune for victory, com-
menced at midday and has all but passed; there-
fore, in the interest of Your friends, please dis-
pose of this formidable foe quickly  (27).This 
demon, luckily for us, has come of his own ac-
cord to You, his death ordained by You; there-
fore, exhibiting Your ways, kill him in the duel 
and establish the worlds in peace  (28).  
SB 3.19: The Killing of the Demon 
Hira ṇyākṣa 
Śrī Maitreya said:  After hearing the words 
of Brahmā, the creator,  which were free from 
all sinful purposes and as sweet as nectar, the 
Lord heartily laughed and accepted his prayer 
with a glance laden with love  (1).  The Lord, 
who had appeared from the nostril of Brahmā, 
sprang and aimed His mace at the chin of His 
enem y, the Hira ṇyākṣa demon, who was stalk-
ing fearlessly before Him  (2).Struck by the de-
mon’s mace, however, the Lord’s mace slipped 
from His hand and looked splendid as it fell 
down whirling. This was miraculous, for the 
mace was blazing wonderfully  (3).Even though 
the demon had an excellent opportunity to 
strike his unarmed foe without obstruction, he respected the law of single combat, thereby kin-
dling the fury of the Supreme Lord  (4).As the 
Lord’s mace fell to the ground and a cry of 
alarm arose from the wi tnessing crowd of gods 
and ṛṣis, the Personality of Godhead acknowl-
edged the demon’s love of righteousness and 
therefore invoked His Sudarśana discus  (5). 
As the discus began to revolve in the Lord’s 
hands and the Lord contended at close quarters 
with the chief of His Vaiku ṇṭha attendants, who 
had been born as Hira ṇyākṣa, a vile son of Diti, 
there issued from every direction strange ex-
pressions uttered by those who were witnessing 
from airplanes. They had no knowledge of the 
Lord’s reality, and they cried, “May victory at-
tend You! Pray disp atch him. Play no more 
with him ” (6). When the demon saw the Per-
sonality of Godhead, who had eyes just like lo-
tus petals, standing in position before him, 
armed with His Sudarśana discus, his senses 
were overpowered by ind ignation. He began to 
hiss like a serpent, and he bit his lip in great 
resentment  (7).The demon, who had fearful 
tusks, stared at the Personality of Godhead as 
though to burn Him. Springing into the air, he 
aimed his mace at the Lord, exclaiming at the 
same time, “You are slain!” (8) O saintly 
Vidura, while His enemy looked on, the Lord 
in His boar form, the enjoyer of all sacrificial 
offerings, playfully knocked down the mace 
with His left foot, even as it came upon Him 
with the force of a tempest  (9). The  Lord then 
said: “Take up your weapon and try again, ea-
ger as you are to conquer Me.” Challenged in 
these words, the demon aimed his mace at the 
Lord and once more loudly roared  (10).When 
the Lord saw the mace flying toward Him, He 
stood firmly where He wa s and caught it with 
the same ease as Garu ḍa, the king of birds, 
would seize a serpent  (11).  
His valor thus frustrated, the great demon 
felt humiliated and was put out of countenance. 
He was reluctant to take back the mace when it 
was offered by the Perso nality of Godhead  
(12).He now took a trident which was as rapa-
cious as a flaming fire and hurled it against the 
Lord, the enjoyer of all sacrifices, even as one 
would use penance for a malevolent purpose 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

152 
 against a holy brāhma ṇa (13).Hurled by the 
mighty de mon with all his strength, the flying 
trident shone brightly in the sky. The Personal-
ity of Godhead, however, tore it to pieces with 
His discus Sudarśana, which had a sharp -edged 
rim, even as Indra cut off a wing of Garu ḍa 
(14).The demon was enraged when h is trident 
was cut to pieces by the discus of the Personal-
ity of Godhead. He therefore advanced toward 
the Lord and, roaring aloud, struck his hard fist 
against the Lord’s broad chest, which bore the 
mark of Śrīvatsa. Then he went out of sight  
(15).  
Hit in this manner by the demon, O Vidura, 
the Lord, who had appeared as the first boar, 
did not feel the least quaking in any part of His 
body, any more than an elephant would when 
struck with a wreath of flowers  (16).The de-
mon, however, employed many conjurin g 
tricks against the Personality of Godhead, who 
is the Lord of yoga -māyā. At the sight of this 
the people were filled with alarm and thought 
that the dissolution of the universe was near  
(17). Fierce winds began to blow from all di-
rections, spreading dark ness occasioned by 
dust and hail storms; stones came in volleys 
from every corner, as if thrown by machine 
guns  (18).The luminaries in outer space disap-
peared due to the sky’s being overcast with 
masses of clouds, which were accompanied by 
lightning and th under. The sky rained pus, hair, 
blood, stool, urine and bones  (19).O sinless 
Vidura, mountains discharged weapons of var-
ious kinds, and naked demonesses armed with 
tridents appeared with their hair hanging loose  
(20).Cruel and savage slogans were uttered by 
hosts of ruffian Yak ṣas and Rāk ṣasas, who all 
either marched on foot or rode on horses, ele-
phants or chariots  (21).  
The Lord, the personal enjoyer of all sacri-
fices, now discharged His beloved Sudarśana, 
which was capable of dispersing the magical 
forces displayed by the demon  (22). At that 
very moment, a shudder suddenly ran through 
the heart of Diti, the mother of Hira ṇyākṣa. She 
recalled the words of her husband , Kaśyapa, 
and blood flowed from her breasts  (23).When 
the demon saw his magic forces disp elled, he once again came into the presence of the Per-
sonality of Godhead, Keśava, and, full of rage, 
tried to embrace Him within his arms to crush 
Him. But to his great amazement he found the 
Lord standing outside the circle of his arms  
(24).The demon now  began to strike the Lord 
with his hard fists, but Lord Adhok ṣaja slapped 
him in the root of the ear, even as Indra, the lord 
of the Maruts, hit the demon V ṛtra (25).  
Though struck indifferently by the Lord, the 
conqueror of all, the demon’s body began to 
wheel. His eyeballs bulged out of their sockets. 
His arms and legs broken and the hair on his 
head scattered, he fell down dead, like a gigan-
tic tree uprooted by the wind  (26).Aja [Brahmā] 
and others arrived on the spot to see the fear-
fully tusked demon ly ing on the ground, biting 
his lip. The glow of his face was yet unfaded, 
and Brahmā admiringly said: Oh, who could 
meet such blessed death? (27)  Brahmā contin-
ued: He was struck by a forefoot of the Lord, 
whom yogīs, seeking freedom from their unreal 
mater ial bodies, meditate upon in seclusion in 
mystic trance. While gazing on His counte-
nance, this crest jewel of Diti’s sons has cast off 
his mortal coil  (28).These two personal assis-
tants of the Supreme Lord, having been cursed, 
have been destined to take bi rth in demoniac 
families. After a few such births, they will re-
turn to their own positions  (29).  
The demigods addressed the Lord:  All 
obeisances unto You! You are the enjoyer of all 
sacrifices, and You have assumed the form of a 
boar, in pure goodness, fo r the purpose of main-
taining the world. Fortunately for us, this de-
mon, who was a torment to the worlds, has been 
slain by You, and we too, O Lord, are now at 
ease, in devotion to Your lotus feet  (30).  
Śrī Maitreya continued:  After thus killing 
the most formidable demon Hira ṇyākṣa, the 
Supreme Lord Hari, the origin of the boar spe-
cies, returned to His own abode, where there is 
always an uninterrupted festival. The Lord was 
praised by all the demigods, he aded by Brahmā  
(31).  Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, I 
have explained to you the Personality of God-
head’s coming down as the first boar incarna-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

153 
 tion and killing in a great fight a demon of un-
precedented prowess as if he were just a play-
thing. This has been narrated by me as I heard 
it from my predecessor spiritual master  (32).  
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī continued : My dear 
brāhma ṇa, Kṣattā [Vidura] the great devotee of 
the Lord achieved transcendental bliss by hear-
ing the narration of the pastimes of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead from the authoritative 
source of the sage Kau ṣārava [Maitreya], and 
he was very pleased  (33).What to speak of 
hearing the pastimes of the Lord, whose chest 
is marked with Śrīvatsa, people may take tran-
scendental pleasure even in hear ing of the 
works and deeds of the devotees, whose fame 
is immortal  (34).The Personality of Godhead 
delivered the king of the elephants, who was at-
tacked by an alligator and who meditated upon 
the lotus feet of the Lord. At that time the fe-
male elephants wh o accompanied him were 
crying, and the Lord saved them from the im-
pending danger  (35).  What grateful soul is 
there who would not render his loving service 
to such a great master as the Personality of 
Godhead? The Lord can be easily pleased by 
spotless dev otees who resort exclusively to 
Him for protection, though the unrighteous 
man finds it difficult to propitiate Him  (36).O 
brāhma ṇas, anyone who hears, chants, or takes 
pleasure in the wonderful narration of the kill-
ing of the Hira ṇyākṣa demon by the Lord,  who 
appeared as the first boar in order to deliver the 
world, is at once relieved of the results of sinful 
activities, even the killing of a brāhma ṇa 
(37).This most sacred narrative confers ex-
traordinary merit, wealth, fame, longevity and 
all the objects of one’s desire. On the field of 
battle it promotes the strength of one’s vital or-
gans and organs of action. One who listens to it 
at the last moment of his life is transferred to 
the supreme abode of the Lord, O dear Śaunaka  
(38).  
SB 3.20: Conversation B etween Maitreya 
and Vidura  
ŚrīŚaunaka inquired:  O Sūta Gosvāmī, af-
ter the earth was again situated in its orbit, what 
did Svāyambhuva Manu do to show the path of 
liberation to persons who were to take birth later on? (1) Śaunaka Ṛṣi inquired about 
Vidura, who was a great devotee and friend of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa and who gave up the company of 
his elder brother because the latter, along with 
his sons, played tricks against the desires of the 
Lord  (2).Vidura was born from the body of Ve-
davyāsa and was not less than he . Thus he ac-
cepted the lotus feet of K ṛṣṇa wholeheartedly 
and was attached to His devotees  (3).  Vidura 
was purified of all passion by wandering in sa-
cred places, and at last he reached Hardwar, 
where he met the great sage who knew the sci-
ence of spiritual  life, and he inquired from him. 
Śaunaka Ṛṣi therefore asked: What more did 
Vidura inquire from Maitreya? (4)Śaunaka in-
quired about the conversation between Vidura 
and Maitreya: There must have been many nar-
rations of the spotless pastimes of the Lord. The  
hearing of such narrations is exactly like bath-
ing in the water of the Ganges, for it can free 
one from all sinful reactions  (5).O Sūta 
Gosvāmī, all good fortune to you! Please nar-
rate the activities of the Lord, which are all 
magnanimous and worth glorif ying. What sort 
of devotee can be satiated by hearing the nec-
tarean pastimes of the Lord? (6) 
On being asked to speak by the great sages 
of Naimi ṣāraṇya, the son of Romahar ṣaṇa, Sūta 
Gosvāmī, whose mind was absorbed in the 
transcendental pastimes of the Lo rd, said: 
Please hear what I shall now speak  (7).  
Sūta Gosvāmī continued:  Vidura, the de-
scendant of Bharata, was delighted to hear the 
story of the Lord, who, having assumed by His 
own divine potency the form of a boar, had en-
acted the sport of lifting th e earth from the bot-
tom of the ocean and indifferently killing the 
demon Hira ṇyākṣa. Vidura then spoke to the 
sage as follows  (8).  
Vidura said:  Since you know of matters in-
conceivable to us, tell me, O holy sage, what 
did Brahmā do to create living beings  after 
evolving the Prajāpatis, the progenitors of liv-
ing beings? (9) Vidura inquired: How did the 
Prajāpatis [such progenitors of living entities as 
Marīci and Svāyambhuva Manu] create accord-
ing to the instruction of Brahmā, and how did 
they evolve this ma nifest ed universe? (10)  Did 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

154 
 they evolve the creation in conjunction with 
their respective wives, did they remain inde-
pendent in their action, or did they all jointly 
produce it? (11) 
Maitreya said:  When the equilibrium of the 
combination of the three modes  of nature was 
agitated by the unseen activity of the living en-
tity, by Mahā -Viṣṇu and by the force of time, 
the total material elements were produced  
(12).As impelled by the destiny of the jīva, the 
false ego, which is of three kinds, evolved from 
the mah at-tattva, in which the element of rajas 
predominates. From the ego, in turn, evolved 
many groups of five principles  (13).  Separately 
unable to produce the material universe, they 
combined with the help of the energy of the Su-
preme Lord and were able to p roduce a shining 
egg (14).For over one thousand years the shiny 
egg lay on the waters of the Causal Ocean in 
the lifeless state. Then the Lord entered it as 
Garbhodakaśāyī Vi ṣṇu (15).From the navel of 
the Personality of Godhead Garbhodakaśāyī 
Viṣṇu sprouted a lotus flower effulgen t like a 
thousand blazing suns. This lotus flower is the 
reservoir of all conditioned souls, and the first 
living entity who came out of the lotus flower 
was the omnipotent Brahmā (16).  
When that Supreme Personality of Godhead 
who is lying on the Garbhodaka  Ocean entered 
the heart of Brahmā, Brahmā brought his intel-
ligence to bear, and with the intelligence in-
voked he began to create the universe as it was 
before  (17).First of all, Brahmā created from 
his shadow the coverings of ignorance of the 
conditioned souls. They are five in number and 
are called tāmisra, andha -tāmisra, tamas, moha 
and mahā -moha  (18).Out of disgust, Brahmā 
threw off the body of ignorance, and taking this 
opportunity, Yak ṣas and Rāk ṣasas sprang for 
possession of the body, which continued  to ex-
ist in the form of night. Night is the source of 
hunger and thirst  (19).Overpowered by hunger 
and thirst, they ran to devour Brahmā from all 
sides and cried, “Spare him not! Eat him up!” 
(20) Brahmā, the head of the demigods, full of 
anxiety, asked t hem, “Do not eat me, but pro-
tect me. You are born from me and have be-
come my sons. Therefore you are Yak ṣas and Rākṣasas” (21).  
He then created the chief demigods, who 
were shining with the glory of goodness. He 
dropped before them the effulgent form of da y-
time, and the demigods sportingly took posses-
sion of it  (22).Lord Brahmā then gave birth to 
the demons from his buttocks, and they were 
very fond of sex. Because they were too lustful, 
they approached him for copulation  (23).The 
worshipful Brahmā first la ughed at their stupid-
ity, but finding the shameless asuras close upon 
him, he grew indignant and ran in great haste 
out of fear  (24).  He approached the Personality 
of Godhead, who bestows all boons and who 
dispels the agony of His devotees and of those 
who take shelter of His lotus feet. He manifests 
His innumerable transcendental forms for the 
satisfaction of His devotees  (25). Lord Brahmā, 
approaching the Lord, addressed Him thus: My 
Lord, please protect me from these sinful de-
mons, who were created by m e under Your or-
der. They are infuriated by an appetite for sex 
and have come to attack me  (26).My Lord, You 
are the only one capable of ending the affliction 
of the distressed and inflicting agony on those 
who never resort to Your feet  (27).  
The Lord, who  can distinctly see the minds 
of others, perceived Brahmā’s distress and said 
to him: “Cast off this impure body of yours.” 
Thus commanded by the Lord, Brahmā cast off 
his body  (28).  
The body given up by Brahmā took the form 
of the evening twilight, when the day and night 
meet, a time which kindles passion. The asuras, 
who are passionate by nature, dominated as 
they are by the element of rajas, took it for a 
damsel, whose lotus feet resounded with the 
tinkling of anklets, whose eyes were wide with 
intoxica tion and whose hips were covered by 
fine cloth, over which shone a girdle  (29).Her 
breasts projected upward because of their cling-
ing to each other, and they were too contiguous 
to admit any intervening space. She had a 
shapely nose and beautiful teeth, a lovely smile 
played on her lips, and she cast a sportful 
glance at the asuras  (30).Adorned with dark 
tresses, she hid herself, as it were, out of shy-
ness. Upon seeing that girl, the asuras were all 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

155 
 infatuated with an appetite for sex  (31).The de-
mons praise d her: Oh, what a beauty! What rare 
self-control! What a budding youth! In the 
midst of us all, who are passionately longing 
for her, she is moving about like one absolutely 
free from passion  (32).  
Indulging in various speculations about the 
evening twili ght, which appeared to them en-
dowed with the form of a young woman, the 
wicked -minded asuras treated her with respect 
and fondly spoke to her as follows  (33). Who 
are you, O pretty girl? Whose wife or daughter 
are you, and what can be the object of your ap-
pearing before us? Why do you tantalize us, un-
fortunate as we are, with the priceless commod-
ity of your beauty? (34) Whosoever you may 
be, O beautiful girl, we are fortunate in being 
able to see you. While playing with a ball, you 
have agitated the minds o f all onlookers  (35).O 
beautiful woman, when you strike the bouncing 
ball against the ground with your hand again 
and again, your lotus feet do not stay in one 
place. Oppressed by the weight of your full -
grown breasts, your waist becomes fatigued, 
and your  clear vision grows dull, as it were. 
Pray braid your comely hair  (36).The asuras, 
clouded in their understanding, took the even-
ing twilight to be a beautiful woman showing 
herself in her alluring form, and they seized her  
(37).  
With a laugh full of deep significance, the 
worshipful Brahmā then evolved by his own 
loveliness, which seemed to enjoy itself by it-
self, the hosts of Gandharvas and Ap-
sarās (38).After that, Brahmā gave up that shin-
ing and beloved form of moonlight. Viśvāvasu 
and other Gandharvas gl adly took possession 
of it (39).  
The glorious Brahmā next evolved from his 
sloth the ghosts and fiends, but he closed his 
eyes when he saw them stand naked with their 
hair scattered  (40).The ghosts and hobgoblins 
took possession of the body thrown off in the 
form of yawning by Brahmā, the creator of the 
living entities. This is also known as the sleep 
which causes drooling. The hobgoblins and 
ghosts attack men who are impure, and their at-
tack is spoken of as insanity  (41).  Recognizing himself to be full o f desire and 
energy, the worshipful Brahmā, the creator of 
the living entities, evolved from his own invis-
ible form, from his navel, the hosts of Sādhyas 
and Pitās  (42).The Pitās themselves took pos-
session of the invisible body, the source of their 
existen ce. It is through the medium of this in-
visible body that those well versed in the rituals 
offer oblations to the Sādhyas and Pitās [in the 
form of their departed ancestors] on the occa-
sion of śrāddha  (43).  
Then Lord Brahmā, by his ability to be hid-
den fro m vision, created the Siddhas and 
Vidyādharas and gave them that wonderful 
form of his known as the Antardhāna  (44).  One 
day, Brahmā, the creator of the living entities, 
beheld his own reflection in the water, and ad-
miring himself, he evolved Kimpuru ṣas as well 
as Kinnaras out of that reflection  (45).The Kim-
puruṣas and Kinnaras took possession of that 
shadowy form left by Brahmā. That is why they 
and their spouses sing his praises by recounting 
his exploits at every daybreak  (46).  
Once Brahmā lay down wit h his body 
stretched at full length. He was very concerned 
that the work of creation had not proceeded 
apace, and in a sullen mood he gave up that 
body too  (47). O dear Vidura, the hair that 
dropped from that body transformed into 
snakes, and even while th e body crawled along 
with its hands and feet contracted, there sprang 
from it ferocious serpents and Nāgas with their 
hoods expanded  (48).  
One day Brahmā, the self -born, the first liv-
ing creature, felt as if the object of his life had 
been accomplished. A t that time he evolved 
from his mind the Manus, who promote the 
welfare activities or the universe  (49).The self -
possessed creator gave them his own human 
form. On seeing the Manus, those who had 
been created earlier  the demigods, the 
Gandharvas and so on   applauded Brahmā, the 
lord of the universe  (50).They prayed: O crea-
tor of the universe, we are glad; what you have 
produced is well done. Since ritualistic acts 
have now been established soundly in this hu-
man form, we shall all share the sacrificial ob-
lations  (51).  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

156 
 Having equipped himself with austere pen-
ance, adoration, mental concentration and ab-
sorption in devotion, accompanied by dispas-
sion, and having controlled his senses, Brahmā, 
the self -born living creature, evolved great 
sages as his beloved so ns (52).To each one of 
these sons the unborn creator of the universe 
gave a part of his own body, which was charac-
terized by deep meditation, mental concentra-
tion, supernatural power, austerity, adoration 
and renunciation  (53).  
SB 3.21: Conversation Betwe en Manu 
and Kardama  
Vidura said:  The line of Svāyambhuva 
Manu was most esteemed. O worshipful sage, I 
beg you: Give me an account of this race, 
whose progeny multiplied through sexual inter-
course  (1).The two great sons of Svāyambhuva 
Manu  Priyavrata and Uttānapāda  ruled the 
world, cons isting of seven islands, just accord-
ing to religious principles  (2).O holy brāhma ṇa, 
O sinless one, you have spoken of his daughter, 
known by the name Devahūti, as the wife of the 
sage Kardama, the lord of created beings  
(3).How many offspring did that gre at yogī be-
get through the princess, who was endowed 
with eightfold perfection in the yoga princi-
ples? Oh, pray tell me this, for I am eager to 
hear it  (4).O holy sage, tell me how the wor-
shipful Ruci and Dak ṣa, the son of Brahmā, 
generated children after s ecuring as their wives 
the other two daughters of Svāyambhuva Manu  
(5).  
The great sage Maitreya replied:  Com-
manded by Lord Brahmā to beget children in 
the worlds, the worshipful Kardama Muni prac-
ticed penance on the bank of the river Sarasvatī 
for a perio d of ten thousand years  (6).During 
that period of penance, the sage Kardama, by 
worship through devotional service in trance, 
propitiated the Personality of Godhead, who is 
the quick bestower of all blessings upon those 
who flee to Him for protection  (7).Then, in the 
Satya -yuga, the lotus -eyed Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, being pleased, showed Himself 
to that Kardama Muni and displayed His tran-
scendental form, which can be understood only 
through the Vedas  (8).  Kardama Muni saw the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, who is free from material con-
tamination, in His eternal form, effulgent like 
the sun, wearing a garland of white lotuses and 
water lilies. The Lord was clad in spotless yel-
low silk, and His lotus face was fringed with 
slick dark locks of curly h air (9).Adorned with 
a crown and earrings, He held His characteris-
tic conch, disc and mace in three of His hands 
and a white lily in the fourth. He glanced about 
in a happy, smiling mood whose sight capti-
vates the hearts of all devotees  (10).A golden 
strea k on His chest, the famous Kaustubha gem 
suspended from His neck, He stood in the air 
with His lotus feet placed on the shoulders of 
Garu ḍa (11).When Kardama Muni actually re-
alized the Supreme Personality of Godhead in 
person, he was greatly satisfied beca use his 
transcendental desire was fulfilled. He fell on 
the ground with his head bowed to offer obei-
sances unto the lotus feet of the Lord. His heart 
naturally full of love of God, with folded hands 
he satisfied the Lord with prayers  (12).  
The great sage Kardama said:  O supreme 
worshipful Lord, my power of sight is now ful-
filled, having attained the greatest  perfection of 
the sight of You, who are the reservoir of all 
existences. Through many successive births of 
deep meditation, advanced yogīs aspire to see 
Your transcendental form  (13).Your lotus feet 
are the true vessel to take one across the ocean 
of mund ane nescience. Only persons deprived 
of their intelligence by the spell of the deluding 
energy will worship those feet with a view to 
attain the trivial and momentary pleasures of 
the senses, which even persons rotting in hell 
can attain. However, O my Lor d, You are so 
kind that You bestow mercy even upon them  
(14).Therefore, desiring to marry a girl of like 
disposition who may prove to be a veritable 
cow of plenty in my married life, to satisfy my 
lustful desire I too have sought the shelter of 
Your lotus feet, which are the source of every-
thing, for You are like a desire tree  (15).O my 
Lord, You are the master and leader of all living 
entities. Under Your direction, all conditioned 
souls, as if bound by rope, are constantly en-
gaged in satisfying their desi res. Following 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

157 
 them, O embodiment of religion, I also bear ob-
lations for You, who are eternal time  (16).  
However, persons who have given up stere-
otyped worldly affairs and the beastly follow-
ers of these affairs, and who have taken shelter 
of the umbrella of Your lotus feet by drinking 
the intoxicating nectar of Your qualities and ac-
tivities in discussions with one another, can be 
freed from the primary necessities of the mate-
rial body  (17).Your wheel, which has three 
naves, rotates around the axis of the i mperisha-
ble Brahman. It has thirteen spokes, 360 joints, 
six rims and numberless leaves carved upon it. 
Though its revolution cuts short the life span of 
the entire creation, this wheel of tremendous 
velocity cannot touch the life span of the devo-
tees of t he Lord  (18).My dear Lord, You alone 
create the universes. O Personality of Godhead, 
desiring to create these universes, You create 
them, maintain them and again wind them up 
by Your own energies, which are under the 
control of Your second energy, called y oga-
māyā, just as a spider creates a cobweb by its 
own energy and again winds it up  (19).My dear 
Lord, although it is not Your desire, You man-
ifest this creation of gross and subtle elements 
just for our sensual satisfaction. Let Your 
causeless mercy be up on us, for You have ap-
peared before us in Your eternal form, adorned 
with a splendid wreath of tulasī leaves  (20).  
I continuously offer my respectful obei-
sances unto Your lotus feet, of which it is wor-
thy to take shelter, because You shower all ben-
edictio ns on the insignificant. To give all living 
entities detachment from fruitive activity by re-
alizing You, You have expanded these material 
worlds by Your own energy  (21).  
Maitreya resumed:  Sincerely extolled in 
these words, Lord Vi ṣṇu, shining very beauti-
fully on the shoulders of Garu ḍa, replied with 
words as sweet as nectar. His eyebrows moved 
gracefully as He looked at the sage with a smile 
full of affection  (22).  
The Supreme Lord said:  Having come to 
know what was in your mind, I have already 
arranged f or that for which you have worshiped 
Me well through your mental and sensory dis-
cipline  (23).The Lord continued: My dear ṛṣi, O leader of the living entities, for those who 
serve Me in devotion by worshiping Me, espe-
cially persons like you who have given u p eve-
rything unto Me, there is never any question of 
frustration  (24).The Emperor Svāyambhuva 
Manu, the son of Lord Brahmā, who is well 
known for his righteous acts, has his seat in 
Brahmāvarta and rules over the earth with its 
seven oceans  (25).The day af ter tomorrow, O 
brāhma ṇa, that celebrated emperor, who is ex-
pert in religious activities, will come here with 
his queen, Śatarūpā, wishing to see you  (26).He 
has a grown -up daughter whose eyes are black. 
She is ready for marriage, and she has good 
characte r and all good qualities. She is also 
searching for a good husband . My dear sir, her 
parents will come to see you, who are exactly 
suitable for her, just to deliver their daughter as 
your wife  (27).That princess, O holy sage, will 
be just the type you have  been thinking of in 
your heart for all these long years. She will 
soon be yours and will serve you to your heart’s 
content  (28).She will bring forth nine daughters 
from the seed sown in her by you, and through 
the daughters you beget, the sages will duly be-
get children  (29).With your heart cleansed by 
properly carrying out My command, resigning 
to Me the fruits of all your acts, you will finally 
attain to Me  (30).Showing compassion to all 
living entities, you will attain self -realization. 
Giving assurance of safety to all, you will per-
ceive your own self as well as all the universes 
in Me, and Myself in you  (31).O great sage, I 
shall manifest My own plenary portion through 
your wife, Devahūti, along with your nine 
daughters, and I shall instruct her in the system 
of philosophy that deals with the ultimate prin-
ciples or categories  (32).  
Maitreya went on:  Thus hav ing spoken to 
Kardama Muni, the Lord, who reveals Himself 
only when the senses are in K ṛṣṇa conscious-
ness, departed from that lake called Bindu -sa-
rovara, which was encircled by the river Saras-
vatī (33).While the sage stood looking on, the 
Lord left by the pathway leading to Vaiku ṇṭha, 
a path extolled by all great liberated souls. The 
sage stood listening as the hymns forming the 
basis of the Sāma Veda were vibrated by the 
flapping wings of the Lord’s carrier, Garu ḍa 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

158 
 (34).  
Then, after the departure of the L ord, the 
worshipful sage Kardama stayed on the bank of 
Bindu -sarovara, awaiting the time of which the 
Lord had spoken  (35).  Svāyambhuva Manu, 
with his wife, mounted his chariot, which was 
decorated with golden ornaments. Placing his 
daughter on it with th em, he began traveling all 
over the earth  (36).O Vidura, they reached the 
hermitage of the sage, who had just completed 
his vows of austerity on the very day foretold 
by the Lord  (37).The holy Lake Bindu -sa-
rovara, flooded by the waters of the river Sar-
asvatī, was resorted to by hosts of eminent 
sages. Its holy water was not only auspicious 
but as sweet as nectar. It was called Bindu -sa-
rovara because drops of tears had fallen there 
from the eyes of the Lord, who was over-
whelmed by extreme compassion for the sage 
who had sought His protection  (38-39).The 
shore of the lake was surrounded by clusters of 
pious trees and creepers, rich in fruits and flow-
ers of all seasons, that afforded shelter to pious 
animals and birds, which uttered various cries. 
It was adorne d by the beauty of groves of forest 
trees  (40).The area resounded with the notes of 
overjoyed birds. Intoxicated bees wandered 
there, intoxicated peacocks proudly danced, 
and merry cuckoos called one another  
(41).Lake Bindu -sarovara was adorned by 
flowerin g trees such as kadamba, campaka, 
aśoka, karañja, bakula, āsana, kunda, mandāra, 
kuṭaja and young mango trees. The air was 
filled with the pleasing notes of kāra ṇḍava 
ducks, plavas, swans, ospreys, waterfowl, 
cranes, cakravākas and cakoras  (42-43).Its 
shores abounded with deer, boars, porcupines, 
gavayas, elephants, baboons, lions, monkeys, 
mongooses and musk deer  (44).  
Entering that most sacred spot with his 
daughter and going near the sage, the first mon-
arch, Svāyambhuva Manu, saw the sage sitting 
in his  hermitage, having just propitiated the sa-
cred fire by pouring oblations into it. His body 
shone most brilliantly; though he had engaged 
in austere penance for a long time, he was not 
emaciated, for the Lord had cast His affection-
ate sidelong glance upon h im and he had also heard the nectar flowing from the moonlike 
words of the Lord. The sage was tall, his eyes 
were large, like the petals of a lotus, and he had 
matted locks on his head. He was clad in rags. 
Svāyambhuva Manu approached and saw him 
to be som ewhat soiled, like an unpolished gem  
(45-47).  Seeing that the monarch had come to 
his hermitage and was bowing before him, the 
sage greeted him with benediction and received 
him with due honor  (48).  
After receiving the sage’s attention, the 
King sat down  and was silent. Recalling the in-
structions of the Lord, Kardama then spoke to 
the King as follows, delighting him with his 
sweet accents  (49).The tour you have under-
taken, O lord, is surely intended to protect the 
virtuous and kill the demons, since you e mbody 
the protecting energy of Śrī Hari  (50). When 
necessary, You assume the part of the sun -god; 
the moon -god; Agni, the god of fire; Indra, the 
lord of paradise; Vāyu, the wind -god; Yama, 
the god of punishment; Dharma, the god of pi-
ety; and Varu ṇa, the g od presiding over the wa-
ters. All obeisances to you, who are none other 
than Lord Vi ṣṇu! (51) If you did not mount 
your victorious jeweled chariot, whose mere 
presence threatens culprits, if you did not pro-
duce fierce sounds by the twanging of your 
bow, an d if you did not roam about the world 
like the brilliant sun, leading a huge army 
whose trampling feet cause the globe of the 
earth to tremble, then all the moral laws gov-
erning the var ṇas and āśramas created by the 
Lord Himself would be broken by the rogu es 
and rascals  (52-54).  If you gave up all thought 
of the world’s situation, unrighteousness would 
flourish, for men who hanker only after money 
would be unopposed. Such miscreants would 
attack, and the world would perish  (55).In spite 
of all this, I ask you, O valiant King, the pur-
pose for which you have come here. Whatever 
it may be, we shall carry it out without reserva-
tion (56).  
SB 3.22: The Marriage of Kardama 
Muni and Devahūti  
Śrī Maitreya said:  After describing the 
greatness of the Emperor’s manifold qualities 
and activities, the sage became silent, and the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

159 
 Emperor, feeling modesty, addressed him as 
follows  (1).  
Manu replied:  To expand himself in Vedic 
knowledge, Lord Brahmā, the personified 
Veda, from his face created you, the 
brāhma ṇas, who are full of austerity, 
knowledge and mystic power and are averse to 
sense gratification  (2).For the protection of the 
brāhma ṇas, the thousan d-legged Supreme Be-
ing created us, the k ṣatriyas, from His thousand 
arms. Hence the brāhma ṇas are said to be His 
heart and the k ṣatriyas His arms  (3).That is why 
the brāhma ṇas and k ṣatriyas protect each other, 
as well as themselves; and the Lord Himself, 
who is both the cause and effect and is yet im-
mutable, protects them through each other  
(4).Now I have resolved all my doubts simply 
by meeting you, for Your Lordship has very 
kindly and clearly explained the duty of a king 
who desires to protect his subjec ts (5).It is my 
good fortune that I have been able to see you, 
for you cannot easily be seen by persons who 
have not subdued the mind or controlled the 
senses. I am all the more fortunate to have 
touched with my head the blessed dust of your 
feet (6). I have fortunately been instructed by 
you, and thus great favor has been bestowed 
upon me. I thank God that I have listened with 
open ears to your pure words  (7). 
O great sage, graciously be pleased to listen 
to the prayer of my humble self, for my mind is 
troubled by affection for my daughter  (8).My 
daughter is the sister of Priyavrata and Ut-
tānapāda. She is seeking a suitable husband  in 
terms of age, character and good qualities  (9). 
The moment she heard from the sage Nārada of 
your noble character, learning, beautiful ap-
pearance, youth and other  virtues, she fixed her 
mind upon you  (10).Therefore please accept 
her, O chief of the brāhma ṇas, for I offer her 
with faith and she is in every respect fit to be 
your wife and take charge of your household 
duties  (11).To deny an offering that has come 
of itself is not commendable even for one abso-
lutely free from all attachment, much less one 
addicted to sensual pleasure  (12).One who re-
jects an offering that comes of its own accord 
but later begs a boon from a miser thus loses his widespread reputation, an d his pride is hum-
bled by the neglectful behavior of others  (13).  
Svāyambhuva Manu continued: O wise man, I 
heard that you were prepared to marry. Please 
accept her hand, which is being offered to you 
by me, since you have not taken a vow of per-
petual celibacy  (14).  
The great sage replied:  Certainly I have a 
desire t o marry, and your daughter has not yet 
married or given her word to anyone. Therefore 
our marriage according to the Vedic system can 
take place  (15).Let your daughter’s desire for 
marriage, which is recognized in the Vedic 
scriptures, be fulfilled. Who wou ld not accept 
her hand? She is so beautiful that by her bodily 
luster alone she excels the beauty of her orna-
ments  (16).I have heard that Viśvāvasu, the 
great Gandharva, his mind stupefied with infat-
uation, fell from his airplane after seeing your 
daughter playing with a ball on the roof of the 
palace, for she was indeed beautiful with her 
tinkling ankle bells and her eyes  moving to and 
fro (17).What wise man would not welcome 
her, the very ornament of womanhood, the be-
loved daughter of Svāyambhuva Manu and sis-
ter of Uttānapāda? Those who have not wor-
shiped the gracious feet of the goddess of for-
tune cannot even perceive he r, yet she has come 
of her own accord to seek my hand  (18).There-
fore I shall accept this chaste girl as my wife, 
on the condition that after she bears semen from 
my body, I shall accept the life of devotional 
service accepted by the most perfect human be-
ings. That process was described by Lord 
Viṣṇu. It is free from envy  (19).  The highest au-
thority for me is the unlimited Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, from whom this wonderful 
creation emanates and in whom its sustenance 
and dissolution rest. He is the ori gin of all 
Prajāpatis, the personalities meant to produce 
living entities in this world  (20).  
Śrī Maitreya said: O great warrior Vidura, 
the sage Kardama said this much only and then 
became silent, thinking of his worshipable Lord 
Viṣṇu, who has a lotus o n His navel. As he si-
lently smiled, his face captured the mind of 
Devahūti, who began to meditate upon the great 
sage (21).After having unmistakably known 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

160 
 the decision of the Queen, as well as that of 
Devahūti, the Emperor most gladly gave his 
daughter to the sage, whose host of virtues was 
equaled by hers  (22). Empress Śatarūpā lov-
ingly gave most valuable presents, suitable for 
the occasion, such as jewelry, clothes and 
household articles, in dowry to the bride and 
bridegroom  (23).Thus relieved of his resp onsi-
bility by handing over his daughter to a suitable 
man, Svāyambhuva Manu, his mind agitated by 
feelings of separation, embraced his affection-
ate daughter with both his arms  (24).The Em-
peror was unable to bear the separation of his 
daughter. Therefore te ars poured from his eyes 
again and again, drenching his daughter’s head 
as he cried, “My dear mother! My dear daugh-
ter!” (25)  After asking and obtaining the great 
sage’s permission to leave, the monarch 
mounted his chariot with his wife and started 
for hi s capital, followed by his retinue. Along 
the way he saw the prosperity of the tranquil 
seers’ beautiful hermitages on both the charm-
ing banks of t he Sarasvatī, the river so agreea-
ble to saintly persons  (26-27).  
Overjoyed to know of his arrival, his sub-
jects came forth from Brahmāvarta to greet 
their returning lord with songs, prayers and mu-
sical instruments  (28).  The city of Barhi ṣmatī, 
rich in al l kinds of wealth, was so called be-
cause Lord Vi ṣṇu’s hair dropped there from His 
body when He manifested Himself as Lord 
Boar. As He shook His body, this very hair fell 
and turned into blades of evergreen kuśa grass 
and kāśa [another kind of grass used fo r mats], 
by means of which the sages worshiped Lord 
Viṣṇu after defeating the demons who had in-
terfered with the performance of their sacrifices  
(29-30).Manu spread a seat of kuśas and kāśas 
and worshiped the Lord, the Personality of 
Godhead, by whose grac e he had obtained the 
rule of the terrestrial globe  (31).  
Having entered the city of Barhi ṣmatī, in 
which he had previously lived, Manu entered 
his palace, which was filled with an atmosphere 
that eradicated the three miseries of material 
existence  (32).Emperor Svāyambhuva Manu 
enjoyed life with his wife and subjects and ful-filled his desires without being disturbed by un-
wanted principles contrary to the process of re-
ligion. Celestial musicians and their wives sang 
in chorus about the pure reputation of th e Em-
peror, and early in the morning, every day, he 
used to listen to the pastimes of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead with a loving heart  
(33).Thus Svāyambhuva Manu was a saintly 
king. Although absorbed in material happiness, 
he was not dragged to the lo west grade of life, 
for he always enjoyed his material happiness in 
a Kṛṣṇa conscious atmosphere  (34).Conse-
quently, although his duration of life gradually 
came to an end, his long life, consisting of a 
Manvantara era, was not spent in vain, since he 
ever engaged in hearing, contemplating, writ-
ing down and chanting the pastimes of the Lord  
(35).He passed his time, which lasted seventy -
one cycles of the four ages [71 × 4,320,000 
years], always thinking of Vāsudeva and al-
ways engaged in matters regarding Vāsu deva. 
Thus he transcended the three destinations  
(36).Therefore, O Vidura, how can persons 
completely under the shelter of Lord K ṛṣṇa in 
devotional service be put into miseries pertain-
ing to the body, the mind, nature, and other men 
and living creatures? (37)  In reply to questions 
asked by certain sages, he [Svāyambhuva 
Manu], out of compassion for all living entities, 
taught the diverse sacred duties of men in gen-
eral and the different var ṇas and āśramas  (38).  
I have spoken to you of the wonderful char-
acter of Svāyambhuva Manu, the original king, 
whose reputation is worthy of description. 
Please hear as I speak of the flourishing of his 
daughter Devahūti  (39).  
SB 3.23: Devahūti’s Lamentation  
Maitreya continued:  After the departure of 
her parents, the cha ste woman Devahūti, who 
could understand the desires of her husband , 
served him constantly with great love, as 
Bhavānī, the wife of Lord Śiva, serves her hus-
band  (1).O Vidura, Devahūti served her hus-
band  with intimacy and great respect, with con-
trol of the  senses, with love and with sweet 
words  (2).Working sanely and diligently, she 
pleased her very powerful husband , giving up 
all lust, pride, envy, greed, sinful activities and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

161 
 vanity  (3).The daughter of Manu, who was 
fully devoted to her husband , looked up on him 
as greater even than providence. Thus she ex-
pected great blessings from him. Having served 
him for a long time, she grew weak and emaci-
ated due to her religious observances. Seeing 
her condition, Kardama, the foremost of celes-
tial sages, was overcom e with compassion and 
spoke to her in a voice choked with great love  
(4-5).  
Kardama Muni said:  O respectful daugh-
ter of Svāyambhuva Manu, today I am very 
much pleased with you for your great devotion 
and most excellent loving service. Since the 
body is so  dear to embodied beings, I am aston-
ished that you have neglected your own body 
to use it on my behalf  (6). Kardama Muni con-
tinued: I have achieved the blessings of the 
Lord in discharging my own religious life of 
austerity, meditation and K ṛṣṇa consciousn ess. 
Although you have not yet experienced these 
achievements, which are free from fear and 
lamentation, I shall offer them all to you be-
cause you are engaged in my service. Now just 
look at them. I am giving you the transcenden-
tal vision to see how nice t hey are  (7).Kardama 
Muni continued: What is the use of enjoyments 
other than the Lord’s grace? All material 
achievements are subject to be annihilated 
simply by a movement of the eyebrows of Lord 
Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
By your principles of devoti on to your husband , 
you have achieved and can enjoy transcenden-
tal gifts very rarely obtained by persons proud 
of aristocracy and material possessions  (8).  
Upon hearing the speaking of her husband , 
who excelled in knowledge of all kinds of tran-
scendental science, innocent Devahūti was 
very satisfied. Her smiling face shining with a 
slightly bashful glance, she spoke in a choked 
voice because of great humility and love  (9).  
Śrī Devahūti said:  My dear husband , O best 
of brāhma ṇas, I know that you have achie ved 
perfection and are the master of all the infallible 
mystic powers because you are under the pro-
tection of yoga -māyā, the transcendental na-
ture. But you once made a promise that our 
bodily union should now fulfill, since children are a great quality for  a chaste woman who has 
a glorious husband  (10).Devahūti continued: 
My dear lord, I am struck by excited emotion 
for you. Therefore kindly make what arrange-
ments must be made according to the scriptures 
so that my skinny body, emaciated through un-
satisfied  passion, may be rendered fit for you. 
Also, my lord, please think of a suitable house 
for this purpose  (11).  
Maitreya continued:  O Vidura, seeking to 
please his beloved wife, the sage Kardama ex-
ercised his yogic power and instantly produced 
an aerial man sion that could travel at his will  
(12).It was a wonderful structure, bedecked 
with all sorts of jewels, adorned with pillars of 
precious stones, and capable of yielding what-
ever one desired. It was equipped with every 
form of furniture and wealth, which t ended to 
increase in the course of time  (13). The castle 
was fully equipped with all necessary parapher-
nalia, and it was pleasing in all seasons. It was 
decorated all around with flags, festoons and 
artistic work of variegated colors. It was further 
embell ished with wreaths of charming flowers 
that attracted sweetly humming bees and with 
tapestries of linen, silk and various other fabrics  
(14-15).The palace looked charming, with 
beds, couches, fans and seats, all separately ar-
ranged in seven stories  (16).Its beauty was en-
hanced by artistic engravings here and there on 
the walls. The floor was of emerald, with coral 
daises  (17).The palace was very beautiful, with 
its coral thresholds at the entrances and its 
doors bedecked with diamonds. Gold pinnacles 
crowne d its domes of sapphire  (18).With the 
choicest rubies set in its diamond walls, it ap-
peared as though possessed of eyes. It was fur-
nished with wonderful canopies and greatly 
valuable gates of gold  (19).Here and there in 
that palace were multitudes of live swans and 
pigeons, as well as artificial swans and pigeons 
so lifelike that the real swans rose above them 
again and again, thinking them live birds like 
themselves. Thus the palace vibrated with the 
sounds of these birds  (20).The castle had pleas-
ure groun ds, resting chambers, bedrooms and 
inner and outer yards designed with an eye to 
comfort. All this caused astonishment to the 
sage himself  (21).  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

162 
 When he saw Devahūti looking at the gigan-
tic opulent palace with a displeased heart, Kar-
dama Muni could understand her feelings be-
cause he could study the heart of anyone. Thus 
he personally addressed his wife as follows  
(22).My dear Devahūti, you look ver y much 
afraid. First bathe in Lake Bindu -sarovara, cre-
ated by Lord Vi ṣṇu Himself, which can grant 
all the desires of a human being, and then 
mount this airplane  (23).  
The lotus -eyed Devahūti accepted the order 
of her husband . Because of her dirty dress an d 
the locks of matted hair on her head, she did not 
look very attractive  (24).Her body was coated 
with a thick layer of dirt, and her breasts were 
discolored. She dove, however, into the lake, 
which contained the sacred waters of the Saras-
vatī (25).In a ho use inside the lake she saw one 
thousand girls, all in the prime of youth and fra-
grant like lotuses  (26).Seeing her, the damsels 
suddenly rose and said with folded hands, “We 
are your maidservants.  Tell us what we can do 
for you ” (27).  
The girls, being ver y respectful to Devahūti, 
brought her forth, and after bathing her with 
valuable oils and ointments, they gave her fine, 
new, spotless cloth to cover her body  (28).They 
then decorated her with very excellent and val-
uable jewels, which shone brightly. Next they 
offered her food containing all good qualities, 
and a sweet inebriating drink called āsavam  
(29).Then in a mirror she beheld her own re-
flection. Her body was completely freed from 
all dirt, and she was adorned with a garland. 
Dressed in unsullied robe s and decorated with 
auspicious marks of tilaka, she was served very 
respectfully by the maids  (30).  Her entire body, 
including her head, was completely bathed, and 
she was decorated all over with ornaments. She 
wore a special necklace with a locket. Ther e 
were bangles on her wrists and tinkling anklets 
of gold about her ankles  (31).  About her hips 
she wore a girdle of gold, set with numerous 
jewels, and she was further adorned with a pre-
cious pearl necklace and auspicious substances  
(32). Her countenance  shone, with beautiful 
teeth and charming eyebrows. Her eyes, distin-
guished by lovely moist corners, defeated the beauty of lotus buds. Her face was surrounded 
by dark curling tresses  (33).When she thought 
of her great husband , the best of the sages, Kar-
dama Muni, who was very dear to her, she, 
along with all the maidservants, at once ap-
peared where he was  (34). She was amazed to 
find herself surrounded by a thousand maids in 
the presence of her husband  and to witness his 
yogic power  (35).  
The sage could s ee that Devahūti had 
washed herself clean and was shining forth as 
though no longer his former wife. She had re-
gained her own original beauty as the daughter 
of a prince. Dressed in excellent robes, her 
charming breasts duly girded, she was waited 
upon by a thousand Gandharva girls. O de-
stroyer of the enemy, his fondness for her grew, 
and he placed her on the aerial mansion  (36-
37).Though seemingly attached to his beloved 
consort while served by the Gandharva girls, 
the sage did not lose his glory, which wa s mas-
tery over his self. In the aerial mansion, Kar-
dama Muni with his consort shone as charm-
ingly as the moon in the midst of the stars in the 
sky, which causes rows of lilies to open in 
ponds at night  (38). In that aerial mansion he 
traveled to the pleasu re valleys of Mount Meru, 
which were rendered all the more beautiful by 
cool, gentle, fragrant breezes that stimulated 
passion. In these valleys, the treasurer of the 
gods, Kuvera, surrounded by beautiful women 
and praised by the Siddhas, generally enjoys 
pleasure. Kardama Muni also, surrounded by 
the beautiful damsels and his wife, went there 
and enjoyed for many, many years  (39).  
Satisfied by his wife, he enjoyed in that aer-
ial mansion not only on Mount Meru but in dif-
ferent gardens known as Vaiśrambhaka, Su-
rasana, Nandana, Pu ṣpabhadraka and Cai-
trarathya, and by the Mānasa -sarovara Lake  
(40).He traveled in that way through the vari-
ous planets, as the air passes uncontrolled in 
every direction. Coursing through the air in that 
great and splendid aerial mansion, which could 
fly at his will, he surpassed even the demigods  
(41).What is difficult to achieve for determined 
men who have ta ken refuge of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead’s lotus feet? His feet 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

163 
 are the source of sacred rivers like the Ganges, 
which put an end to the dangers of mundane life  
(42).  
After showing his wife the globe of the uni-
verse and its different arrangements,  full of 
many wonders, the great yogī Kardama Muni 
returned to his own hermitage  (43). After com-
ing back to his hermitage, he divided himself 
into nine personalities just to give pleasure to 
Devahūti, the daughter of Manu, who was ea-
ger for sex life. In th at way he enjoyed with her 
for many, many years, which passed just like a 
moment  (44).In that aerial mansion, Devahūti, 
in the company of her handsome husband , situ-
ated on an excellent bed that increased sexual 
desires, could not realize how much time was 
passing  (45).While the couple, who eagerly 
longed for sexual pleasure, were thus enjoying 
themselves by virtue of mystic powers, a hun-
dred autumns passed like a brief span of time  
(46).The powerful Kardama Muni was the 
knower of everyone’s heart, and he co uld grant 
whatever one desired. Knowing the spiritual 
soul, he regarded her as half of his body. Divid-
ing himself into nine forms, he impregnated 
Devahūti with nine discharges of semen  
(47).Immediately afterward, on the same day, 
Devahūti gave birth to nin e female children, all 
charming in every limb and fragrant with the 
scent of the red lotus flower  (48). When she 
saw her husband  about to leave home, she 
smiled externally, but at heart she was agitated 
and distressed  (49).She stood and scratched the 
groun d with her foot, which was radiant with 
the luster of her gemlike nails. Her head bent 
down, she spoke in slow yet charming accents, 
suppressing her tears  (50).  
Śrī Devahūti said:  My lord, you have ful-
filled all the promises you gave me, yet because 
I am your surrendered soul, you should give me 
fearlessness too  (51).My dear brāhma ṇa, as far 
as your daughters are concerned, they will find 
their own suitable husban ds and go away to 
their respective homes. But who will give me 
solace after your departure as a sannyāsī? 
(52)Until now we have simply wasted so much 
of our time in sense gratification, neglecting to 
cultivate knowledge of the Supreme Lord  (53).Not knowing  your transcendental situa-
tion, I have loved you while remaining attached 
to the objects of the senses. Nonetheless, let the 
affinity I have developed for you rid me of all 
fear (54).Association for sense gratification is 
certainly the path of bondage. But  the same 
type of association, performed with a saintly 
person, leads to the path of liberation, even if 
performed without knowledge  (55).  Anyone 
whose work is not meant to elevate him to reli-
gious life, anyone whose religious ritualistic 
performances do not raise him to renunciation, 
and anyone situated in renunciation that does 
not lead him to devotional service to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, must be consid-
ered dead, although he is breathing  (56).My 
lord, surely I have been solidly cheated by the  
insurmountable illusory energy of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, for in spite of having 
obtained your association, which gives libera-
tion from material bondage, I did not seek such 
liberation  (57).  
SB 3.24: The Renunciation of Kardama 
Muni  
Recalling  the words of Lord Vi ṣṇu, the mer-
ciful sage Kardama replied as follows to 
Svāyambhuva Manu’s praiseworthy daughter, 
Devahūti, who was speaking words full of re-
nunciation  (1).  
The sage said:  Do not be disappointed with 
yourself, O princess. You are actuall y praise-
worthy. The infallible Supreme Personality of 
Godhead will shortly enter your womb as your 
son (2).You have undertaken sacred vows. God 
will bless you. Hence you should worship the 
Lord with great faith, through sensory control, 
religious observanc es, austerities and gifts of 
your money in charity  (3).The Personality of 
Godhead, being worshiped by you, will spread 
my name and fame. He will vanquish the knot 
of your heart by becoming your son and teach-
ing knowledge of Brahman  (4).  
Śrī Maitreya said:  Devahūti was fully 
faithful and respectful toward the direction of 
her husband , Kardama, who was one of the 
Prajāpatis, or generators of human beings in the 
universe. O great sage, she thus began to wor-
ship the master of the universe, th e Supreme 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

164 
 Personality of Godhead, who is situated in eve-
ryone’s heart  (5).After many, many years, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Madhusūdana, the killer of the demon Madhu, 
having entered the semen of Kardama, ap-
peared in Devahūti just as fire comes f rom 
wood in a sacrifice  (6).At the time of His de-
scent on earth, demigods in the form of raining 
clouds sounded musical instruments in the sky. 
The celestial musicians, the Gandharvas, sang 
the glories of the Lord, while celestial dancing 
girls known as Ap sarās danced in joyful ecstasy  
(7).At the time of the Lord’s appearance, the 
demigods flying freely in the sky showered 
flowers. All the directions, all the waters and 
everyone’s mind became very satisfied  
(8).Brahmā, the first -born living being, went 
along with Marīci and other sages to the place 
of Kardama’s hermitage, which was sur-
rounded by the river Sarasvatī  (9).  Maitreya 
continued: O killer of the enemy, the unborn 
Lord Brahmā, who is almost independent in ac-
quiring knowledge, could understand that a 
portion of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, in His quality of pure existence, had ap-
peared in the womb of Devahūti just to explain 
the complete state of knowledge known as 
sāṅkhya -yoga  (10).After worshiping the Su-
preme Lord with gladdened senses and a  pure 
heart for His intended activities as an incarna-
tion, Brahmā spoke as follows to Kardama and 
Devahūti  (11).  
Lord Brahmā said : My dear son Kardama, 
since you have completely accepted my in-
structions without duplicity, showing them 
proper respect, you have worshiped me 
properly. Whatever instructions you took from 
me you have carried out, and thereby you have 
honored me  (12).Sons ought to render service 
to their father exactly to this extent. One should 
obey the command of his father or spiritual 
master  with due deference, saying, “Yes, sir.”  
(13)Lord Brahmā then praised Kardama 
Muni’s nine daughters, saying: All your thin -
waisted daughters are certainly very chaste. I 
am sure they will increase this creation by their 
own descendants in various ways  (14).There-
fore, today please give away your daugh ters to 
the foremost of the sages, with due regard for the girls’ temperaments and likings, and 
thereby spread your fame all over the universe  
(15).O Kardama, I know that the original Su-
preme Personality of Godhead has now ap-
peared as an incarnation by His  internal energy. 
He is the bestower of all that is desired by the 
living entities, and He has now assumed the 
body of Kapila Muni  (16).By mystic yoga and 
the practical application of knowledge from the 
scriptures, Kapila Muni, who is characterized 
by His golden hair, His eyes just like lotus pet-
als and His lotus feet, which bear the marks of 
lotus flowers, will uproot the deep -rooted de-
sire for work in this material world  (17).Lord 
Brahmā then told Devahūti: My dear daughter 
of Manu, the same Supreme Perso nality of 
Godhead who killed the demon Kai ṭabha is 
now within your womb. He will cut off all the 
knots of your ignorance and doubt. Then He 
will travel all over the world  (18).Your son will 
be the head of all the perfected souls. He will 
be approved by the  ācāryas expert in dissemi-
nating real knowledge, and among the people 
He will be celebrated by the name Kapila. As 
the son of Devahūti, He will increase your fame  
(19).  
Śrī Maitreya said : After thus speaking to 
Kardama Muni and his wife Devahūti, Lord 
Brahmā, the creator of the universe, who is also 
known as Ha ṁsa, went back to the highest of 
the three planetary systems on his swan carrier 
with the four Kumāras and Nārada  (20).O 
Vidura, after the departure of Brahmā, Kar-
dama Muni, having been ordered by Br ahmā, 
handed over his nine daughters, as instructed, 
to the nine great sages who created the popula-
tion of the world  (21). Kardama Muni handed 
over his daughter Kalā to Marīci, and another 
daughter, Anasūyā, to Atri. He delivered 
Śraddhā to A ṅgirā, and Hav irbhū to Pulastya. 
He delivered Gati to Pulaha, the chaste Kriyā to 
Kratu, Khyāti to Bh ṛgu, and Arundhatī to Va-
siṣṭha (22-23).He delivered Śānti to Atharvā. 
Because of Śānti, sacrificial ceremonies are 
well performed. Thus he got the foremost 
brāhma ṇas mar ried, and he maintained them 
along with their wives  (24). Thus married, the 
sages took leave of Kardama and departed full 
of joy, each for his own hermitage, O Vidura  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

165 
 (25).  
When Kardama Muni understood that the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the chief of  
all the demigods, Vi ṣṇu, had descended, Kar-
dama approached Him in a secluded place, of-
fered obeisances and spoke as follows  (26). 
Kardama Muni said: Oh, after a long time the 
demigods of this universe have become pleased 
with the suffering souls who are i n material en-
tanglement because of their own misdeeds  
(27).After many births, mature yogīs, by com-
plete trance in yoga, endeavor in secluded 
places to see the lotus feet of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead  (28).Not considering the 
negligence of ordinary householders like us, 
that very same Supreme Personality of God-
head appears in our homes just to support His 
devotees  (29).Kardama Muni said: You, my 
dear Lord, who are always increasing the honor 
of Your devotees, have descended in my home 
just to fulfill  Your word and disseminate the 
process of real knowledge  (30).My dear Lord, 
although You have no material form, You have 
Your own innumerable forms. They truly are 
Your transcendental forms, which are pleasing 
to Your devotees  (31). My dear Lord, Your lo-
tus feet are the reservoir that always deserves to 
receive worshipful homage from all great sages 
eager to understand the Absolute Truth. You 
are full in opulence, renunciation, transcenden-
tal fame, knowledge, strength and beauty, and 
therefore I surrender m yself unto Your lotus 
feet (32).I surrender unto the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, descended in the form of Ka-
pila, who is independently powerful and tran-
scendental, who is the Supreme Person and the 
Lord of the sum total of matter and the element 
of tim e, who is the fully cognizant maintainer 
of all the universes under the three modes of 
material nature, and who absorbs the material 
manifestations after their dissolution  (33).To-
day I have something to ask from You, who are 
the Lord of all living entities . Since I have now 
been liberated by You from my debts to my fa-
ther, and since all my desires are fulfilled, I 
wish to accept the order of an itinerant mendi-
cant. Renouncing this family life, I wish to 
wander about, free from lamentation, thinking 
always o f You in my heart  (34).  The Personality of Godhead Kapila said : 
Whatever I speak, whether directly or in the 
scriptures, is authoritative in all respects for the 
people of the world. O Muni, because I told you 
before that I would become your son, I have d e-
scended to fulfill this truth  (35).My appearance 
in this world is especially to explain the philos-
ophy of Sā ṅkhya, which is highly esteemed for 
self-realization by those desiring freedom from 
the entanglement of unnecessary material de-
sires (36).This path of self -realization, which is 
difficult to understand, has now been lost in the 
course of time. Please know that I have as-
sumed this body of Kapila to introduce and ex-
plain this philosophy to human society again  
(37).Now, being sanctioned by Me, go as you 
desire, surrendering all your acti vities to Me. 
Conquering insurmountable death, worship Me 
for eternal life  (38).In your own heart, through 
your intellect, you will always see Me, the su-
preme self -effulgent soul dwelling within the 
hearts of all living entities. Thus you will 
achieve the state of eternal life, free from all 
lamentation and fear  (39).I shall also describe 
this sublime knowledge, which is the door to 
spiritual life, to My mother, so that she also can 
attain perfection and self -realization, ending all 
reactions to fruitive ac tivities. Thus she also 
will be freed from all material fear  (40).  
Śrī Maitreya said:  Thus when Kardama 
Muni, the progenitor of human society, was 
spoken to in fullness by his son, Kapila, he cir-
cumambulated Him, and with a good, pacified 
mind he at once left for the forest  (41).  
The sage Kardama accepted silence as a vo w 
in order to think of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and take shelter of Him exclusively. 
Without association, he traveled over the sur-
face of the globe as a sannyāsī, devoid of any 
relationship with fire or shelter  (42).He fixed 
his mind upon the Sup reme Personality of God-
head, Parabrahman, who is beyond cause and 
effect, who manifests the three modes of mate-
rial nature, who is beyond those three modes, 
and who is perceived only through unfailing 
devotional service  (43). Thus he gradually be-
came unaff ected by the false ego of material 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

166 
 identity and became free from material affec-
tion. Undisturbed, equal to everyone and with-
out duality, he could indeed see himself also. 
His mind was turned inward and was perfectly 
calm, like an ocean unagitated by waves  
(44).He thus became liberated from condi-
tioned life and became self -situated in transcen-
dental devotional service to the Personality of 
Godhead, Vāsudeva, the omniscient Supersoul 
within everyone  (45).He began to see that the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead  is seated in 
everyone’s heart, and that everyone is existing 
on Him, because He is the Supersoul of every-
one (46).Freed from all hatred and desire, Kar-
dama Muni, being equal to everyone because of 
discharging uncontaminated devotional ser-
vice, ultimately attained the path back to God-
head (47).  
SB 3.25: The Glories of Devotional Ser-
vice 
ŚrīŚaunaka said : Although He is unborn, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead took birth 
as Kapila Muni by His internal potency. He de-
scended to disseminate transcendental 
knowledge for the benefit of the whole human 
race (1).Śaunaka continued: There is no on e 
who knows more than the Lord Himself. No 
one is more worshipable or more mature a yogī 
than He. He is therefore the master of the Ve-
das, and to hear about Him always is the actual 
pleasure of the senses  (2).Therefore please pre-
cisely describe all the act ivities and pastimes of 
the Personality of Godhead, who is full of self -
desire and who assumes all these activities by 
His internal potency  (3).  
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said : The most powerful 
sage Maitreya was a friend of Vyāsadeva. Be-
ing encouraged and pleased  by Vidura’s in-
quiry about transcendental knowledge, Mait-
reya spoke as follows  (4).  
Maitreya said:  When Kardama left for the 
forest, Lord Kapila stayed on the strand of the 
Bindu -sarovara to please His mother, Devahūti  
(5).When Kapila, who could show her the ulti-
mate goal of the Absolute Truth, was sitting lei-
surely before her, Devahūti remembered the 
words Brahmā had spoken to her, and she 
therefore began to question Kapila as follows  (6).  
Devahūti said:  I am very sick of the disturb-
ance caused by my mat erial senses, for because 
of this sense disturbance, my Lord, I have fallen 
into the abyss of ignorance  (7).Your Lordship 
is my only means of getting out of this darkest 
region of ignorance because You are my tran-
scendental eye, which, by Your mercy only, I 
have attained after many, many births  (8). You 
are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
origin and Supreme Lord of all living entities. 
You have arisen to disseminate the rays of the 
sun in order to dissipate the darkness of the ig-
norance of the unive rse (9).Now be pleased, my 
Lord, to dispel my great delusion. Due to my 
feeling of false ego, I have been engaged by 
Your māyā and have identified myself with the 
body and consequent bodily relations  
(10).Devahūti continued: I have taken shelter 
of Your lo tus feet because You are the only per-
son of whom to take shelter. You are the ax 
which can cut the tree of material existence. I 
therefore offer my obeisances unto You, who 
are the greatest of all transcendentalists, and I 
inquire from You as to the relati onship between 
man and woman and between spirit and matter  
(11).  
Maitreya said:  After hearing of His 
mother’s uncontaminated desire for transcen-
dental realization, the Lord thanked her within 
Himself for her questions, and thus, His face 
smiling, He expla ined the path of the transcen-
dentalists, who are interested in self -realization  
(12).  
The Personality of Godhead answered:  
The yoga system which relates to the Lord and 
the individual soul, which is meant for the ulti-
mate benefit of the living entity, and  which 
causes detachment from all happiness and dis-
tress in the material world, is the highest yoga 
system  (13).O most pious mother, I shall now 
explain unto you the ancient yoga system, 
which I explained formerly to the great sages. 
It is serviceable and practical in every way  (14).  
The stage in which the consciousness of the 
living entity is attracted by the three modes of 
material nature is called conditional life. But 
when that same consciousness is attached to the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

167 
 Supreme Personality of Godhead, one i s situ-
ated in the consciousness of liberation  (15). 
When one is completely cleansed of the impu-
rities of lust and greed produced from the false 
identification of the body as “I” and bodily pos-
sessions as “mine,” one’s mind becomes puri-
fied. In that pure st ate he transcends the stage 
of so -called material happiness and distress  
(16).At that time the soul can see himself to be 
transcendental to material existence and always 
self-effulgent, never fragmented, although very 
minute in size  (17).In that position o f self -real-
ization, by practice of knowledge and renunci-
ation in devotional service, one sees everything 
in the right perspective; he becomes indifferent 
to material existence, and the material influ-
ence acts less powerfully upon him  (18).Perfec-
tion in sel f-realization cannot be attained by 
any kind of yogī unless he engages in devo-
tional service to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, for that is the only auspicious path  
(19).Every learned man knows very well that 
attachment for the material is the greatest  en-
tanglement of the spirit soul. But that same at-
tachment, when applied to the self -realized 
devotees, opens the door of liberation  (20).  
The symptoms of a sādhu are that he is tol-
erant, merciful and friendly to all living enti-
ties. He has no enemies, he  is peaceful, he 
abides by the scriptures, and all his characteris-
tics are sublime  (21).Such a sādhu engages in 
staunch devotional service to the Lord without 
deviation. For the sake of the Lord he re-
nounces all other connections, such as family 
relationsh ips and friendly acquaintances within 
the world  (22).Engaged constantly in chanting 
and hearing about Me, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, the sādhus do not suffer from ma-
terial miseries because they are always filled 
with thoughts of My pastimes and ac tivities  
(23).O My mother, O virtuous lady, these are 
the qualities of great devotees who are free 
from all attachment. You must seek attachment 
to such holy men, for this counteracts the per-
nicious effects of material attachment  (24).In 
the association of  pure devotees, discussion of 
the pastimes and activities of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is very pleasing and satis-
fying to the ear and the heart. By cultivating such knowledge one gradually becomes ad-
vanced on the path of liberation, and thereafter  
he is freed, and his attraction becomes fixed. 
Then real devotion and devotional service 
begin  (25).Thus consciously engaged in devo-
tional service in the association of devotees, a 
person gains distaste for sense gratification, 
both in this world and in t he next, by constantly 
thinking about the activities of the Lord. This 
process of K ṛṣṇa consciousness is the easiest 
process of mystic power; when one is actually 
situated on that path of devotional service, he is 
able to control the mind  (26).Thus by not en-
gaging in the service of the modes of material 
nature but by developing K ṛṣṇa consciousness, 
knowledge in renunciation, and by practicing 
yoga, in which the mind is always fixed in de-
votional service unto the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, one achieves My association in 
this very life, for I am the Supreme Personality, 
the Absolute Truth  (27).  
On hearing this statement of the Lord, 
Devahūti inquired : What kind of devotional 
service is worth developing and practicing to 
help me easily and immediately att ain the ser-
vice of Your lotus feet? (28) The mystic yoga 
system, as You have explained, aims at the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead and is meant for 
completely ending material existence. Please 
let me know the nature of that yoga system. 
How many ways are th ere by which one can 
understand in truth that sublime yoga?  (29) My 
dear son, Kapila, after all, I am a woman. It is 
very difficult for me to understand the Absolute 
Truth because my intelligence is not very great. 
But if You will kindly explain it to me, even 
though I am not very intelligent, I can under-
stand it and thereby feel transcendental happi-
ness (30).  
Śrī Maitreya said:  After hearing the state-
ment of His mother, Kapila could understand 
her purpose, and He became compassionate to-
wards her because o f being born of her body. 
He described the Sā ṅkhya system of philoso-
phy, which is a combination of devotional ser-
vice and mystic realization, as received by dis-
ciplic succession  (31).  
Lord Kapila said : The senses are symbolic 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

168 
 representations of the demigo ds, and their nat-
ural inclination is to work under the direction 
of the Vedic injunctions. As the senses are rep-
resentatives of the demigods, so the mind is the 
representative of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. The mind’s natural duty is to serve. 
When  that service spirit is engaged in devo-
tional service to the Personality of Godhead, 
without any motive, that is far better even than 
salvation  (32).Bhakti, devotional service, dis-
solves the subtle body of the living entity with-
out separate effort, just as  fire in the stomach 
digests all that we eat  (33).A pure devotee, who 
is attached to the activities of devotional ser-
vice and who always engages in the service of 
My lotus feet, never desires to become one with 
Me. Such a devotee, who is unflinchingly en-
gaged, always glorifies My pastimes and activ-
ities (34).O My mother, My devotees always 
see the smiling face of My form, with eyes like 
the rising morning sun. They like to see My 
various transcendental forms, which are all be-
nevolent, and they also talk fav orably with Me  
(35).Upon seeing the charming forms of the 
Lord, smiling and attractive, and hearing His 
very pleasing words, the pure devotee almost 
loses all other consciousness. His senses are 
freed from all other engagements, and he be-
comes absorbed in devotional service. Thus in 
spite of his unwillingness, he attains liberation 
without separate endeavor  (36).Thus because 
he is completely absorbed in thought of Me, the 
devotee does not desire even the highest bene-
diction obtainable in the upper planetary  sys-
tems, including Satyaloka. He does not desire 
the eight material perfections obtained from 
mystic yoga, nor does he desire to be elevated 
to the kingdom of God. Yet even without desir-
ing them, the devotee enjoys, even in this life, 
all the offered bene dictions  (37).The Lord con-
tinued: My dear mother, devotees who receive 
such transcendental opulences are never bereft 
of them; neither weapons nor the change of 
time can destroy such opulences. Because the 
devotees accept Me as their friend, their rela-
tive, their son, preceptor, benefactor and Su-
preme Deity, they cannot be deprived of their 
possessions at any time  (38).  
Thus the devotee who worships Me, the all -pervading Lord of the universe, in unflinching 
devotional service, gives up all aspirations to b e 
promoted to heavenly planets or to become 
happy in this world with wealth, children, cat-
tle, home or anything in relationship with the 
body. I take him to the other side of birth and 
death  (39-40).The terrible fear of birth and 
death can never be forsake n by anyone who re-
sorts to any shelter other than Myself, for I am 
the almighty Lord, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, the original source of all creation, 
and also the Supreme Soul of all souls  (41).It is 
because of My supremacy that the wind blows, 
out of fear of Me; the sun shines out of fear of 
Me, and the lord of the clouds, Indra, sends 
forth showers out of fear of Me. Fire burns out 
of fear of Me, and death goes about taking its 
toll out of fear of Me  (42).The yogīs, equipped 
with transcendental knowledge and renuncia-
tion and engaged in devotional service for their 
eternal benefit, take shelter of My lotus feet, 
and since I am the Lord, they are thus eligible 
to enter into the kingdom of Godhead without 
fear (43).Therefore persons whose minds are 
fixed on the Lord engage in the intensive prac-
tice of devotional service. That is the only 
means for attainment of the final perfection of 
life (44).  
SB 3.26: Fundamental Principles of Ma-
terial Nature  
The Personali ty of Godhead, Kapila, con-
tinued : My dear mother, now I shall describe 
unto you the different categories of the Abso-
lute Truth, knowing which any person can be 
released from the influence of the modes of ma-
terial nature  (1).Knowledge is the ultimate per-
fection of self -realization. I shall explain that 
knowledge unto you by which the knots of at-
tachment to the material world are cut  (2).  The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Su-
preme Soul, and He has no beginning. He is 
transcendental to the material mod es of nature 
and beyond the existence of this material world. 
He is perceivable everywhere because He is 
self-effulgent, and by His self -effulgent luster 
the entire creation is maintained  (3).As His pas-
time, that Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

169 
 greates t of the great, accepted the subtle mate-
rial energy, which is invested with three mate-
rial modes of nature and which is related with 
Viṣṇu (4). Divided into varieties by her three-
fold modes, material nature creates the forms of 
the living entities, and the  living entities, seeing 
this, are illusioned by the knowledge -covering 
feature of the illusory energy  (5).Because of his 
forgetfulness, the transcendental living entity 
accepts the influence of material energy as his 
field of activities, and thus actuated , he 
wrongly applies the activities to himself  
(6).Material consciousness is the cause of one’s 
conditional life, in which conditions are en-
forced upon the living entity by the material en-
ergy. Although the spirit soul does not do any-
thing and is transcend ental to such activities, he 
is thus affected by conditional life  (7).The 
cause of the conditioned soul’s material body 
and senses, and the senses’ presiding deities, 
the demigods, is the material nature. This is un-
derstood by learned men. The feelings of hap-
piness and distress of the soul, who is transcen-
dental by nature, are caused by the spirit soul 
himself  (8).  
Devahūti said:  O Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, kindly explain the characteristics of 
the Supreme Person and His energies, for both 
of these are the causes of this manifest and un-
manifest creation  (9).  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  The unmanif ested eternal combination of 
the three modes is the cause of the manifest 
state and is called pradhāna. It is called prak ṛti 
when in the manifested stage of existence  (10). 
The aggregate elements, namely the five gross 
elements, the five subtle elements, t he four in-
ternal senses, the five senses for gathering 
knowledge and the five outward organs of ac-
tion, are known as the pradhāna  (11).  There are 
five gross elements, namely earth, water, fire, 
air and ether. There are also five subtle ele-
ments: smell, ta ste, color, touch and sound  
(12).The senses for acquiring knowledge and 
the organs for action number ten, namely the 
auditory sense, the sense of taste, the tactile 
sense, the sense of sight, the sense of smell, and the active organs for speaking, working,  travel-
ing, generating and evacuating  (13).The inter-
nal, subtle senses are experienced as having 
four aspects, in the shape of mind, intelligence, 
ego and contaminated consciousness. Distinc-
tions between them can be made only by differ-
ent functions, since they represent different 
characteristics  (14).All these are considered the 
qualified Brahman. The mixing element, which 
is known as time, is counted as the twenty -fifth 
element  (15).The influence of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is felt in the time fa ctor, 
which causes fear of death due to the false ego 
of the deluded soul who has contacted material 
nature  (16).My dear mother, O daughter of 
Svāyambhuva Manu, the time factor, as I have 
explained, is the Supreme Personality of God-
head, from whom the creation begins as a result 
of the agitation of the neutral, unmanifested na-
ture (17).By exhibiting His potencies, t he Su-
preme Personality of Godhead adjusts all these 
different elements, keeping Himself within as 
the Supersoul and without as time  (18).  
After the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
impregnates material nature with His internal 
potency, material nature deliv ers the sum total 
of the cosmic intelligence, which is known as 
Hiraṇmaya. This takes place in material nature 
when she is agitated by the destinations of the 
conditioned souls  (19).Thus, after manifesting 
variegatedness, the effulgent mahat -tattva, 
which contains all the universes within itself, 
which is the root of all cosmic manifestations 
and which is not destroyed at the time of anni-
hilation, swallows the darkness that covered the 
effulgence at the time of dissolution  (20).  
The mode of goodness, which  is the clear, 
sober status of understanding the Personality of 
Godhead and which is generally called 
vāsudeva, or consciousness, becomes manifest 
in the mahat -tattva  (21).After the manifestation 
of the mahat -tattva, these features appear sim-
ultaneously. A s water in its natural state, before 
coming in contact with earth, is clear, sweet and 
unruffled, so the characteristic traits of pure 
consciousness are complete serenity, clarity, 
and freedom from distraction  (22).The material 
ego springs up from the maha t-tattva, which 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

170 
 evolved from the Lord’s own energy. The ma-
terial ego is endowed predominantly with ac-
tive power of three kinds: good, passionate and 
ignorant. It is from these three types of material 
ego that the mind, the senses of perception, the 
organs of action, and the gross elements evolve  
(23-24).  The threefold aha ṅkāra, the source of 
the gross elements, the senses and the mind, is 
identical with them because it is their cause. It 
is known by the name of Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, who is 
directly Lord Ananta with a thousand heads  
(25).This false ego is characterized as the doer, 
as an instrument and as an effect. It is further 
characterized as serene, active or dull accord-
ing to how it is influenced by the modes of 
goodness, passion and ignorance  (26).From the 
false ego of goodness, another transformation 
takes place. From this evolves the mind, whose 
thoughts and reflections give rise to desire  
(27).The mind of the living entity is known by 
the name of Lord Aniruddha, the supreme ruler 
of the senses. He possesses a  bluish -black form 
resembling a lotus flower growing in the au-
tumn. He is found slowly by the yogis (28) .  By 
transformation of the false ego in passion, in-
telligence takes birth, O virtuous lady. The 
functions of intelligence are to help in ascer-
taining t he nature of objects when they come 
into view, and to help the senses  (29).Doubt, 
misapprehension, correct apprehension, 
memory and sleep, as determined by their dif-
ferent functions, are said to be the distinct char-
acteristics of intelligence  (30).Egoism i n the 
mode of passion produces two kinds of senses: 
the senses for acquiring knowledge and the 
senses of action. The senses of action depend 
on the vital energy, and the senses for acquiring 
knowledge depend on intelligence  (31).  
When egoism in ignorance is agitated by the 
sex energy of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the subtle element sound is manifested, 
and from sound come the ethereal sky and the 
sense of hearing  (32). Persons who are learned 
and who have true knowledge define sound as 
that which conveys the idea of an object, indi-
cates the presence of a speaker screened from 
our view and constitutes the subtle form of 
ether  (33).The activities and characteristics of the ethereal element can be observed as the ac-
commodation of room for the external  and in-
ternal existences of all living entities, namely 
the field of activities of the vital air, the senses 
and the mind  (34).  
From ethereal existence, which evolves 
from sound, the next transformation takes place 
under the impulse of time, and thus the subtle 
element touch and thence the air and sense of 
touch become prominent  (35).Softness and 
hardness and cold and heat are the distinguish-
ing attributes of touch, which is characterized 
as the subtle form of air  (36).The action of the 
air is exhibited in  movements, mixing, allow-
ing approach to the objects of sound and other 
sense perceptions, and providing for the proper 
functioning of all other senses  (37).  
By interactions of the air and the sensations 
of touch, one receives different forms accord-
ing to  destiny. By evolution of such forms, 
there is fire, and the eye sees different forms in 
color  (38).My dear mother, the characteristics 
of form are understood by dimension, quality 
and individuality. The form of fire is appreci-
ated by its effulgence  (39).Fire is appreciated 
by its light and by its ability to cook, to digest, 
to destroy cold, to evaporate, and to give rise to 
hunger, thirst, eating and drinking  (40).  
By the interaction of fire and the visual sen-
sation, the subtle element taste evolves under  a 
superior arrangement. From taste, water is pro-
duced, and the tongue, which perceives taste, is 
also manifested  (41).Although originally one, 
taste becomes manifold as astringent, sweet, 
bitter, pungent, sour and salty due to contact 
with other substance s (42).The characteristics 
of water are exhibited by its moistening other 
substances, coagulating various mixtures, caus-
ing satisfaction, maintaining life, softening 
things, driving away heat, incessantly supply-
ing itself to reservoirs of water, and refres hing 
by slaking thirst  (43).  
Due to the interaction of water with the taste 
perception, the subtle element odor evolves un-
der superior arrangement. Thence the earth and 
the olfactory sense, by which we can variously 
experience the aroma of the earth, beco me 
manifest  (44).Odor, although one, becomes 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

171 
 many as mixed, offensive, fragrant, mild, 
strong, acidic and so on  according to the pro-
portions of associated substances  (45). The 
characteristics of the functions of earth can be 
perceived by modeling forms of  the Supreme 
Brahman, by constructing places of residence, 
by preparing pots to contain water, etc. In other 
words, the earth is the place of sustenance for 
all elements  (46).  
The sense whose object of perception is 
sound is called the auditory sense, and  that 
whose object of perception is touch is called the 
tactile sense  (47).The sense whose object of 
perception is form, the distinctive characteristic 
of fire, is the sense of sight. The sense whose 
object of perception is taste, the distinctive 
character istic of water, is known as the sense of 
taste. Finally, the sense whose object of percep-
tion is odor, the distinctive characteristic of 
earth, is called the sense of smell  (48).  Since 
the cause exists in its effect as well, the charac-
teristics of the for mer are observed in the latter. 
That is why the peculiarities of all the elements 
exist in the earth alone  (49).When all these ele-
ments were unmixed, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, the origin of creation, along with 
time, work, and the qualities of th e modes of 
material nature, entered into the universe with 
the total material energy in seven divisions  
(50).  
From these seven principles, roused into ac-
tivity and united by the presence of the Lord, 
an unintelligent egg arose, from which ap-
peared the cel ebrated Cosmic Being  (51).This 
universal egg, or the universe in the shape of an 
egg, is called the manifestation of material en-
ergy. Its layers of water, air, fire, sky, ego and 
mahat -tattva increase in thickness one after an-
other. Each layer is ten times  bigger than the 
previous one, and the final outside layer is cov-
ered by pradhāna. Within this egg is the univer-
sal form of Lord Hari, of whose body the four-
teen planetary systems are parts  (52).The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the virā ṭ-
puruṣa, situate d Himself in that golden egg, 
which was lying on the water, and He divided 
it into many departments  (53).  First of all a 
mouth appeared in Him, and then came forth the organ of speech, and with it the god of fire, 
the deity who presides over that organ. T hen a 
pair of nostrils appeared, and in them appeared 
the olfactory sense, as well as prā ṇa, the vital 
air (54). In the wake of the olfactory sense came 
the wind -god, who presides over that sense. 
Thereafter a pair of eyes appeared in the uni-
versal form, a nd in them the sense of sight. In 
the wake of this sense came the sun -god, who 
presides over it. Next there appeared in Him a 
pair of ears, and in them the auditory sense and 
in its wake the Dig -devatās, or the deities who 
preside over the directions  (55).  Then the uni-
versal form of the Lord, the virā ṭ-puruṣa, man-
ifested His skin, and thereupon the hair, mus-
tache and beard appeared. After this all the 
herbs and drugs became manifested, and then 
His genitals also appeared  (56).After this, se-
men (the faculty  of procreation) and the god 
who presides over the waters appeared. Next 
appeared an anus and then the organs of defe-
cation and thereupon the god of death, who is 
feared throughout the universe  (57).  Thereafter 
the two hands of the universal form of the L ord 
became manifested, and with them the power 
of grasping and dropping things, and after that 
Lord Indra appeared. Next the leg s became 
manifested, and with them the process of move-
ment, and after that Lord Vi ṣṇu appeared  
(58).The veins of the universal body became 
manifested and thereafter the red corpuscles, or 
blood. In their wake came the rivers (the deities 
presiding over the  veins), and then appeared an 
abdomen  (59).Next grew feelings of hunger 
and thirst, and in their wake came the manifes-
tation of the oceans. Then a heart became man-
ifest, and in the wake of the heart the mind ap-
peared  (60).After the mind, the moon appeared.  
Intelligence appeared next, and after intelli-
gence, Lord Brahmā appeared. Then the false 
ego appeared and then Lord Śiva, and after the 
appearance of Lord Śiva came consciousness 
and the deity presiding over consciousness  
(61).When the demigods and presid ing deities 
of the various senses were thus manifested, 
they wanted to wake their origin of appearance. 
But upon failing to do so, they reentered the 
body of the virā ṭ-puruṣa one after another in or-
der to wake Him  (62).The god of fire entered 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

172 
 His mouth wit h the organ of speech, but the 
virāṭ-puruṣa could not be aroused. Then the god 
of wind entered His nostrils with the sense of 
smell, but still the virā ṭ-puruṣa refused to be 
awakened  (63).The sun -god entered the eyes of 
the virā ṭ-puruṣa with the sense of s ight, but still 
the virā ṭ-puruṣa did not get up. Similarly, the 
predominating deities of the directions entered 
through His ears with the sense of hearing, but 
still He did not get up  (64).The predominating 
deities of the skin, herbs and seasoning plants 
entered the skin of the virā ṭ-puruṣa with the hair 
of the body, but the Cosmic Being refused to 
get up even then. The god predominating over 
water entered His organ of generation with the 
faculty of procreation, but the virā ṭ-puruṣa still 
would not rise  (65).The god of death entered 
His anus with the organ of defecation, but the 
virāṭ-puruṣa could not be spurred to activity. 
The god Indra entered the hands with their 
power of grasping and dropping things, but the 
virāṭ-puruṣa would not get up even then  
(66).Lord Vi ṣṇu entered His feet with the fac-
ulty of locomotion, but the virā ṭ-puruṣa refused 
to stand up even then. The rivers entered His 
blood vessels with the blood and the power of 
circulation, but still the Cosmic Being could not 
be made to stir  (67).The ocean entered His ab-
domen with hunger and thirst, but the Cosmic 
Being refused to rise even then. The moon -god 
entered His heart with the mind, but the Cosmic 
Being would not be roused  (68).Brahmā also 
entered His heart with intelligence, but even 
then the  Cosmic Being could not be prevailed 
upon to get up. Lord Rudra also entered His 
heart with the ego, but even then the Cosmic 
Being did not stir  (69).However, when the in-
ner controller, the deity presiding over con-
sciousness, entered the heart with reason,  at 
that very moment the Cosmic Being arose from 
the causal waters  (70).When a man is sleeping, 
all his material assets  namely the vital energy, 
the senses for recording knowledge, the senses 
for working, the mind and the intelligence  can-
not arouse him. He can be aroused only when 
the Supersoul helps him  (71).Therefore, 
through devotion, detachment and advance-
ment in spiritual knowledge acquired through 
concentrated devotional service, one should contemplate that Supersoul as present in this 
very body alt hough simultaneously apart from 
it (72).  
SB 3.27: Understanding Material Nature  
The Personality of Godhead Kapila con-
tinued:  When the living entity is thus unaf-
fected by the modes of material nature, because 
he is unchanging and does not claim proprietor-
ship, he remains apart from the reactions of the 
modes, although abiding in a material body, 
just as the sun remains aloof from its reflection 
on water  (1).When the soul is under the spell of 
material nature and false ego, identifying his 
body as the self, he becomes absorbed in mate-
rial activities, and by the influence of false ego 
he thinks that he is the proprietor of everything  
(2).The conditioned soul therefore transmi-
grates into different species of life, higher and 
lower, because of his association wi th the 
modes of material nature. Unless he is relieved 
of material activities, he has to accept this po-
sition because of his faulty work  (3).Actually a 
living entity is transcendental to material exist-
ence, but because of his mentality of lording it 
over m aterial nature, his material existential 
condition does not cease, and just as in a dream, 
he is affected by all sorts of disadvantages  (4).It 
is the duty of every conditioned soul to engage 
his polluted consciousness, which is now at-
tached to material enj oyment, in very serious 
devotional service with detachment. Thus his 
mind and consciousness will be under full con-
trol (5).  
One has to become faithful by practicing the 
controlling process of the yoga system and 
must elevate himself to the platform of una l-
loyed devotional service by chanting and hear-
ing about Me  (6).In executing devotional ser-
vice, one has to see every living entity equally, 
without enmity towards anyone yet without in-
timate connections with anyone. One has to ob-
serve celibacy, be grave an d execute his eternal 
activities, offering the results to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead  (7).For his income a 
devotee should be satisfied with what he earns 
without great difficulty. He should not eat more 
than what is necessary. He should live in a se-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

173 
 cluded place and always be thoughtful, peace-
ful, friendly, compassionate and self -realized  
(8). One’s seeing power should be increased 
through knowledge of spirit and matter, and 
one should not unnecessarily identify himself 
with the body and thus become a ttracted by 
bodily relationships  (9).One should be situated 
in the transcendental position, beyond the 
stages of material consciousness, and should be 
aloof from all other conceptions of life. Thus 
realizing freedom from false ego, one should 
see his own s elf just as he sees the sun in the 
sky (10).A liberated soul realizes the Absolute 
Personality of Godhead, who is transcendental 
and who is manifest as a reflection even in the 
false ego. He is the support of the material 
cause and He enters into everythin g. He is ab-
solute, one without a second, and He is the eyes 
of the illusory energy  (11).  
The presence of the Supreme Lord can be 
realized just as the sun is realized first as a re-
flection on water, and again as a second reflec-
tion on the wall of a room, a lthough the sun it-
self is situated in the sky.The self -realized soul 
is thus reflected first in the threefold ego and 
then in the body, senses and mind.Although a 
devotee appears to be merged in the five mate-
rial elements, the objects of material enjoy-
ment , the material senses and material mind 
and intelligence, he is understood to be awake 
and to be freed from the false ego  (12-14).The 
living entity can vividly feel his existence as the 
seer, but because of the disappearance of the 
ego during the state of deep sleep, he falsely 
takes himself to be lost, like a man who has lost 
his fortune and feels distressed, thinking him-
self to be lost  (15).When, by mature under-
standing, one can realize his individuality, then 
the situation he accepts under false ego be-
comes manifest to him  (16).  
Śrī Devahūti inquired:  My dear brāhma ṇa, 
does material nature ever give release to the 
spirit soul? Since one is attracted to the other 
eternally, how is their separation possible? (17) 
As there is no separate existence of the ea rth 
and its aroma or of water and its taste, there 
cannot be any separate existence of intelligence 
and consciousness  (18). Hence even though he is the passive performer of all activities, how 
can there be freedom for the soul as long as ma-
terial nature ac ts on him and binds him? (19) 
Even if the great fear of bondage is avoided by 
mental speculation and inquiry into the funda-
mental principles, it may still appear again, 
since its cause has not ceased  (20).  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  One can get liberation by seriously dis-
charging devotional service unto Me and 
thereby hearing for a long time about Me or 
from Me. By thus executing one’s prescribed 
duties, there will be no reaction, and one will 
be freed from the contamination of matter.This 
devotional service has to be performed strongly 
in perfect knowledge and with transcendental 
vision. One must be strongly renounced and 
must engage in austerity and perform mystic 
yoga in order to be firmly fixed in self -absorp-
tion.The influence of material nature has cov-
ered the living entity, and thus it is as if the liv-
ing entity were always in a blazing fire. But by 
the process of seriously discharging devotional 
service, this influence can be removed, just as 
wooden sticks which cause a fire are them-
selves consumed by it  (21-23).By discovering 
the faultiness of his desiring to lord it over ma-
terial nature and by therefore giving it up, the 
living entity becomes independent and stands 
in his own glory  (24).In the dreaming state 
one’s consciousness is almos t covered, and one 
sees many inauspicious things, but when he is 
awakened and fully conscious, such inauspi-
cious things cannot bewilder him  (25).The in-
fluence of material nature cannot harm an en-
lightened soul, even though he engages in ma-
terial activities , because he knows the truth of 
the Absolute, and his mind is fixed on the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead  (26).When a 
person thus engages in devotional service and 
self-realization for many, many years and 
births, he becomes completely reluctant to en-
joy a ny one of the material planets, even up to 
the highest planet, which is known as Brah-
maloka; he becomes fully developed in con-
sciousness  (27).My devotee actually becomes 
self-realized by My unlimited causeless mercy, 
and thus, when freed from all doubts, h e stead-
ily progresses towards his destined abode, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

174 
 which is directly under the protection of My 
spiritual energy of unadulterated bliss. That is 
the ultimate perfectional goal of the living en-
tity. After giving up the present material body, 
the mystic devot ee goes to that transcendental 
abode and never comes back  (28-29). When a 
perfect yogī’s attention is no longer attracted to 
the by -products of mystic powers, which are 
manifestations of the external energy, his pro-
gress towards Me becomes unlimited, and t hus 
the power of death cannot overcome him  (30). 

SB 3.28: Kapila’s Instructions on the Ex-
ecution of Devotional Service  
The Personality of Godhead said:  My dear 
mother, O daughter of the King, now I shall ex-
plain to you the system of yoga, the object of 
which is to concentrate the mind. By practicing 
this system one can become joyful and progres-
sively advance towards the path of the Absolute 
Truth  (1).One should execute his prescribed 
duties to the best of his ability and avoid per-
forming duties not allott ed to him. One should 
be satisfied with as much gain as he achieves 
by the grace of the Lord, and one should wor-
ship the lotus feet of a spiritual master  (2).One 
should cease performing conventional religious 
practices and should be attracted to those whic h 
lead to salvation. One should eat very frugally 
and should always remain secluded so that he 
can achieve the highest perfection of life  
(3).One should practice nonviolence and truth-
fulness, should avoid thieving and be satisfied 
with possessing as much a s he needs for his 
maintenance. He should abstain from sex life, 
perform austerity, be clean, study the Vedas 
and worship the supreme form of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead  (4).  One must observe 
silence, acquire steadiness by practicing differ-
ent yogi c postures, control the breathing of the 
vital air, withdraw the senses from sense ob-
jects and thus concentrate the mind on the heart  
(5).Fixing the vital air and the mind in one of 
the six circles of vital air circulation within the 
body, thus concentrati ng one’s mind on the 
transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, is called samādhi, or samādhāna, of the mind  (6).  By these pro-
cesses, or any other true process, one must con-
trol the contaminated, unbridled mind, which is 
always attract ed by material enjoyment, and 
thus fix himself in thought of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead  (7).  
After controlling one’s mind and sitting pos-
tures, one should spread a seat in a secluded and 
sanctified place, sit there in an easy posture, 
keeping the body erect, and practice breath con-
trol (8).The yogī should clear the passage of vi-
tal air by breathing in the following manner: 
first he should inhale very deeply, then hold the 
breath in, and finally exhale. Or, reversing the 
process, the yogi can first exhale, then hold the 
breath outside, and f inally inhale. This is done 
so that the mind may become steady and free 
from external disturbances  (9).The yogīs who 
practice such breathing exercises are very soon 
freed from all mental disturbances, just as gold, 
when put into fire and fanned with air, b ecomes 
free from all impurities  (10).By practicing the 
process of prā ṇāyāma, one can eradicate the 
contamination of his physiological condition, 
and by concentrating the mind one can become 
free from all sinful activities. By restraining the 
senses one can  free himself from material asso-
ciation, and by meditating on the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead one can become free from 
the three modes of material attachment  
(11).When the mind is perfectly purified by this 
practice of yoga, one should concentrate on th e 
tip of the nose with half -closed eyes and see the 
form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead  
(12).  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has a 
cheerful, lotuslike countenance with ruddy 
eyes like the interior of a lotus, and a swarthy 
body like the petals of a blue lotus. He bears a 
conch, discus and mace in three of His hands  
(13).  His loins are covered by a shining cloth, 
yellowish like the filaments of a lotus. On His 
breast He bears the mark of Śrīvatsa, a curl of 
white hair. The brilliant Kaustubha ge m is sus-
pended from His neck  (14).He also wears 
around His neck a garland of attractive sylvan 
flowers, and a swarm of bees, intoxicated by its 
delicious fragrance, hums about the garland. He 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

175 
 is further superbly adorned with a pearl neck-
lace, a crown and p airs of armlets, bracelets and 
anklets  (15).His loins and hips encircled by a 
girdle, He stands on the lotus of His devotee’s 
heart. He is most charming to look at, and His 
serene aspect gladdens the eyes and souls of the 
devotees who behold Him  (16).The L ord is 
eternally very beautiful, and He is worshipable 
by all the inhabitants of every planet. He is ever 
youthful and always eager to bestow His bless-
ing upon His devotees  (17).The glory of the 
Lord is always worth singing, for His glories 
enhance the glo ries of His devotees. One 
should therefore meditate upon the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead and upon His devotees. 
One should meditate on the eternal form of the 
Lord until the mind becomes fixed  (18).Thus 
always merged in devotional service, the yogī 
visualizes the Lord standing, moving, lying 
down or sitting within him, for the pastimes of 
the Supreme Lord are always beautiful and at-
tractive  (19).In fixing his mind on the eternal 
form of the Lord, the  yogī should not take a col-
lective view of all His limbs, but should fix the 
mind on each individual limb of the Lord  (20).  
The devotee should first concentrate his 
mind on the Lord’s lotus feet, which are 
adorned with the marks of a thunderbolt, a 
goad, a banner and a lotus. The splendor of 
their beautiful ruby nails resembles the orb of 
the moon and dispels the thick gloom of one’s 
heart  (21).The blessed Lord Śiva becomes all 
the more blessed by bearing on his head the 
holy waters of the Ganges, which ha s its source 
in the water that washed the Lord’s lotus feet. 
The Lord’s feet act like thunderbolts hurled to 
shatter the mountain of sin stored in the mind 
of the meditating devotee. One should therefore 
meditate on the lotus feet of the Lord for a long 
time (22).  
The yogī should fix in his heart the activities 
of Lak ṣmī, the goddess of fortune, who is wor-
shiped by all demigods and is the mother of the 
supreme person, Brahmā. She can always be 
found massaging the legs and thighs of the tran-
scendental Lord, very care fully serving Him in 
this way  (23).Next, the yogi should fix his mind 
in meditation on the Personality of Godhead’s thighs, the storehouse of all energy. The Lord’s 
thighs are whitish blue, like the luster of the lin-
seed flower, and appear most graceful wh en the 
Lord is carried on the shoulders of Garu ḍa. 
Also the yogī should contemplate His rounded 
hips, which are encircled by a girdle that rests 
on the exquisite yellow silk cloth that extends 
down to His ankles  (24).  
The yogī should then meditate on His moon-
like navel in the center of His abdomen. From 
His navel, which is the foundation of the entire 
universe, sprang the lotus stem containing all 
the different planetary systems. The lotus is the 
residence of Brahmā, the first created being. In 
the same wa y, the yogī should concentrate his 
mind on the Lord’s nipples, which resemble a 
pair of most exquisite emeralds and which ap-
pear whitish because of the rays of the milk -
white pearl necklaces adorning His chest  
(25).The yogī should then meditate on the ches t 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
abode of goddess Mahā -Lakṣmī. The Lord’s 
chest is the source of all transcendental pleas-
ure for the mind and full satisfaction for the 
eyes. The yogī should then imprint on his mind 
the neck of the Personality o f Godhead, who is 
adored by the entire universe. The neck of the 
Lord serves to enhance the beauty of the Kaust-
ubha gem, which hangs on His chest  (26).  
The yogī should further meditate upon the 
Lord’s four arms, which are the source of all 
the powers of t he demigods who control the 
various functions of material nature. Then the 
yogi should concentrate on the polished orna-
ments, which were burnished by Mount Man-
dara as it revolved. He should also duly con-
template the Lord’s discus, the Sudarśana 
cakra, whic h contains one thousand spokes and 
a dazzling luster, as well as the conch, which 
looks like a swan in His lotuslike palm  (27).The 
yogī should meditate upon His club, which is 
named Kaumodakī and is very dear to Him. 
This club smashes the demons, who are a lways 
inimical soldiers, and is smeared with their 
blood. One should also concentrate on the nice 
garland on the neck of the Lord, which is al-
ways surrounded by bumblebees, with their 
nice buzzing sound, and one should meditate 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

176 
 upon the pearl necklace on t he Lord’s neck, 
which is considered to represent the pure living 
entities who are always engaged in His service  
(28). 
The yogī should then meditate on the lo-
tuslike countenance of the Lord, who presents 
His different forms in this world out of compas-
sion for the anxious devotees. His nose is prom-
inent, and His crystal -clear cheeks are illumi-
nated by the oscillation of His  glittering alliga-
tor-shaped earrings  (29).The yogi then medi-
tates upon the beautiful face of the Lord, which 
is adorned with curly hair and decorated by lo-
tuslike eyes and dancing eyebrows. A lotus sur-
rounded by swarming bees and a pair of swim-
ming fish w ould be put to shame by its elegance  
(30).  
The yogīs should contemplate with full de-
votion the compassionate glances frequently 
cast by the Lord’s eyes, for they soothe the 
most fearful threefold agonies of His devotees. 
His glances, accompanied by loving smiles, are 
full of abundant grace  (31).A yo gī should sim-
ilarly meditate on the most benevolent smile of 
Lord Śrī Hari, a smile which, for all those who 
bow to Him, dries away the ocean of tears 
caused by intense grief. The yogī should also 
meditate on the Lord’s arched eyebrows, which 
are manifeste d by His internal potency in order 
to charm the sex -god for the good of the sages  
(32).With devotion steeped in love and affec-
tion, the yogī should meditate within the core 
of his heart upon the laughter of Lord Vi ṣṇu. 
The laughter of Vi ṣṇu is so captivati ng that it 
can be easily meditated upon. When the Su-
preme Lord is laughing, one can see His small 
teeth, which resemble jasmine buds rendered 
rosy by the splendor of His lips. Once devoting 
his mind to this, the yogī should no longer de-
sire to see anything  else (33).  
By following this course, the yogī gradually 
develops pure love for the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Hari. In the course of his progress 
in devotional service, the hairs on his body 
stand erect through excessive joy, and he is 
constantly ba thed in a stream of tears occa-
sioned by intense love. Gradually, even the 
mind, which he used as a means to attract the Lord, as one attracts a fish to a hook, withdraws 
from material activity  (34).When the mind is 
thus completely freed from all material c ontam-
ination and detached from material objectives, 
it is just like the flame of a lamp. At that time 
the mind is actually dovetailed with that of the 
Supreme Lord and is experienced as one with 
Him because it is freed from the interactive 
flow of the mate rial qualities  (35).Thus situated 
in the highest transcendental stage, the mind 
ceases from all material reaction and becomes 
situated in its own glory, transcendental to all 
material conceptions of happiness and distress. 
At that time the yogī realizes th e truth of his 
relationship with the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. He discovers that pleasure and pain 
as well as their interactions, which he attributed 
to his own self, are actually due to the false ego, 
which is a product of ignorance  (36).Because 
he has achieved his real identity, the perfectly 
realized soul has no conception of how the ma-
terial body is moving or acting, just as an intox-
icated person cannot understand whether or not 
he has clothing on his body  (37).The body of 
such a liberated yogī, along with the senses, is 
taken charge of by the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, and it functions until its destined ac-
tivities are finished. The liberated devotee, be-
ing awake to his constitutional position and 
thus sit uated in samādhi, the highest perfec-
tional stage of yoga, does not accept the by -
products of the material body as his own. Thus 
he considers his bodily activities to be like the 
activities of a body in a dream  (38).  
Because of great affection for family a nd 
wealth, one accepts a son and some money as 
his own, and due to affection for the material 
body, one thinks that it is his. But actually, as 
one can understand that his family and wealth 
are different from him, the liberated soul can 
understand that he and his body are not the 
same  (39).The blazing fire is different from the 
flames, from the sparks and from the smoke, 
although all are intimately connected because 
they are born from the same blazing wood  
(40).The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is kno wn as Parambrahma, is the seer. He 
is different from the jīva soul, or individual liv-
ing entity, who is combined with the senses, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

177 
 five elements and consciousness  (41).A yogi 
should see the same soul in all manifestations, 
for all that exists is a manif estation of different 
energies of the Supreme. In this way the devo-
tee should see all living entities without distinc-
tion. That is realization of the Supreme Soul  
(42).As fire is exhibited in different forms of 
wood, so, under different conditions of the 
modes of material nature, the pure spirit soul 
manifests itself in different bodies  (43).Thus 
the yogī can be in the self -realized position af-
ter conquering the insurmountable spell of 
māyā, who presents herself as both the cause 
and effect of this material manifestation and is 
therefore very difficult to understand  (44).  
SB 3.29: Explanatio n of Devotional Ser-
vice by Lord Kapila  
Devahūti inquired : My dear Lord, You 
have already very scientifically described the 
symptoms of the total material nature and the 
characteristics of the spirit according to the 
Sāṅkhya system of philosophy. Now I shal l re-
quest You to explain the path of devotional ser-
vice, which is the ultimate end of all philosoph-
ical systems  (1-2).Devahūti continued: My 
dear Lord, please also describe in detail, both 
for me and for people in general, the continual 
process of birth an d death, for by hearing of 
such calamities we may become detached from 
the activities of this material world  (3). Please 
also describe eternal time, which is a represen-
tation of Your form and by whose influence 
people in general engage in the performance o f 
pious activities  (4). My dear Lord, You are just 
like the sun, for You illuminate the darkness of 
the conditional life of the living entities. Be-
cause their eyes of knowledge are not open, 
they are sleeping eternally in that darkness 
without Your shelter , and therefore they are 
falsely engaged by the actions and reactions of 
their material activities, and they appear to be 
very fatigued  (5).  
Śrī Maitreya said:  O best amongst the Ku-
rus, the great sage Kapila, moved by great com-
passion and pleased by the w ords of His glori-
ous mother, spoke as follows  (6).  
Lord Kapila, the Personality of Godhead, 
replied:  O noble lady, there are multifarious paths of devotional service in terms of the dif-
ferent qualities of the executor  (7). Devotional 
service executed by a  person who is envious, 
proud, violent and angry, and who is a sepa-
ratist, is considered to be in the mode of dark-
ness (8).The worship of Deities in the temple 
by a separatist, with a motive for material en-
joyment, fame and opulence, is devotion in the 
mode of passion  (9).When a devotee worships 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offers 
the results of his activities in order to free him-
self from the inebrieties of fruitive activities, 
his devotion is in the mode of goodness  (10). 
The manifestation of un adulterated devotional 
service is exhibited when one’s mind is at once 
attracted to hearing the transcendental name 
and qualities of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is residing in everyone’s heart. 
Just as the water of the Ganges flows naturally 
down towards the ocean, such devotional ec-
stasy, uninterrupted by any material condition, 
flows towards the Supreme Lord  (11-12).A 
pure devotee does not accept any kind of liber-
ation  sālokya, sār ṣṭi, sāmīpya, sārūpya or 
ekatva  even though they are offered by the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead  (13).By attain-
ing the highest platform of devotional service, 
as I have explained, one can overcome the in-
fluence of the three modes of material nature 
and be situated in the transcendental stage, as is 
the Lord  (14).  
A devotee must execute his prescribed du-
ties, which are glorious, without material profit. 
Without excessive violence, one should regu-
larly perform one’s devotional activities.The 
devotee should regularly see My statues in the 
temple, touch My lotus feet and offer worship-
able paraphernalia and prayer. He should see in 
the spirit of renunciation, from the mode of 
goodness, and see every living entity as spir-
itual.The pure devotee should execute devo-
tional service by giving the greatest respect to 
the spirit ual master and the ācāryas. He should 
be compassionate to the poor and make friend-
ship with persons who are his equals, but all his 
activities should be executed under regulation 
and with control of the senses. A devotee 
should always try to hear about spi ritual mat-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

178 
 ters and should always utilize his time in chant-
ing the holy name of the Lord. His behavior 
should always be straightforward and simple, 
and although he is not envious but friendly to 
everyone, he should avoid the company of per-
sons who are not s piritually advanced.When 
one is fully qualified with all these transcen-
dental attributes and his consciousness is thus 
completely purified, he is immediately at-
tracted simply by hearing My name or hearing 
of My transcendental quality  (15-19).  
As the chari ot of air carries an aroma from 
its source and immediately catches the sense of 
smell, similarly, one who constantly engages in 
devotional service, in K ṛṣṇa consciousness, can 
catch the Supreme Soul, who is equally present 
everywhere  (20). I am present in every living 
entity as the Supersoul. If someone neglects or 
disregards that Supersoul everywhere and en-
gages himself in the worship of the Deity in the 
temple, that is simply imitation  (21).One who 
worships the Deity of Godhead in the temples 
but does not  know that the Supreme Lord, as 
Paramātmā, is situated in every living entity’s 
heart, must be in ignorance and is compared to 
one who offers oblations into ashes  (22). One 
who offers Me respect but is envious of the 
bodies of others and is therefore a sep aratist 
never attains peace of mind, because of his in-
imical behavior towards other living entities  
(23).My dear mother, even if he worships with 
proper rituals and paraphernalia, a person who 
is ignorant of My presence in all living entities 
never pleases  Me by the worship of My Deities 
in the temple  (24).Performing his prescribed 
duties, one should worship the Deity of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead until one real-
izes My presence in his own heart and in the 
hearts of other living entities as well  (25).As 
the blazing fire of death, I cause great fear to 
whoever makes the least discrimination be-
tween himself and other living entities because 
of a differential outlook  (26).Therefore, 
through charitable gifts and attention, as well as 
through friendly beha vior and by viewing all to 
be alike, one should propitiate Me, who abide 
in all creatures as their very Self  (27).  Living entities are superior to inanimate ob-
jects, O blessed mother, and among them, liv-
ing entities who display life symptoms are bet-
ter. A nimals with developed consciousness are 
better than them, and better still are those who 
have developed sense perception  (28).Among 
the living entities who have developed sense 
perception, those who have developed the 
sense of taste are better than those w ho have 
developed only the sense of touch. Better than 
them are those who have developed the sense 
of smell, and better still are those who have de-
veloped the sense of hearing  (29).Better than 
those living entities who can perceive sound are 
those who can distinguish between one form 
and another. Better than them are those who 
have developed upper and lower sets of teeth, 
and better still are those who have many legs. 
Better than them are the quadrupeds, and better 
still are the human beings  (30). Among hum an 
beings, the society which is divided according 
to quality and work is best, and in that society, 
the intelligent men, who are designated as  
brāhma ṇas, are best. Among the brāhma ṇas, 
one who has studied the Vedas is the best, and 
among the brāhma ṇas who have studied the 
Vedas, one who knows the actual purport of 
Veda is the best  (31).Better than the brāhma ṇa 
who knows the purpose of the Vedas is he who 
can dissipate all doubts, and better than him is 
one who strictly follows the brahminical prin-
ciples. Better than him is one who is liberated 
from all material contamination, and better than 
him is a pure devotee, who executes devotional 
service without expectation of reward  
(32).Therefore I do not find a greater person 
than he who has no interest outside of Mine and 
who therefore engages and dedicates all his ac-
tivities and all his life  everything  unto Me 
without cessation  (33).Such a perfect d evotee 
offers respects to every living entity because he 
is under the firm conviction that the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead has entered the body of 
every living entity as the Supersoul, or control-
ler (34).  
My dear mother, O daughter of Manu, a dev-
otee w ho applies the science of devotional ser-
vice and mystic yoga in this way can achieve 
the abode of the Supreme Person simply by that 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

179 
 devotional service  (35).This puru ṣa whom the 
individual soul must approach is the eternal 
form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is known as Brahman and Paramātmā. He 
is the transcendental chief personality, and His 
activities are all spiritual  (36).The time factor, 
who causes the transformation of the various 
material manifestations, is another feature of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anyone 
who does not know that time is the same Su-
preme Personality is afraid of the time factor  
(37).Lord Vi ṣṇu, the Supreme Person ality of 
Godhead, who is the enjoyer of all sacrifices, is 
the time factor and the master of all masters. He 
enters everyone’s heart, He is the support of 
everyone, and He causes every being to be an-
nihilated by another  (38).No one is dear to the 
Supreme P ersonality of Godhead, nor is anyone 
His enemy or friend. But He gives inspiration 
to those who have not forgotten Him and de-
stroys those who have  (39).Out of fear of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead the wind 
blows, out of fear of Him the sun shines, out  of 
fear of Him the rain pours forth showers, and 
out of fear of Him the host of heavenly bodies 
shed their luster  (40).Out of fear of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead the trees, 
creepers, herbs and seasonal plants and flowers 
blossom and fructify, each in its own season  
(41).Out of fear of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead the rivers flow, and the ocean never 
overflows. Out of fear of Him only does fire 
burn and does the earth, with its mountains, not 
sink in the water of the universe  (42).Subject to 
the control of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the sky allows outer space to accommo-
date all the various planets, which hold innu-
merable living entities. The total universal 
body expands with its seven coverings under 
His supreme control  (43). Out of fea r of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the directing 
demigods in charge of the modes of material 
nature carry out the functions of creation, 
maintenance and destruction; everything ani-
mate and inanimate within this material world 
is under their control  (44).The eternal time fac-
tor has no beginning and no end. It is the repre-
sentative of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the maker of the criminal world. It brings about the end of the phenomenal world, it car-
ries on the work of creation by bringing one in-
dividual into existence from another, and like-
wise it dissolves the universe by destroying 
even the lord of death, Yamarāja  (45).  
SB 3.30: Description by Lord Kapila of 
Adverse Fruitive Activities  
The Personality of Godhead said:  As a 
mass of clouds does not know the powerful in-
fluence of the wind, a person engaged in mate-
rial consciousness does not know the powerful 
strength of the time factor, by which he is being 
carried  (1).Whatever is produced by the mate-
rialist with great pain and labor for so -called  
happiness, the Supreme Personality, as the time 
factor, destroys, and for this reason the condi-
tioned soul laments  (2). The misguided materi-
alist does not know that his very body is imper-
manent and that the attractions of home, land 
and wealth, which are in relationship to that 
body, are also temporary. Out of ignorance 
only, he thinks that everything is permanent  
(3). The living entity, in whatever species of 
life he appears, finds a particular type of satis-
faction in that species, and he is never averse to 
being situated in such a condition  (4).  The con-
ditioned living entity is satisfied in his own par-
ticular species of life; while deluded by the cov-
ering influence of the illusory energy, he feels 
little inclined to cast off his body, even when in 
hell, for he takes delight in hellish enjoyment  
(5).Such satisfaction with one’s standard of liv-
ing is due to deep -rooted attraction for body, 
wife, home, children, animals, wealth and 
friends. In such association, the conditioned 
soul thinks himself quite perfe ct (6). Although 
he is always burning with anxiety, such a fool 
always performs all kinds of mischievous ac-
tivities, with a hope which is never to be ful-
filled, in order to maintain his so -called family 
and society  (7).He gives heart and senses to a 
woman,  who falsely charms him with māyā. He 
enjoys solitary embraces and talking with her, 
and he is enchanted by the sweet words of the 
small children  (8).The attached householder re-
mains in his family life, which is full of diplo-
macy and politics. Always sprea ding miseries 
and controlled by acts of sense gratification, he 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

180 
 acts just to counteract the reactions of all his 
miseries, and if he can successfully counteract 
such miseries, he thinks that he is happy  (9).He 
secures money by committing violence here 
and there, and although he employs it in the ser-
vice of his family, he himself eats only a little 
portion of the food thus purchased, and he goes 
to hell for those for whom he earned the money 
in such an irregular way  (10).When he suffers 
reverses in his occup ation, he tries again and 
again to improve himself, but when he is baf-
fled in all attempts and is ruined, he accepts 
money from others because of excessive greed  
(11).Thus the unfortunate man, unsuccessful in 
maintaining his family members, is bereft of al l 
beauty. He always thinks of his failure, griev-
ing very deeply  (12).  
Seeing him unable to support them, his wife 
and others do not treat him with the same re-
spect as before, even as miserly farmers do not 
accord the same treatment to their old and 
worn -out oxen  (13).The foolish family man 
does not become averse to family life although 
he is maintained by those whom he once main-
tained. Deformed by the influence of old age, 
he prepares himself to meet ultimate death  
(14).Thus he remains at home just like a pet dog 
and eats whatever is so negligently given to 
him. Afflicted with many illnesses, such as dys-
pepsia and loss of appetite, he eats only very 
small morsels of food, and he becomes an inva-
lid who cannot work any more  (15).In that dis-
eased condition, on e’s eyes bulge due to the 
pressure of air from within, and his glands be-
come congested with mucus. He has difficulty 
breathing, and upon exhaling and inhaling he 
produces a sound like ghura -ghura, a rattling 
within the throat  (16).In this way he comes un-
der the clutches of death and lies down, sur-
rounded by lamenting friends and relatives, and 
although he wants to speak with them, he no 
longer can because he is under the control of 
time (17).  
Thus the man, who engaged with uncon-
trolled senses in maintainin g a family, dies in 
great grief, seeing his relatives crying. He dies 
most pathetically, in great pain and without consciousness  (18).At death, he sees the mes-
sengers of the lord of death come before him, 
their eyes full of wrath, and in great fear he 
passes stool and urine  (19).As a criminal is ar-
rested for punishment by the constables of the 
state, a person engaged in criminal sense grati-
fication is similarly arrested by the Yamadūtas, 
who bind him by the neck with strong rope and 
cover his subtle body so that he may undergo 
severe punishment  (20).While carried by the 
constables of Yamarāja, he is overwhelmed and 
trembles in their hands. While passing on the 
road he is bitten by dogs, and he can remember 
the sinful activities of his life. He is thus terri-
bly distressed  (21).Unde r the scorching sun, the 
criminal has to pass through roads of hot sand 
with forest fires on both sides. He is whipped 
on the back by the constables because of his in-
ability to walk, and he is afflicted by hunger 
and thirst, but unfortunately there is no d rink-
ing water, no shelter and no place for rest on the 
road (22).While passing on that road to the 
abode of Yamarāja, he falls down in fatigue, 
and sometimes he becomes unconscious, but he 
is forced to rise again. In this way he is very 
quickly brought to the presence of Yamarāja  
(23).Thus he has to pass ninety -nine th ousand 
yojanas within two or three moments, and then 
he is at once engaged in the torturous punish-
ment which he is destined to suffer  (24).He is 
placed in the midst of burning pieces of wood, 
and his limbs are set on fire. In some cases he 
is made to eat h is own flesh or have it eaten by 
others  (25). His entrails are pulled out by the 
hounds and vultures of hell, even though he is 
still alive to see it, and he is subjected to tor-
ment by serpents, scorpions, gnats and other 
creatures that bite him  (26).Next his limbs are 
lopped off and torn asunder by elephants. He is 
hurled down from hilltops, and he is also held 
captive either in water or in a cave  (27). Men 
and women whose lives were built upon indul-
gence in illicit sex life are put into many kinds 
of mise rable conditions in the hells known as 
Tāmisra, Andha -tāmisra and Raurava  
(28).Lord Kapila continued: My dear mother, it 
is sometimes said that we experience hell or 
heaven on this planet, for hellish punishments 
are sometimes visible on this planet also  (29).  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

181 
 After leaving this body, the man who main-
tained himself and his family members by sin-
ful activities suffers a hellish life, and his rela-
tives suffer also  (30).He goes alone to the dark-
est regions of hell after quitting the present 
body, and the money  he acquired by envying 
other living entities is the passage money with 
which he leaves this world  (31). Thus, by the 
arrangement of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, the maintainer of kinsmen is put into 
a hellish condition to suffer for his sinful acti v-
ities, like a man who has lost his wealth  
(32).Therefore a person who is very eager to 
maintain his family and kinsmen simply by 
black methods certainly goes to the darkest re-
gion of hell, which is known as Andha -tāmisra  
(33).Having gone through all the m iserable, 
hellish conditions and having passed in a regu-
lar order through the lowest forms of animal 
life prior to human birth, and having thus been 
purged of his sins, one is reborn again as a hu-
man being on this earth  (34).  
SB 3.31: Lord Kapila’s Instru ctions on 
the Movements of the Living Entities  
The Personality of Godhead said:  Under 
the supervision of the Supreme Lord and ac-
cording to the result of his work, the living en-
tity, the soul, is made to enter into the womb of 
a woman through the particle o f male semen to 
assume a particular type of body  (1).On the first 
night, the sperm and ovum mix, and on the fifth 
night the mixture ferments into a bubble. On 
the tenth night it develops into a form like a 
plum, and after that, it gradually turns into a 
lump of flesh or an egg, as the case may be  (2). 
In the course of a month, a head is formed, and 
at the end of two months the hands, feet and 
other limbs take shape. By the end of three 
months, the nails, fingers, toes, body hair, 
bones and skin appear, as d o the organ of gen-
eration and the other apertures in the body, 
namely the eyes, nostrils, ears, mouth and anus  
(3).Within four months from the date of con-
ception, the seven essential ingredients of the 
body, namely chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone, 
marrow an d semen, come into existence. At the 
end of five months, hunger and thirst make 
themselves felt, and at the end of six months, the fetus, enclosed by the amnion, begins to 
move on the right side of the abdomen  (4).De-
riving its nutrition from the food and d rink 
taken by the mother, the fetus grows and re-
mains in that abominable residence of stools 
and urine, which is the breeding place of all 
kinds of worms  (5). Bitten again and again all 
over the body by the hungry worms in the ab-
domen itself, the child suf fers terrible agony 
because of his tenderness. He thus becomes un-
conscious moment after moment because of the 
terrible condition  (6).Owing to the mother’s 
eating bitter, pungent foodstuffs, or food which 
is too salty or too sour, the body of the child 
incessantly suffers pains which are almost in-
tolerable  (7).Placed within the amnion and cov-
ered outside by the intestines, the child remains 
lying on one side of the abdomen, his head 
turned towards his belly and his back and neck 
arched like a bow (8).  
The ch ild thus remains just like a bird in a 
cage, without freedom of movement. At that 
time, if the child is fortunate, he can remember 
all the troubles of his past one hundred births, 
and he grieves wretchedly. What is the possi-
bility of peace of mind in that condition? (9) 
Thus endowed with the development of con-
sciousness from the seventh month after his 
conception, the child is tossed downward by the 
airs that press the embryo during the weeks pre-
ceding delivery. Like the worms born of the 
same filthy abdomi nal cavity, he cannot remain 
in one place  (10). The living entity in this 
frightful condition of life, bound by seven lay-
ers of material ingredients, prays with folded 
hands, appealing to the Lord, who has put him 
in that condition  (11).  
The human soul sa ys: I take shelter of the 
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who appears in His various eternal forms 
and walks on the surface of the world. I take 
shelter of Him only, because He can give me 
relief from all fear and from Him I have re-
ceived  this condition of life, which is just befit-
ting my impious activities  (12).I, the pure soul, 
appearing now bound by my activities, am ly-
ing in the womb of my  mother by the arrange-
ment of māyā. I offer my respectful obeisances 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

182 
 unto Him who is also here with me but who is 
unaffected and changeless. He is unlimited, but 
He is perceived in the repentant heart. To Him 
I offer my respectful obeisances  (13).I am sep-
arated from the Supreme Lord because of my 
being in this material body, which is made of 
five elements, and therefore my qualities and 
senses are being misused, although I am essen-
tially spiritual. Because the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead is transcendenta l to material na-
ture and the living entities, because He is de-
void of such a material body, and because He is 
always glorious in His spiritual qualities, I offer 
my obeisances unto Him  (14).The human soul 
further prays: The living entity is put under the 
influence of material nature and continues a 
hard struggle for existence on the path of re-
peated birth and death. This conditional life is 
due to his forgetfulness of his relationship with 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There-
fore, without the Lord’s me rcy, how can he 
again engage in the transcendental loving ser-
vice of the Lord? (15) No one other than the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the local-
ized Paramātmā, the partial representation of 
the Lord, is directing all inanimate and animate 
objects. He is present in the three phases of time  
past, present and future. Therefore, the c ondi-
tioned soul is engaged in different activities by 
His direction, and in order to get free from the 
threefold miseries of this conditional life, we 
have to surrender unto Him only  (16).  
Fallen into a pool of blood, stool and urine 
within the abdomen of  his mother, his own 
body scorched by the mother’s gastric fire, the 
embodied soul, anxious to get out, counts his 
months and prays, “O my Lord, when shall I, a 
wretched soul, be released from this confine-
ment?” (17) My dear Lord, by Your causeless 
mercy I  am awakened to consciousness, alt-
hough I am only ten months old. For this cause-
less mercy of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the friend of all fallen souls, there is no 
way to express my gratitude but to pray with 
folded hands  (18).  
The living entity  in another type of body 
sees only by instinct; he knows only the agree-
able and disagreeable sense perceptions of that particular body. But I have a body in which I 
can control my senses and can understand my 
destination; therefore, I offer my respectful 
obeisances to the Supreme Personality of God-
head, by whom I have been blessed with this 
body and by whose grace I can see Him within 
and without  (19).Therefore, my Lord, although 
I am living in a terrible condition, I do not wish 
to depart from my mother’s abdomen to fall 
again into the blind well of materialistic life. 
Your external energy, called deva -māyā, at 
once captures the newly born child, and imme-
diately false identification, which is the begin-
ning of the cycle of continual birth and death, 
begins  (20).Therefore, without being agitated 
any more, I shall deliver myself from the dark-
ness of nescience with the help of my friend, 
clear consciousness. Simply by keeping the lo-
tus feet of Lord Vi ṣṇu in my mind, I shall be 
saved from entering into the wombs of many 
mothers for repeated birth and death  (21).  
Lord Kapila continued:  The ten -month -
old living entity has these desires even while in 
the womb. But while he thus extols the Lord, 
the wind that helps parturition propels him 
forth with his face turned d ownward so that he 
may be born  (22).Pushed downward all of a 
sudden by the wind, the child comes out with 
great trouble, head downward, breathless and 
deprived of memory due to severe agony  
(23).The child thus falls on the ground, 
smeared with stool and bl ood, and plays just 
like a worm germinated from the stool. He 
loses his superior knowledge and cries under 
the spell of māyā  (24).  
After coming out of the abdomen, the child 
is given to the care of persons who are unable 
to understand what he wants, and t hus he is 
nursed by such persons. Unable to refuse what-
ever is given to him, he falls into undesirable 
circumstances  (25).Laid down on a foul bed in-
fested with sweat and germs, the poor child is 
incapable of scratching his body to get relief 
from his itchi ng sensation, to say nothing of sit-
ting up, standing or even moving  (26). In his 
helpless condition, gnats, mosquitoes, bugs and 
other germs bite the baby, whose skin is tender, 
just as smaller worms bite a big worm. The 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

183 
 child, deprived of his wisdom, crie s bitterly  
(27).  
In this way, the child passes through his 
childhood, suffering different kinds of distress, 
and attains boyhood. In boyhood also he suffers 
pain over desires to get things he can never 
achieve. And thus, due to ignorance, he be-
comes angry  and sorry  (28).With the growth of 
the body, the living entity, in order to vanquish 
his soul, increases his false prestige and anger 
and thereby creates enmity towards similarly 
lusty people  (29).By such ignorance the living 
entity accepts the material bo dy, which is made 
of five elements, as himself. With this misun-
derstanding, he accepts nonpermanent things as 
his own and increases his ignorance in the dark-
est region  (30).For the sake of the body, which 
is a source of constant trouble to him and which 
follows him because he is bound by ties of ig-
norance and fruitive activities, he performs var-
ious actions which cause him to be subjected to 
repeated birth and death  (31).If, therefore, the 
living entity again associates with the path of 
unrighteousness, inf luenced by sensually 
minded people engaged in the pursuit of sexual 
enjoyment and the gratification of the palate, he 
again goes to hell as before  (32).He becomes 
devoid of truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy, 
gravity, spiritual intelligence, shyness, auster-
ity, fame, forgiveness, control of the mind, con-
trol of the senses, fortune and all such opportu-
nities  (33).One should not associate with a 
coarse fool who is bereft of the knowledge of 
self-realization and who is no more than a danc-
ing dog in the hands of a woman  (34).The in-
fatuation and bondage which accrue to a man 
from attachment to any other object is not as 
complete as that resulting from attachment to a 
woman or to the fellowship of men who are 
fond of women  (35).At the sight of his own 
daughter, Brah mā was bewildered by her 
charms and shamelessly ran up to her in the 
form of a stag when she took the form of a hind  
(36).  Amongst all kinds of living entities be-
gotten by Brahmā, namely men, demigods and 
animals, none but the sage Nārāya ṇa is immune 
to the attraction of māyā in the form of woman  
(37).Just try to understand the mighty strength 
of My māyā in the shape of woman, who by the mere movement of her eyebrows can keep even 
the greatest conquerors of the world under her 
grip (38).  
One who aspires t o reach the culmination of 
yoga and has realized his self by rendering ser-
vice unto Me should never associate with an at-
tractive woman, for such a woman is declared 
in the scripture to be the gateway to hell for the 
advancing devotee (39).The woman, created  by 
the Lord, is the representation of māyā, and one 
who associates with such māyā by accepting 
services must certainly know that this is the 
way of death, just like a blind well covered with 
grass  (40).  
A living entity who, as a result of attachment 
to a woman in his previous life, has been en-
dowed with the form of a woman, foolishly 
looks upon māyā in the form of a man, her hus-
band , as the bestower of wealth, progeny, house 
and other material assets.A woman, therefore, 
should consider her husband , her hou se and her 
children to be the arrangement of the external 
energy of the Lord for her death, just as the 
sweet singing of the hunter is death for the deer  
(41-42).Due to his particular type of body, the 
materialistic living entity wanders from one 
planet to  another, following fruitive activities. 
In this way, he involves himself in fruitive ac-
tivities and enjoys the result incessantly  (43).In 
this way the living entity gets a suitable body 
with a material mind and senses, according to 
his fruitive activities . When the reaction of his 
particular activity comes to an end, that end is 
called death, and when a particular type of re-
action begins, that beginning is called birth  
(44). When the eyes lose their power to see 
color or form due to morbid affliction of th e op-
tic nerve, the sense of sight becomes deadened. 
The living entity, who is the seer of both the 
eyes and the sight, loses his power of vision. In 
the same way, when the physical body, the 
place where perception of objects occurs, is 
rendered incapable o f perceiving, that is known 
as death. When one begins to view the physical 
body as one’s very self, that is called birth  (45-
46).Therefore, one should not view death with 
horror, nor have recourse to defining the body 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

184 
 as soul, nor give way to exaggeration in enjoy-
ing the bodily necessities of life. Realizing the 
true nature of the living entity, one should 
move about in the world free from attachment 
and steadfast in purpose.  Endowed with right 
vision and strengthened by devotional service 
and a pessimisti c attitude towards material 
identity, one should relegate his body to this il-
lusory world through his reason. Thus one can 
be unconcerned with this material world  (47-
48).  
SB 3.32: Entanglement in Fruitive Activ-
ities 
The Personality of Godhead said:  The p er-
son who lives in the center of household life de-
rives material benefits by performing religious 
rituals, and thereby he fulfills his desire for eco-
nomic development and sense gratification. 
Again and again he acts the same way  (1).Such 
persons are ever b ereft of devotional service 
due to being too attached to sense gratification, 
and therefore, although they perform various 
kinds of sacrifices and take great vows to sat-
isfy the demigods and forefathers, they are not 
interested in K ṛṣṇa consciousness, devo tional 
service  (2).Such materialistic persons, attracted 
by sense gratification and devoted to the fore-
fathers and demigods, can be elevated to the 
moon, where they drink an extract of the soma 
plant. They again return to this planet  (3).All 
the planets of  the materialistic persons, includ-
ing all the heavenly planets, such as the moon, 
are vanquished when the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Hari, goes to His bed of serpents, 
which is known as Ananta Śe ṣa (4).  
Those who are intelligent and are of purified 
consciousness are completely satisfied in K ṛṣṇa 
consciousness. Freed from the modes of mate-
rial nature, they do not act for sense gratifica-
tion; rather, since they are situated in their own 
occupational duties, they act as one is expected 
to act.By executin g one’s occupational duties, 
acting with detachment and without a sense of 
proprietorship or false egoism, one is posted in 
one’s constitutional position by dint of com-
plete purification of consciousness, and by thus 
executing so -called material duties he can eas-
ily enter into the kingdom of God  (5-6).  Through the path of illumination, such liber-
ated persons approach the complete Personality 
of Godhead, who is the proprietor of the mate-
rial and spiritual worlds and is the supreme 
cause of their manifestati on and dissolution  (7).  
Worshipers of the Hira ṇyagarbha expansion of 
the Personality of Godhead remain within this 
material world until the end of two parārdhas, 
when Lord Brahmā also dies  (8).After experi-
encing the inhabitable time of the three modes 
of material nature, known as two parārdhas, 
Lord Brahmā closes the material universe, 
which is covered by layers of earth, water, air, 
fire, ether, mind, ego, etc., and goes back to 
Godhead  (9-10).The yogīs who become de-
tached from the material world by pract ice of 
breathing exercises and control of the mind 
reach the planet of Brahmā, which is far, far 
away. After giving up their bodies, they enter 
into the body of Lord Brahmā, and therefore 
when Brahmā is liberated and goes to the Su-
preme Personality of Godh ead, who is the Su-
preme Brahman, such yogīs can also enter into 
the kingdom of God  (11).Therefore, My dear 
mother, by devotional service take direct shel-
ter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is seated in everyone’s heart . My dear 
mother, someone m ay worship the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead with a special self -in-
terest, but even demigods such as Lord 
Brahmā, great sages such as Sanat -kumāra and 
great munis such as Marīci have to come back 
to the material world again at the time of crea-
tion. When t he interaction of the three modes 
of material nature begins, Brahmā, who is the 
creator of this cosmic manifestation and who is 
full of Vedic knowledge, and the great sages, 
who are the authors of the spiritual path and the 
yoga system, come back under the  influence of 
the time factor. They are liberated by their non-
fruitive activities and attain the first incarnation 
of the puru ṣa, but at the time of creation they 
come back in exactly the same forms and posi-
tions they previously had  (12-15).  
Persons who a re too addicted to this material 
world execute their prescribed duties very 
nicely and with great faith. They daily perform 
all such prescribed duties with attachment to 
the fruitive result  (16).Such persons, impelled 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

185 
 by the mode of passion, are full of an xieties and 
always aspire for sense gratification due to un-
controlled senses. They worship the forefathers 
and are busy day and night improving the eco-
nomic condition of their family, social or na-
tional life  (17).Such persons are called trai -
vargika becaus e they are interested in the three 
elevating processes. They are averse to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who can give 
relief to the conditioned soul. They are not in-
terested in the Supreme Personality’s pastimes, 
which are worth hearing because of Hi s tran-
scendental prowess  (18).Such persons are con-
demned by the supreme order of the Lord. Be-
cause they are averse to the nectar of the activ-
ities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
they are compared to stool -eating hogs. They 
give up hearing the trans cendental activities of 
the Lord and indulge in hearing of the abomi-
nable activities of materialistic persons  
(19).Such materialistic persons are allowed to 
go to the planet called Pit ṛloka by the southern 
course of the sun, but they again come back to 
this planet and take birth in their own families, 
beginning again the same fruitive activities 
from birth to the end of life  (20). When the re-
sults of their pious activities are exhausted, they 
fall down by higher arrangement and again 
come back to this plane t, just as any person 
raised to a high position sometimes all of a sud-
den falls  (21).My dear mother, I therefore ad-
vise that you take shelter of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, for His lotus feet are 
worth worshiping. Accept this with all devotion 
and love, for thus you can be situated in tran-
scendental devotional service  (22). Engage-
ment in K ṛṣṇa consciousness and application of 
devotional service unto K ṛṣṇa make it possible 
to advance in knowledge and detachment, as 
well as in self -realization  (23).The exalted dev-
otee’s mind becomes equipoised in sensory ac-
tivities, and he is transcendental to that which 
is agreeable and not agreeable.Because of his 
transcendental intelligence, the pure devotee is 
equipoised in his vision and sees himself to be 
unconta minated by matter. He does not see an-
ything as superior or inferior, and he feels him-
self elevated to the transcendental platform of being equal in qualities with the Supreme Per-
son (24-25).The Supreme Personality of God-
head alone is complete transcendenta l 
knowledge, but according to the different pro-
cesses of understanding He appears differently, 
either as impersonal Brahman, as Paramātmā, 
as the Supreme Personality of Godhead or as 
the puru ṣa-avatāra  (26).The greatest common 
understanding for all yogīs i s complete detach-
ment from matter, which can be achieved by 
different kinds of yoga  (27).Those who are 
averse to the Transcendence realize the Su-
preme Absolute Truth differently through spec-
ulative sense perception, and therefore, because 
of mistaken specu lation, everything appears to 
them to be relative  (28).From the total energy, 
the mahat -tattva, I have manifested the false 
ego, the three modes of material nature, the five 
material elements, the individual conscious-
ness, the eleven senses and the materia l body. 
Similarly, the entire universe has come from 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead  (29).This 
perfect knowledge can be achieved by a person 
who is already engaged in devotional service 
with faith, steadiness and full detachment, and 
who is always absor bed in thought of the Su-
preme. He is aloof from material association  
(30).  
My dear respectful mother, I have already 
described the path of understanding the Abso-
lute Truth, by which one can come to under-
stand the real truth of matter and spirit and their 
relationship  (31).Philosophical research culmi-
nates in understanding the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. After achieving this understand-
ing, when one becomes free from the material 
modes of nature, he attains the stage of devo-
tional service. Either by devo tional service di-
rectly or by philosophical research, one has to 
find the same destination, which is the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead  (32).A single object is 
appreciated differently by different senses due 
to its having different qualities. Similarly, th e 
Supreme Personality of Godhead is one, but ac-
cording to different scriptural injunctions He 
appears to be different  (33).By performing fru-
itive activities and sacrifices, by distributing 
charity, by performing austerities, by studying 
various literatures , by conducting philosophical 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

186 
 research, by controlling the mind, by subduing 
the senses, by accepting the renounced order of 
life, by performing the prescribed duties of 
one’s social order, by performing the different 
divisions of yoga practice, by perform ing devo-
tional service, by exhibiting the process of de-
votional service containing the symptoms of 
both attachment and detachment, by under-
standing the science of self -realization, and by 
developing a strong sense of detachment, one 
who is expert in unders tanding the different 
processes of self -realization realizes the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead as He is repre-
sented in the material world as well as in tran-
scendence  (34-36).  
My dear mother, I have explained to you the 
process of devotional service and i ts identity in 
four different social divisions. I have explained 
to you as well how eternal time is chasing the 
living entities, although it is imperceptible to 
them  (37).There are varieties of material exist-
ence for the living entity according to the work  
he performs in ignorance or forgetfulness of his 
real identity. My dear mother, if anyone enters 
into that forgetfulness, he is unable to under-
stand where his movements will end  (38).Lord 
Kapila continued: This instruction is not meant 
for the envious, fo r the agnostics or for persons 
who are unclean in their behavior. Nor is it for 
hypocrites or for persons who are proud of ma-
terial possessions  (39).It is not to be instructed 
to persons who are too greedy and too attached 
to family life, nor to persons wh o are nondevo-
tees and who are envious of the devotees and of 
the Personality of Godhead  (40).Instruction 
should be given to the faithful devotee who is 
respectful to the spiritual master, nonenvious, 
friendly to all kinds of living entities and eager 
to re nder service with faith and sincerity  
(41).This instruction should be imparted by the 
spiritual master to persons who have taken the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead to be more 
dear than anything, who are not envious of an-
yone, who are perfectly cleansed and  who have 
developed detachment for that which is outside 
the purview of K ṛṣṇa consciousness  (42). Any-
one who once meditates upon Me with faith and 
affection, who hears and chants about Me, 
surely goes back home, back to Godhead  (43). SB 3.33: Activities of  Kapila  
Śrī Maitreya said:  Thus Devahūti, the 
mother of Lord Kapila and wife of Kardama 
Muni, became freed from all ignorance con-
cerning devotional service and transcendental 
knowledge. She offered her obeisances unto the 
Lord, the author of the basic prin ciples of the 
Sāṅkhya system of philosophy, which is the 
background of liberation, and she satisfied Him 
with the following verses of prayer  (1).  
Devahūti said:  Brahmā is said to be unborn 
because he takes birth from the lotus flower 
which grows from Your  abdomen while You 
lie in the ocean at the bottom of the universe. 
But even Brahmā simply meditated upon You, 
whose body is the source of unlimited uni-
verses  (2).My dear Lord, although personally 
You have nothing to do, You have distributed 
Your energies i n the interactions of the material 
modes of nature, and for that reason the crea-
tion, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic 
manifestation take place. My dear Lord, You 
are self -determined and are the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead for all living entiti es. For 
them You created this material manifestation, 
and although You are one, Your diverse ener-
gies can act multifariously. This is inconceiva-
ble to us  (3).As the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, You have taken birth from my abdo-
men. O my Lord, how is tha t possible for the 
supreme one, who has in His belly all the cos-
mic manifestation? The answer is that it is pos-
sible, for at the end of the millennium You lie 
down on a leaf of a banyan tree, and just like a 
small baby, You lick the toe of Your lotus foot  
(4).My dear Lord, You have assumed this body 
in order to diminish the sinful activities of the 
fallen and to enrich their knowledge in devo-
tion and liberation. Since these sinful people 
are dependent on Your direction, by Your own 
will You assume incarnati ons as a boar and as 
other forms. Similarly, You have appeared in 
order to distribute transcendental knowledge to 
Your dependents  (5).To say nothing of the spir-
itual advancement of persons who see the Su-
preme Person face to face, even a person born 
in a fa mily of dog -eaters immediately becomes 
eligible to perform Vedic sacrifices if he once 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

187 
 utters the holy name of the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead or chants about Him, hears 
about His pastimes, offers Him obeisances or 
even remembers Him  (6).Oh, how gloriou s are 
they whose tongues are chanting Your holy 
name! Even if born in the families of dog -eat-
ers, such persons are worshipable. Persons who 
chant the holy name of Your Lordship must 
have executed all kinds of austerities and fire 
sacrifices and achieved al l the good manners of 
the Āryans. To be chanting the holy name of 
Your Lordship, they must have bathed at holy 
places of pilgrimage, studied the Vedas and ful-
filled everything required  (7).I believe, my 
Lord, that You are Lord Vi ṣṇu Himself under 
the name of Kapila, and You are the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Brah-
man! The saints and sages, being freed from all 
the disturbances of the senses and mind, medi-
tate upon You, for by Your mercy only can one 
become free from the clutches of the three  
modes of material nature. At the time of disso-
lution, all the Vedas are sustained in You only  
(8).  
Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
Kapila, satisfied by the words of His mother, 
towards whom He was very affectionate, re-
plied with gravity  (9).  
The Personality of Godhead said:  My dear 
mother, the path of self -realization which I 
have already instructed to you is very easy. You 
can execute this system without difficulty, and 
by following it you shall very soon be liberated, 
even within your present b ody (10).My dear 
mother, those who are actually transcendental-
ists certainly follow My instructions as I have 
given them to you. You may rest assured that if 
you traverse this path of self -realization per-
fectly, surely you shall be freed from fearful 
mater ial contamination and shall ultimately 
reach Me. Mother, persons who are not conver-
sant with this method of devotional service cer-
tainly cannot get out of the cycle of birth and 
death  (11).  
Śrī Maitreya said:  The Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead Kapila, aft er instructing His be-
loved mother, took permission from her and left 
His home, His mission having been fulfilled  (12).As instructed by her son, Devahūti also be-
gan to practice bhakti -yoga in that very āśrama. 
She practiced samādhi in the house of Kardama 
Muni, which was so beautifully decorated with 
flowers that it was considered the flower crown 
of the river Sarasvatī  (13).She began to bathe 
three times daily, and thus her curling black 
hair gradually became gray. Due to austerity, 
her body gradually becam e thin, and she wore 
old garments  (14).The home and household 
paraphernalia of Kardama, who was one of the 
Prajāpatis, was developed in such a way, by 
dint of his mystic powers of austerity and yoga, 
that his opulence was sometimes envied by 
those who trav el in outer space in airplanes  
(15).The opulence of the household of Kar-
dama Muni is described herein. The bedsheets 
and mattresses were all as white as the foam of 
milk, the chairs and benches were made of 
ivory and were covered by cloths of lace with 
golden filigree, and the couches were made of 
gold and had very soft pillows.The walls of the 
house were made of first -class marble, deco-
rated with valuable jewels. There was no need 
of light, for the household was illuminated by 
the rays of these jewels. The  female members 
of the household were all amply decorated with 
jewelry.The compound of the main household 
was surrounded by beautiful gardens with 
sweet, fragrant flowers and many trees which 
produced fresh fruit and were tall and beautiful. 
The attraction  of such gardens was that singing 
birds would sit on the trees, and their chanting 
voices, as well as the humming sound of the 
bees, made the whole atmosphere as pleasing 
as possible.When Devahūti would enter that 
lovely garden to take her bath in the pond  filled 
with lotus flowers, the associates of the deni-
zens of heaven, the Gandharvas, would sing 
about Kardama’s glorious household life. Her 
great husband , Kardama, gave her all protec-
tion at all times.Although her position was 
unique from all points of v iew, saintly 
Devahūti, in spite of all her possessions, which 
were envied even by the ladies of the heavenly 
planets, gave up all such comforts. She was 
only sorry that her great son was separated from 
her (16-20).  
Devahūti’s husband  had already left home  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

188 
 and accepted the renounced order of life, and 
then her only son, Kapila, left home. Although 
she knew all the truths of life and death, and 
although her heart was cleansed of all dirt, she 
was very aggrieved at the loss of her son, just 
as a cow is affect ed when her calf dies  (21).O 
Vidura, thus always meditating upon her son, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Ka-
piladeva, she very soon became unattached to 
her nicely decorated home  (22).Thereafter, 
having heard with great eagerness and in all de-
tail from her son, Kapiladeva, the eternally 
smiling Personality of Godhead, Devahūti be-
gan to meditate constantly upon the Vi ṣṇu form 
of the Supreme Lord  (23).She did so with seri-
ous engagement in devotional service. Because 
she was strong in renunciation, she acce pted 
only the necessities of the body. She became 
situated in knowledge due to realization of the 
Absolute Truth, her heart became purified, she 
became fully absorbed in meditation upon the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and all mis-
givings due to the mode s of material nature dis-
appeared  (24-25).Her mind became completely 
engaged in the Supreme Lord, and she automat-
ically realized the knowledge of the impersonal 
Brahman. As a Brahman -realized soul, she was 
freed from the designations of the materialistic 
concept of life. Thus all material pangs disap-
peared, and she attained transcendental bliss  
(26).Situated in eternal trance and freed from 
illusion impelled by the modes of material na-
ture, she forgot her material body, just as one 
forgets his different bodi es in a dream  (27). Her 
body was being taken care of by the spiritual 
damsels created by her husband , Kardama, and 
since she had no mental anxiety at that time, her 
body did not become thin. She appeared just 
like a fire surrounded by smoke. Because she 
was always absorbed in the thought of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, she was not 
aware that sometimes her hair was loosened or 
her garments were disarrayed  (28-29).  
My dear Vidura, by following the principles 
instructed by Kapila, Devahūti soon became 
liberated from material bondage and achieved 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as Super-
soul, without difficulty  (30).The place where 
Devahūti achieved her perfection, my dear Vidura, is understood to be a most sacred spot. 
It is known all over the three worlds as Sid-
dhapada  (31).Dear Vidura, the material ele-
ments of her body have melted into water and 
are now a flowing river, which is the most sa-
cred of all rivers. Anyone who bathes in that 
river also attains perfection, and therefore all 
persons who desi re perfection go bathe there  
(32).  
My dear Vidura, the great sage Kapila, the 
Personality of Godhead, left His father’s her-
mitage with the permission of His mother and 
went towards the northeast  (33).While He was 
passing in the northern direction, all the  celes-
tial denizens known as Cāra ṇas and Gandhar-
vas, as well as the munis and the damsels of the 
heavenly planets, prayed and offered Him all 
respects. The ocean offered Him oblations and 
a place of residence.Even now Kapila Muni is 
staying there in trance  for the deliverance of the 
conditioned souls in the three worlds, and all 
the ācāryas, or great teachers, of the system of 
Sāṅkhya philosophy are worshiping Him  (34-
35).  
My dear son, since you have inquired from 
me, I have answered. O sinless one, the de scrip-
tions of Kapiladeva and His mother and their 
activities are the purest of all pure discourses  
(36).The description of the dealings of Ka-
piladeva and His mother is very confidential, 
and anyone who hears or reads this narration 
becomes a devotee of the  Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, who is carried by Garu ḍa, and he 
thereafter enters into the abode of the Supreme 
Lord to engage in the transcendental loving ser-
vice of the Lord  (37).  
Canto  4: The Creation of the Fourth Or-
der 
SB 4.1: Genealogical Table of  the Daugh-
ters of Manu  
Śrī Maitreya said:  Svāyambhuva Manu be-
got three daughters in his wife, Śatarūpā, and 
their names were Ākūti, Devahūti and Prasūti  
(1).Ākūti had two brothers, but in spite of her 
brothers, King Svāyambhuva Manu handed her 
over to Praj āpati Ruci on the condition that the 
son born of her be returned to Manu as his son. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

189 
 This he did in consultation with his wife, 
Śatarūpā  (2).  
Ruci, who was very powerful in his brah-
minical qualifications and was appointed one 
of the progenitors of the liv ing entities, begot 
one son and one daughter by his wife, Ākūti  
(3).Of the two children born of Ākūti, the male 
child was directly an incarnation of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, and His name 
was Yajña, which is another name of Lord 
Viṣṇu. The female  child was a partial incarna-
tion of Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, the eter-
nal consort of Lord Viṣṇu  (4).Svāyambhuva 
Manu very gladly brought home the beautiful 
boy named Yajña, and Ruci, his son -in-law, 
kept with him the daughter, Dakṣiṇā  (5).The 
Lord of  the ritualistic performance of yajña 
later married Dakṣiṇā, who was anxious to have 
the Personality of Godhead as her husband , and 
in this wife the Lord was also very much 
pleased to beget twelve children  (6).The twelve 
boys born of Yajña and Dakṣiṇā were  named 
Toṣa, Pratoṣa, Santoṣa, Bhadra, Śānti, Iḍaspati, 
Idhma, Kavi, Vibhu, Svahna, Sudeva and 
Rocana  (7).During the time of Svāyambhuva 
Manu, these sons all became the demigods col-
lectively named the Tuṣitas. Marīci became the 
head of the seven ṛṣis, and Yajña became the 
king of the demigods, Indra  (8). Svāyambhuva 
Manu’s two sons, Priyavrata and Uttānapāda, 
became very powerful kings, and their sons and 
grandsons spread all over the three worlds dur-
ing that period  (9).  
My dear son, Svāyambhuva Manu hande d 
over his very dear daughter Devahūti to Kar-
dama Muni. I have already spoken to you about 
them, and you have heard about them almost in 
full (10).Svāyambhuva Manu handed over his 
daughter Prasūti to the son of Brahmā named 
Dakṣa, who was also one of the p rogenitors of 
the living entities. The descendants of Dakṣa 
are spread throughout the three worlds  (11).  
You have already been informed about the 
nine daughters of Kardama Muni, who were 
handed over to nine different sages. I shall now 
describe the descen dants of those nine daugh-
ters. Please hear from me  (12).Kardama Muni’s 
daughter Kalā, who was married to Marīci, gave birth to two children, whose names were 
Kaśyapa and Pūrṇimā. Their descendants are 
spread all over the world  (13).My dear Vidura, 
of the t wo sons, Kaśyapa and Pūrṇimā, 
Pūrṇimā begot three children, namely Viraja, 
Viśvaga and Devakulyā. Of these three, 
Devakulyā was the water which washed the lo-
tus feet of the Personality of Godhead and 
which later on transformed into the Ganges of 
the heaven ly planets  (14). Anasūyā, the wife of 
Atri Muni, gave birth to three very famous sons  
Soma, Dattātreya and Durvāsā  who were par-
tial representations of Lord Viṣṇu, Lord Śiva 
and Lord Brahmā. Soma was a partial represen-
tation of Lord Brahmā, Dattātreya was  a partial 
representation of Lord Viṣṇu, and Durvāsā was 
a partial representation of Lord Śiva  (15).  
After hearing this, Vidura inquired from 
Maitreya: My dear master, how is it that the 
three deities Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, who are 
the creator, maintaine r and destroyer of the 
whole creation, became the offspring of the 
wife of Atri Muni? (16) 
Maitreya said:  When Lord Brahmā ordered 
Atri Muni to create generations after marrying 
Anasūyā, Atri Muni and his wife went to per-
form severe austerities in the vall ey of the 
mountain known as Ṛkṣa  (17).In that mountain 
valley flows a river named Nirvindhyā. On the 
bank of the river are many aśoka trees and other 
plants full of palāśa flowers, and there is always 
the sweet sound of water flowing from a water-
fall. The husband  and wife reached that beauti-
ful place  (18).There the great sage concentrated 
his mind by the yogic breathing exercises, and 
thereby controlling all attachment, he remained 
standing on one leg only, eating nothing but air, 
and stood there on one leg  for one hundred 
years  (19).He was thinking: May the Lord of 
the universe, of whom I have taken shelter, 
kindly be pleased to offer me a son exactly like 
Him (20).  
While Atri Muni was engaged in these se-
vere austerities, a blazing fire came out of his 
head by virtue of his breathing exercise, and 
that fire was seen by the three principal deities 
of the three worlds  (21).At that time, the three 
deities approached the hermitage of Atri Muni, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

190 
 accompanied by the denizens of the heavenly 
planets, such as the ce lestial beauties, the 
Gandharvas, the Siddhas, the Vidyādharas and 
the Nāgas. Thus they entered the āśrama of the 
great sage, who had become famous by his aus-
terities  (22).The sage was standing on one leg, 
but as soon as he saw that the three deities had 
appeared before him, he was so pleased to see 
them all together that despite great difficulty he 
approached them on one leg  (23). Thereafter he 
began to offer prayers to the three deities, who 
were seated on different carriers  a bull, a swan 
and Garuḍa  an d who held in their hands a 
drum, kuśa grass and a discus. The sage offered 
them his respects by falling down like a stick  
(24).Atri Muni was greatly pleased to see that 
the three devas were gracious towards him. His 
eyes were dazzled by the effulgence of their 
bodies, and therefore he closed his eyes for the 
time being  (25).But since his heart was already 
attracted by the deities, somehow or other he 
gathered his senses, and with folded hands and 
sweet words he began to offer prayers to the 
predominating d eities of the universe  (26).  
The great sage Atri said : O Lord Brahmā, 
Lord Viṣṇu and Lord Śiva, you have divided 
yourself into three bodies by accepting the 
three modes of material nature, as you do in 
every millennium for the creation, maintenance 
and dissolution of the cosmic manifestation. I 
offer my resp ectful obeisances unto all of you 
and beg to inquire whom of you three I have 
called by my prayer  (27).I called for the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, desiring a son 
like Him, and I thought of Him only. But alt-
hough He is far beyond the mental speculation  
of man, all three of you have come here. Kindly 
let me know how you have come, for I am 
greatly bewildered about this  (28). 
The great sage Maitreya continued : Upon 
hearing Atri Muni speak in that way, the three 
great deities smiled, and they replied in th e fol-
lowing sweet words  (29).  
The three deities told Atri Muni : Dear 
brāhmaṇa, you are perfect in your determina-
tion, and therefore as you have decided, so it 
will happen; it will not happen otherwise. We 
are all the same person upon whom you were meditat ing, and therefore we have all come to 
you (30).You will have sons who will represent 
a partial manifestation of our potency, and be-
cause we desire all good fortune for you, those 
sons will glorify your reputation throughout the 
world  (31).Thus, while the couple looked on, 
the three deities Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara 
disappeared from that place after bestowing 
upon Atri Muni the benediction  (32). Thereaf-
ter, from the partial representation of Brahmā, 
the moon -god was born of them; from the par-
tial represen tation of Viṣṇu, the great mystic 
Dattātreya was born; and from the partial rep-
resentation of Śaṅkara [Lord Śiva], Durvāsā 
was born. Now you may hear from me of the 
many sons of Aṅgirā  (33).  
Aṅgirā’s wife, Śraddhā, gave birth to four 
daughters, named Sinī vālī, Kuhū, Rākā and 
Anumati  (34).Besides these four daughters, she 
also had another two sons. One of them was 
known as Utathya, and the other was the 
learned scholar Bṛhaspati  (35).Pulastya begot 
in his wife, Havirbhū, one son of the name 
Agastya, who in his next birth became 
Dahrāgni. Besides him, Pulastya begot another 
very great and saintly son, whose name was 
Viśravā  (36).Viśravā had two wives. The first 
wife was Iḍaviḍā, from whom Kuvera, the mas-
ter of all Yakṣas, was born, and the next wife 
was named  Keśinī, from whom three sons were 
born  Rāvaṇa, Kumbhakarṇa and Vibhīṣaṇa  
(37).  
Gati, the wife of the sage Pulaha, gave birth 
to three sons, named Karmaśreṣṭha, Varīyān 
and Sahiṣṇu, and all of them were great sages  
(38).Kratu’s wife, Kriyā, gave birth to  sixty 
thousand great sages, named the Vālakhilyas. 
All these sages were greatly advanced in spir-
itual knowledge, and their bodies were illumi-
nated by such knowledge  (39).The great sage 
Vasiṣṭha begot in his wife, Ūrjā [sometimes 
called Arundhatī], seven s potlessly great sages, 
headed by the sage named Citraketu  (40).The 
names of these seven sages are as follows: 
Citraketu, Suroci, Virajā, Mitra, Ulbaṇa, 
Vasubhṛdyāna and Dyumān. Some other very 
competent sons were born from Vasiṣṭha’s 
other wife  (41).Citti,  wife of the sage Atharvā, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

191 
 gave birth to a son named Aśvaśirā by accept-
ing a great vow called Dadhyañca. Now you 
may hear from me about the descendants of the 
sage Bhṛgu  (42).  
The sage Bhṛgu was highly fortunate. In his 
wife, known as Khyāti, he begot two  sons, 
named Dhātā and Vidhātā, and one daughter, 
named Śrī, who was very much devoted to the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead  (43).The sage 
Meru had two daughters, named Āyati and Ni-
yati, whom he gave in charity to Dhātā and 
Vidhātā. Āyati and Niyati gave b irth to two 
sons, Mṛkaṇḍa and Prāṇa  (44).From Mṛkaṇḍa, 
Mārkaṇḍeya Muni was born, and from Prāṇa, 
the sage Vedaśirā, whose son was Uśanā 
[Śukrācārya], also known as Kavi. Thus Kavi 
also belonged to the descendants of the Bhṛgu 
dynasty  (45).My dear Vidura, t he population of 
the universe was thus increased by the descend-
ants of these sages and the daughters of Kar-
dama. Anyone who hears the descriptions of 
this dynasty with faith will be relieved from all 
sinful reactions  (46).  
Another of Manu’s daughters, kno wn as 
Prasūti, married the son of Brahmā named 
Dakṣa  (47). 
Dakṣa begot sixteen very beautiful daugh-
ters with lotuslike eyes in his wife Prasūti. Of 
these sixteen daughters, thirteen were given in 
marriage to Dharma, and one daughter was 
given to Agni  (48).  One of the remaining two 
daughters was given in charity to the Pitṛloka, 
where she resides very amicably, and the other 
was given to Lord Śiva, who is the deliverer of 
sinful persons from material entanglement. The 
names of the thirteen daughters of Dakṣa  who 
were given to Dharma are Śraddhā, Maitrī, 
Dayā, Śānti, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi, Kriyā, Unnati, Bud-
dhi, Medhā, Titikṣā, Hrī and Mūrti. These thir-
teen daughters produced the following sons: 
Śraddhā gave birth to Śubha, Maitrī produced 
Prasāda, Dayā gave birth to A bhaya, Śānti gave 
birth to Sukha, Tuṣṭi gave birth to Muda, Puṣṭi 
gave birth to Smaya, Kriyā gave birth to Yoga, 
Unnati gave birth to Darpa, Buddhi gave birth 
to Artha, Medhā gave birth to Smṛti, Titikṣā 
gave birth to Kṣema, and Hrī gave birth to 
Praśraya.  Mūrti, a reservoir of all respectable qualities, gave birth to Śrī Nara -Nārāyaṇa, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead  (49-52).On 
the occasion of the appearance of Nara -
Nārāyaṇa, the entire world was full of joy. Eve-
ryone’s mind became tranquil, and thus in  all 
directions the air, the rivers and the mountains 
became pleasant  (53).In the heavenly planets, 
bands began to play, and they showered flow-
ers from the sky. The pacified sages chanted 
Vedic prayers, the denizens of heaven known 
as the Gandharvas and Ki nnaras sang, the beau-
tiful damsels of the heavenly planets danced, 
and in this way, at the time of the appearance 
of Nara -Nārāyaṇa, all signs of good fortune 
were visible. Just at that time, great demigods 
like Brahmā also offered their respectful pray-
ers (54-55).  
The demigods said:  Let us offer our re-
spectful obeisances unto the transcendental 
Personality of Godhead, who created as His ex-
ternal energy this cosmic manifestation, which 
is situated in Him as the air and clouds are sit-
uated in space, and who has now appeared in 
the form of Nara -Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi in the house of 
Dharma  (56).Let that Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is understood by truly author-
ized Vedic literature and who has created peace 
and prosperity to destroy all calamities of the 
created world, be kind enough to bestow His 
glance upon the demigods. His merciful glance 
can supersede the beauty of the spotless lotus 
flower which is the home of the goddess of for-
tune (57).  
[Maitreya said:] O Vidura, thus the demi-
gods worshiped with prayers t he Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead appearing as the sage 
Nara -Nārāyaṇa. The Lord glanced upon them 
with mercy and then departed for Gand-
hamādana Hill  (58).That Nara -Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi, 
who is a partial expansion of Kṛṣṇa, has now 
appeared in the dynasties of Yadu  and Kuru, in 
the forms of Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna respectively, to 
mitigate the burden of the world  (59).  
The predominating deity of fire begot in his 
wife, Svāhā, three children, named Pāvaka, Pa-
vamāna and Śuci, who exist by eating the obla-
tions offered to the  fire of sacrifice  (60).From 
those three sons another forty -five descendants 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

192 
 were generated, who are also fire -gods. The to-
tal number of fire -gods is therefore forty -nine, 
including the fathers and the grandfather  
(61).These forty -nine fire -gods are the be nefi-
ciaries of the oblations offered in the Vedic sac-
rificial fire by impersonalist brāhmaṇas  (62).  
The Agniṣvāttas, the Barhiṣadas, the 
Saumyas and the Ājyapas are the Pitās. They 
are either sāgnika or niragnika. The wife of all 
these Pitās is Svadhā, wh o is the daughter of 
King Dakṣa  (63). S vadhā, who was offered to 
the Pitās, begot two daughters named Vayunā 
and Dhāriṇī, both of whom were impersonalists 
and were expert in transcendental and Vedic 
knowledge  (64).The sixteenth daughter, whose 
name was Sat ī, was the wife of Lord Śiva. She 
could not produce a child, although she always 
faithfully engaged in the service of her husband  
(65).The reason is that Satī’s father, Dakṣa, 
used to rebuke Lord Śiva in spite of Śiva’s 
faultlessness. Consequently, before attaining a 
mature age, Satī gave up her body by dint of 
yogic mystic power  (66).  
SB 4.2: Dakṣa Curses Lord Śiva  
Vidura inquired : Why was Dakṣa, who 
was so affectionate towards his daughter, envi-
ous of Lord Śiva, who is the best among the 
gentle? Why did he neglect his daughter Satī? 
(1) Lord Śiva, the spiritual master of the entire 
world, is free from enmity, is a peaceful per-
sonality, and is always satisfied in himself. He 
is the greatest among the demigods. How is it 
possible that Dakṣa could be inimica l towards 
such an auspicious personality? (2) 
My dear Maitreya, to part with one’s life is 
very difficult. Would you kindly explain to me 
how such a son -in-law and father -in-law could 
quarrel so bitterly that the great goddess Satī 
could give up her life? (3) 
The sage Maitreya said:  In a former time, 
the leaders of the universal creation performed 
a great sacrifice in which all the great sages, 
philosophers, demigods and fire -gods assem-
bled with their followers  (4). When Dakṣa, the 
leader of the Prajāpatis,  entered that assembly, 
his personal bodily luster as bright as the efful-gence of the sun, the entire assembly was illu-
minated, and all the assembled personalities be-
came insignificant in his presence  (5). Influ-
enced by his personal bodily luster, all the fire-
gods and other participants in that great assem-
bly, with the exceptions of Lord Brahmā and 
Lord Śiva, gave up their own sitting places and 
stood in respect for Dakṣa  (6).Dakṣa was ade-
quately welcomed by the president of the great 
assembly, Lord Brahmā . After offering Lord 
Brahmā respect, Dakṣa, by the order of 
Brahmā, properly took his seat  (7).  
Before taking his seat, however, Dakṣa was 
very much offended to see Lord Śiva sitting and 
not showing him any respect. At that time, 
Dakṣa became greatly ang ry, and, his eyes 
glowing, he began to speak very strongly 
against Lord Śiva  (8).All sages, brāhmaṇas and 
fire-gods present, please hear me with atten-
tion, for I speak about the manners of gentle 
persons. I do not speak out of ignorance or envy  
(9).Śiva ha s spoiled the name and fame of the 
governors of the universe and has polluted the 
path of gentle manners. Because he is shame-
less, he does not know how to act  (10).He has 
already accepted himself as my subordinate by 
marrying my daughter in the presence of  fire 
and brāhmaṇas. He has married my daughter, 
who is equal to Gāyatrī, and has pretended to 
be just like an honest person  (11).He has eyes 
like a monkey’s, yet he has married my daugh-
ter, whose eyes are just like those of a deer cub. 
Nevertheless he did  not stand up to receive me, 
nor did he think it fit to welcome me with sweet 
words  (12).I had no desire to give my daughter 
to this person, who has broken all rules of civil-
ity. Because of not observing the required rules 
and regulations, he is impure, bu t I was obliged 
to hand over my daughter to him just as one 
teaches the messages of the Vedas to a śūdra  
(13).He lives in filthy places like crematori-
ums, and his companions are the ghosts and de-
mons. Naked like a madman, sometimes laugh-
ing and sometimes c rying, he smears cremato-
rium ashes all over his body. He does not bathe 
regularly, and he ornaments his body with a 
garland of skulls and bones. Therefore only in 
name is he śiva, or auspicious; actually, he is 
the most mad and inauspicious creature. Thus 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

193 
 he is very dear to crazy beings in the gross 
mode of ignorance, and he is their leader  (14-
15).On the request of Lord Brahmā I handed 
over my chaste daughter to him, although he is 
devoid of all cleanliness and his heart is filled 
with nasty things  (16).  
The sage Maitreya continued : Thus 
Dakṣa, seeing Lord Śiva sitting as if against 
him, washed his hands and mouth and cursed 
him in the following words  (17).The demigods 
are eligible to share in the oblations of sacrifice, 
but Lord Śiva, who is the lowest of  all the dem-
igods, should not have a share  (18).Maitreya 
continued: My dear Vidura, in spite of the re-
quests of all the members of the sacrificial as-
sembly, Dakṣa, in great anger, cursed Lord Śiva 
and then left the assembly and went back to his 
home  (19).  
Upon understanding that Lord Śiva had been 
cursed, Nandīśvara, one of Lord Śiva’s princi-
pal associates, became greatly angry. His eyes 
became red, and he prepared to curse Dakṣa 
and all the brāhmaṇas present there who had 
tolerated Dakṣa’s cursing Śiva in  harsh words  
(20).Anyone who has accepted Dakṣa as the 
most important personality and neglected Lord 
Śiva because of envy is less intelligent and, be-
cause of visualizing in duality, will be bereft of 
transcendental knowledge  (21).Pretentiously 
religious ho useholder life, in which one is at-
tracted to material happiness and thus also at-
tracted to the superficial explanation of the Ve-
das, robs one of all intelligence and attaches 
one to fruitive activities as all in all  (22).Dakṣa 
has accepted the body as all in all. Therefore, 
since he has forgotten the viṣṇu -pāda, or viṣṇu -
gati, and is attached to sex life only, within a 
short time he will have the face of a goat  
(23).Those who have become as dull as matter 
by cultivating materialistic education and intel-
ligence are nesciently involved in fruitive ac-
tivities. Such men have purposely insulted Lord 
Śiva. May they continue in the cycle of re-
peated birth and death  (24).May those who are 
envious of Lord Śiva, being attracted by the 
flowery language of the enchantin g Vedic 
promises, and who have thus become dull, al-
ways remain attached to fruitive activities  (25).These brāhmaṇas take to education, aus-
terity and vows only for the purpose of main-
taining the body. They shall be devoid of dis-
crimination between what to e at and what not 
to eat. They will acquire money, begging from 
door to door, simply for the satisfaction of the 
body  (26).  
When all the hereditary brāhmaṇas were 
thus cursed by Nandīśvara, the sage Bhṛgu, as 
a reaction, condemned the followers of Lord 
Śiva with this very strong brahminical curse  
(27).One who takes a vow to satisfy Lord Śiva 
or who follows such principles will certainly 
become an atheist and be diverted from tran-
scendental scriptural injunctions  (28).  Those 
who vow to worship Lord Śiva are so foolish 
that they imitate him by keeping long hair on 
their heads. When initiated into worship of 
Lord Śiva, they prefer to live on wine, flesh and 
other such things  (29).Bhṛgu Muni continued: 
Since you blaspheme the Vedas and the 
brāhmaṇas, who are fol lowers of the Vedic 
principles, it is understood that you have al-
ready taken shelter of the doctrine of atheism  
(30).The Vedas give the eternal regulative prin-
ciples for auspicious advancement in human 
civilization which have been rigidly followed 
in the p ast. The strong evidence of this princi-
ple is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is called Janārdana, the well -wisher of all 
living entities  (31). By blaspheming the princi-
ples of the Vedas, which are the pure and su-
preme path of the saintly persons, certainly you 
followers of Bhūtapati, Lord Śiva, will descend 
to the standard of atheism without a doubt  (32).  
The sage Maitreya said : When such curs-
ing and countercursing was going on between 
Lord Śiva’s followers and the parties of Dakṣa 
and Bhṛgu, Lord  Śiva became very morose. Not 
saying anything, he left the arena of the sacri-
fice, followed by his disciples  (33).The sage 
Maitreya continued: O Vidura, all the progeni-
tors of the universal population thus executed a 
sacrifice for thousands of years, for s acrifice is 
the best way to worship the Supreme Lord, 
Hari, the Personality of Godhead  (34).My dear 
Vidura, carrier of bows and arrows, all the dem-
igods who were performing the sacrifice took 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

194 
 their bath at the confluence of the Ganges and 
the Yamunā after completing the yajña perfor-
mance. Such a bath is called avabhṛtha -snāna. 
After thus becoming purified in heart, they de-
parted for their respective abodes  (35).  
SB 4.3: Talks Between Lord Śiva and 
Satī 
Maitreya continued : In this manner the 
tension between  the father -in-law and son -in-
law, Dakṣa and Lord Śiva, continued for a con-
siderably long period  (1).When Lord Brahmā 
appointed Dakṣa the chief of all the Prajāpatis, 
the progenitors of population, Dakṣa became 
very much puffed up  (2).Dakṣa began a sacri-
fice named vājapeya, and he became exces-
sively confident of his support by Lord 
Brahmā. He then performed another great sac-
rifice, named bṛhaspati -sava (3).While the sac-
rifice was being performed, many brahmarṣis, 
great sages, ancestral demigods and other de m-
igods, their wives all very nicely decorated with 
ornaments, attended from different parts of the 
universe  (4).  
The chaste lady Satī, the daughter of Dakṣa, 
heard the heavenly denizens flying in the sky 
conversing about the great sacrifice being per-
forme d by her father. When she saw that from 
all directions the beautiful wives of the heav-
enly denizens, their eyes very beautifully glit-
tering, were near her residence and were going 
to the sacrifice dressed in fine clothing and or-
namented with earrings and n ecklaces with 
lockets, she approached her husband , the mas-
ter of the bhūtas, in great anxiety, and spoke as 
follows  (5-7).  
Satī said:  My dear Lord Śiva, your father -
in-law is now executing great sacrifices, and all 
the demigods, having been invited by him, are 
going there. If you desire, we may also go  (8).I 
think that all my sisters must have gone to this 
great sacrificial ceremony with their husband s 
just to see their relatives. I also desire to deco-
rate myself with the ornaments given to me by 
my father and go there with you to participate 
in that ass embly  (9).My sisters, my mother’s 
sisters and their husband s, and other affection-
ate relatives must be assembled there, so if I go 
I shall be able to see them, and I shall be able to see the flapping flags and the performance of 
the sacrifice by the great sages. For these rea-
sons, my dear husband , I am very much anxious 
to go  (10).This manifested cosmos is a wonder-
ful creation of the interaction of the three mate-
rial modes, or the external energy of the Su-
preme Lord. This truth is fully known to you. 
Yet I am but a poor woman, and, as you know, 
I am not conversant with the truth. Therefore I 
wish to see my birthplace once more  (11).O 
never -born, O blue -throated one, not only my 
relatives but also other women, dressed in nice 
clothes and decorated with orname nts, are go-
ing there with their husband s and friends. Just 
see how their flocks of white airplanes have 
made the entire sky very beautiful  (12). O best 
of the demigods, how can the body of a daugh-
ter remain undisturbed when she hears that 
some festive even t is taking place in her fa-
ther’s house? Even though you may be consid-
ering that I have not been invited, there is no 
harm if one goes to the house of one’s friend, 
husband , spiritual master or father without in-
vitation  (13).O immortal Śiva, please be kind 
towards me and fulfill my desire. You have ac-
cepted me as half of your body; therefore please 
show kindness towards me and accept my re-
quest  (14).  
The great sage Maitreya said : Lord Śiva, 
the deliverer of the hill Kailāsa,  having thus 
been addressed by his dear wife, replied smil-
ingly, although at the same time he remem-
bered the malicious, heart -piercing speeches 
delivered by Dakṣa before the guardians of the 
universal affairs  (15).  
The great L ord replied:  My dear beautifu l 
wife, you have said that one may go to a 
friend’s house without being invited, and this is 
true, provided such a friend does not find fault 
with the guest because of bodily identification 
and thereby become angry towards him  
(16).Although the six qualiti es education, aus-
terity, wealth, beauty, youth and heritage are 
for the highly elevated, one who is proud of 
possessing them becomes blind, and thus he 
loses his good sense and cannot appreciate the 
glories of great personalities  (17).One should 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

195 
 not go to anyone’s house, even on the consid-
eration of his being a relative or a friend, when 
the man is disturbed in his mind and looks upon 
the guest with raised eyebrows and angry eyes  
(18).Lord Śiva continued: If one is hurt by the 
arrows of an enemy, one is not  as aggrieved as 
when cut by the unkind words of a relative, for 
such grief continues to rend one’s heart day and 
night  (19).  
My dear white -complexioned wife, it is 
clear that of the many daughters of Dakṣa you 
are the pet, yet you will not be honored at his 
house because of your being my wife. Rather, 
you will be sorry that you are connected with 
me (20).One who is conducted by false ego and 
thus always distressed, both mentally and sen-
sually, cannot tolerate the opulence of self -re-
alized persons. Being u nable to rise to the 
standard of self -realization, he envies such per-
sons as much as demons envy the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead  (21).  
My dear young wife, certainly friends and 
relatives offer mutual greetings by standing up, 
welcoming one another and offering obei-
sances. But those who are elevated to the tran-
scendental platform, being intelligent, offer 
such respects to the Supersoul, who is sitting 
within the body, not to the person who identi-
fies with the body  (22).I am always engaged in 
offering obe isances to Lord Vāsudeva in pure 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Kṛṣṇa consciousness is 
always pure consciousness, in which the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, known as 
Vāsudeva, is revealed without any covering  
(23).Therefore you should not see your father, 
although  he is the giver of your body, because 
he and his followers are envious of me. Be-
cause of his envy, O most worshipful one, he 
has insulted me with cruel words although I am 
innocent  (24).If in spite of this instruction you 
decide to go, neglecting my words , the future 
will not be good for you. You are most respect-
able, and when you are insulted by your rela-
tive, this insult will immediately be equal to 
death  (25).  
SB 4.4: Satī Quits Her Body  
The sage Maitreya said:  Lord Śiva was si-
lent after speaking to Satī, seeing her between decisions. Satī was very much anxious to see 
her relatives at her father’s house, but at the 
same time she was afraid of Lord Śiva’s warn-
ing. H er mind unsettled, she moved in and out 
of the room as a swing moves this way and that  
(1).Satī felt very sorry at being forbidden to go 
see her relatives at her father’s house, and due 
to affection for them, tears fell from her eyes. 
Shaking and very much  afflicted, she looked at 
her uncommon husband , Lord Śiva, as if she 
were going to blast him with her vision  
(2).Thereafter Satī left her husband , Lord Śiva, 
who had given her half his body due to affec-
tion. Breathing very heavily because of anger 
and bere avement, she went to the house of her 
father. This less intelligent act was due to her 
being a weak woman  (3).When they saw Satī 
leaving alone very rapidly, thousands of Lord 
Śiva’s disciples, headed by Maṇimān and 
Mada, quickly followed her with his bull Nandi 
in front and accompanied by the Yakṣas  
(4).The disciples of Lord Śiva arranged for Satī 
to be seated on the back of a bull and gave her 
the bird which was her pet. They bore a lotus 
flower, a mirror and all such paraphernalia for 
her enjoyment and co vered her with a great 
canopy. Followed by a singing party with 
drums, conchshells and bugles, the entire pro-
cession was as pompous as a royal parade  (5).  
She then reached her father’s house, where 
the sacrifice was being performed, and entered 
the arena where everyone was chanting the Ve-
dic hymns. The great sages, brāhmaṇas and 
demigods were all assembled there, and there 
were many sacrificial animals, as well as pots 
made of clay, stone, gold, grass and skin, which 
were all requisite for the sacrifice  (6).When 
Satī, with her followers, reached the arena, be-
cause all the people assembled were afraid of 
Dakṣa, none of them received her well. No one 
welcomed her but her mother and sisters, who, 
with tears in their eyes and with glad faces, wel-
comed her and t alked with her very pleasingly  
(7).Although she was received by her sisters 
and mother, she did not reply to their words of 
reception, and although she was offered a seat 
and presents, she did not accept anything, for 
her father neither talked with her nor  welcomed 
her by asking about her welfare  (8).  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

196 
 Present in the arena of sacrifice, Satī saw 
that there were no oblations for her husband , 
Lord Śiva. Next she realized that not only had 
her father failed to invite Lord Śiva, but when 
he saw Lord Śiva’s exalted wife, Dakṣa did not 
receive her either. Thus  she became greatly an-
gry, so much so that she looked at her father as 
if she were going to burn him with her eyes  
(9).The followers of Lord Śiva, the ghosts, 
were ready to injure or kill Dakṣa, but Satī 
stopped them by her order. She was very angry 
and so rrowful, and in that mood she began to 
condemn the process of sacrificial fruitive ac-
tivities and persons who are very proud of such 
unnecessary and troublesome sacrifices. She 
especially condemned her father, speaking 
against him in the presence of all  (10).  
The blessed G oddess said:  Lord Śiva is the 
most beloved of all living entities. He has no 
rival. No one is very dear to him, and no one is 
his enemy. No one but you could be envious of 
such a universal bein g, who is free from all en-
mity (11). Twice -born Dakṣa, a man like you 
can s imply find fault in the qualities of others. 
Lord Śiva, however, not only finds no faults 
with others’ qualities, but if someone has a little 
good quality, he magnifies it greatly. Unfortu-
nately, you have found fa ult with such a great 
soul (12). It is not wonderful for persons who 
have accepted the transient material body as the 
self to engage always in deriding great souls. 
Such envy on the part of materialistic persons 
is very good because that is the way they fall 
down. They are diminished by the dust of  the 
feet of great personalities  (13). Satī continued: 
My dear father, you are committing the greatest 
offense by envying Lord Śiva, whose very 
name, consisting of two syllables, śi and va, pu-
rifies one of all sinful activities. His order is 
never neglected. Lord Śiva is always pure, and 
no one but you envies him  (14).You are envi-
ous of Lord Śiva, who is the friend of all living 
entities within the three worlds. For the com-
mon man he fulfills all desires, and because of 
their engagement in thinking of his lotus feet, 
he also blesses higher per sonalities who are 
seeking after brahmā nanda [transcendental 
bliss] (15).  Do you think that greater, more respectable 
personalities than you, such as Lord Brahmā, 
do not know this inauspicious person who goes 
under the name Lord Śiva? He associates with 
the demons in the crematorium, his locks of 
hair are scattered all over his body, and he is 
garlanded with human skulls and smeared with 
ashes from the crematorium, but in spite of all 
these inauspicious qualities, great personalities 
like Brahmā honor him b y accepting the flow-
ers offered to his lotus feet and placing them 
with great respect on their heads  (16).Satī con-
tinued: If one hears an irresponsible person 
blaspheme the master and controller of reli-
gion, one should block his ears and go away if 
unable to punish him. But if one is able to kill, 
then one should by force cut out the blas-
phemer’s tongue and kill the offender, and after 
that one should give up his own life  (17).There-
fore I shall no longer bear this unworthy body, 
which has been received from  you, who have 
blasphemed Lord Śiva. If someone has taken 
food which is poisonous, the best treatment is 
to vomit  (18).It is better to execute one’s own 
occupational duty than to criticize others’. Ele-
vated transcendentalists may sometimes forgo 
the rules and regulations of the Vedas, since 
they do not need to follow them, just as the 
demigods travel in space whereas ordinary men 
travel on the surface of the earth  (19).In the Ve-
das there are directions for two kinds of activi-
ties  activities for those who a re attached to ma-
terial enjoyment and activities for those who 
are materially detached. In consideration of 
these two kinds of activities, there are two 
kinds of people, who have different symptoms. 
If one wants to see two kinds of activities in one 
person , that is contradictory. But both kinds of 
activities may be neglected by a person who is 
transcendentally situated  (20).  
My dear father, the opulence we possess is 
impossible for either you or your flatterers to 
imagine, for persons who engage in fruitiv e ac-
tivities by performing great sacrifices are con-
cerned with satisfying their bodily necessities 
by eating foodstuff offered as a sacrifice. We 
can exhibit our opulences simply by desiring to 
do so. This can be achieved only by great per-
sonalities who ar e renounced, self -realized 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

197 
 souls  (21).You are an offender at the lotus feet 
of Lord Śiva, and unfortunately I have a body 
produced from yours. I am very much ashamed 
of our bodily relationship, and I condemn my-
self because my body is contaminated by a re-
lationship with a person who is an offender at 
the lotus feet of the greatest personality  (22).  
Because of our family relationship, when Lord 
Śiva addresses me as Dākṣāyaṇī I at once be-
come morose, and my jolliness and my smile at 
once disappear. I feel ver y much sorry that my 
body, which is just like a bag, has been pro-
duced by you. I shall therefore give it up  (23).  
Maitreya the sage told Vidura : O annihi-
lator of enemies, while thus speaking to her fa-
ther in the arena of sacrifice, Satī sat down on 
the gr ound and faced north. Dressed in saffron 
garments, she sanctified herself with water and 
closed her eyes to absorb herself in the process 
of mystic yoga  (24).First of all she sat in the 
required sitting posture, and then she carried 
the life air upwards an d placed it in the position 
of equilibrium near the navel. Then she raised 
her life air, mixed with intelligence, to the heart 
and then gradually towards the pulmonary pas-
sage, and from there to between her eyebrows  
(25).Thus, in order to give up her body,  which 
had been so respectfully and affectionately 
seated on the lap of Lord Śiva, who is wor-
shiped by great sages and saints, Satī, due to 
anger towards her father, began to meditate on 
the fiery air within the body  (26).Satī concen-
trated all her meditati on on the holy lotus feet 
of her husband , Lord Śiva, who is the supreme 
spiritual master of all the world. Thus she be-
came completely cleansed of all taints of sin 
and quit her body in a blazing fire by medita-
tion on the fiery elements  (27). 
When Satī anni hilated her body in anger, 
there was a tumultuous roar all over the uni-
verse. Why had Satī, the wife of the most re-
spectable demigod, Lord Śiva, quit her body in 
such a manner? (28) It was astonishing that 
Dakṣa, who was Prajāpati, the maintainer of all 
living entities, was so disrespectful to his own 
daughter Satī, who was not only chaste but was 
also a great soul, that she gave up her body be-cause of his neglect  (29).Dakṣa, who is so hard-
hearted that he is unworthy to be a brāhmaṇa, 
will gain extensive il l fame because of his of-
fenses to his daughter, because of not having 
prevented her death, and because of his great 
envy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead  
(30).  
While people were talking among them-
selves about the wonderful voluntary death of 
Satī, th e attendants who had come with her 
readied themselves to kill Dakṣa with their 
weapons  (31).They came forward forcibly, but 
Bhṛgu Muni saw the danger and, offering obla-
tions into the southern side of the sacrificial 
fire, immediately uttered mantric hymns from 
the Yajur Veda by which the destroyers of yaj-
ñic performances could be killed immediately  
(32). When Bhṛgu Muni offered oblations in 
the fire, immediately many thousands of demi-
gods named Ṛbhus became manifested. All of 
them were powerful, having achi eved strength 
from Soma, the moon  (33).When the Ṛbhu 
demigods attacked the ghosts and Guhyakas 
with half -burned fuel from the yajña fire, all 
these attendants of Satī fled in different direc-
tions and disappeared. This was possible 
simply because of brahma -tejas, brahminical 
power  (34) 
.  
SB 4.5: Frustration of the Sacrifice of 
Dakṣa  
Maitreya said:  When Lord Śiva heard from 
Nārada that Satī, his wife, was now dead be-
cause of Prajāpati Dakṣa’s insult to her and that 
his soldiers had been driven away by the Ṛb hu 
demigods, he became greatly angry  (1).  Thus 
Lord Śiva, being extremely angry, pressed his 
lips with his teeth and immediately snatched 
from his head a strand of hair which blazed like 
electricity or fire. He stood up at once, laughing 
like a madman, an d dashed the hair to the 
ground  (2).A fearful black demon as high as the 
sky and as bright as three suns combined was 
thereby created, his teeth very fearful and the 
hairs on his head like burning fire. He had thou-
sands of arms, equipped with various weapo ns, 
and he was garlanded with the heads of men  
(3).When that gigantic demon asked with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

198 
 folded  hands, “What shall I do, my lord?” Lord 
Śiva, who is known as Bhūtanātha, directly or-
dered, “Because you are born from my body, 
you are the chief of all my associates. There-
fore, kill Dakṣa and his soldiers at the sacri-
fice.” (4) 
Maitreya continued: My de ar Vidura, that 
black person was the personified anger of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he was 
prepared to execute the orders of Lord Śiva. 
Thus, considering himself capable of coping 
with any power offered against him, he circum-
ambulated Lord Śi va (5).Many other soldiers of 
Lord Śiva followed the fierce personality in a 
tumultuous uproar. He carried a great trident, 
fearful enough to kill even death, and on his 
legs he wore bangles which seemed to roar  (6).  
At that time, all the persons assemble d in the 
sacrificial arena  the priests, the chief of the sac-
rificial performance, and the brāhmaṇas and 
their wives  wondered where the darkness was 
coming from. Later they could understand that 
it was a dust storm, and all of them were full of 
anxiety  (7).Conjecturing on the origin of the 
storm, they said: There is no wind blowing, and 
no cows are passing, nor is it possible that this 
dust storm could be raised by plunderers, for 
there is still the strong King Barhi, who would 
punish them. Where is this d ust storm blowing 
from? Is the dissolution of the planet now to oc-
cur? (8)Prasūti, the wife of Dakṣa, along with 
the other women assembled, became very anx-
ious and said: This danger has been created by 
Dakṣa because of the death of Satī, who, even 
though completely innocent, quit her body as 
her sisters looked on  (9). At the tim e of disso-
lution, Lord Śiva’s hair is scattered, and he 
pierces the rulers of the different directions 
with his trident. He laughs and dances proudly, 
scattering their hands like flags, as thunder 
scatters the clouds all over the world  (10).The 
gigantic bl ack man bared his fearful teeth. By 
the movements of his brows he scattered the lu-
minaries all over the sky, and he covered them 
with his strong, piercing effulgence. Because of 
the mi SBehavior of Dakṣa, even Lord Brahmā, 
Dakṣa’s father, could not have bee n saved from 
the great exhibition of anger  (11).  While all the people talked amongst them-
selves, Dakṣa saw dangerous omens from all 
sides, from the earth and from the sky  (12).My 
dear Vidura, all the followers of Lord Śiva sur-
rounded the arena of sacrific e. They were of 
short stature and were equipped with various 
kinds of weapons; their bodies appeared to be 
like those of sharks, blackish and yellowish. 
They ran all around the sacrificial arena and 
thus began to create disturbances  (13).Some of 
the soldie rs pulled down the pillars which were 
supporting the pandal of sacrifice, some of 
them entered the female quarters, some began 
destroying the sacrificial arena, and some en-
tered the kitchen and the residential quarters  
(14). They broke all the pots made fo r use in the 
sacrifice, and some of them began to extinguish 
the sacrificial fire. Some tore down the bound-
ary line of the sacrificial arena, and some 
passed urine on the arena  (15).Some blocked 
the way of the fleeing sages, some threatened 
the women assem bled there, and some arrested 
the demigods who were fleeing the pandal  
(16).Maṇimān, one of the followers of Lord 
Śiva, arrested Bhṛgu Muni, and Vīrabhadra, the 
black demon, arrested Prajāpati Dakṣa. An-
other follower, who was named Caṇḍeśa, ar-
rested Pūṣā. Nandīśvara arrested the demigod 
Bhaga  (17).  
There was a continuous shower of stones, 
and all the priests and other members assem-
bled at the sacrifice were put into immense mis-
ery. For fear of their lives, they dispersed in dif-
ferent directions  (18).Vīrabhadra tore off the 
mustache of Bhṛgu, who was offering the sac-
rificial oblat ions with his hands in the fire  
(19).Vīrabhadra immediately caught Bhaga, 
who had been moving his eyebrows during 
Bhṛgu’s cursing of Lord Śiva, and out of great 
anger thrust him to the ground and forcibly put 
out his eyes  (20).  Just as Baladeva knocked ou t 
the teeth of Dantavakra, the King of Kaliṅga, 
during the gambling match at the marriage cer-
emony of Aniruddha, Vīrabhadra knocked out 
the teeth of both Dakṣa, who had shown them 
while cursing Lord Śiva, and Pūṣā, who by 
smiling sympathetically had also s hown his 
teeth  (21).Then Vīrabhadra, the giantlike per-
sonality, sat on the chest of Dakṣa and tried to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

199 
 separate his head from his body with sharp 
weapons, but was unsuccessful  (22).  He tried 
to cut the head of Dakṣa with hymns as well as 
weapons, but stil l it was hard to cut even the 
surface of the skin of Dakṣa’s head. Thus 
Vīrabhadra was exceedingly bewildered  
(23).Then Vīrabhadra saw the wooden device 
in the sacrificial arena by which the animals 
were to have been killed. He took the oppor-
tunity of this  facility to behead Dakṣa  
(24).Upon seeing the action of Vīrabhadra, the 
party of Lord Śiva was pleased and cried out 
joyfully, and all the bhūtas, ghosts and demons 
that had come made a tumultuous sound. On 
the other hand, the brāhmaṇas in charge of the 
sacrifice cried out in grief at the death of Dakṣa  
(25).Vīrabhadra then took the head and with 
great anger threw it into the southern side of the 
sacrificial fire, offering it as an oblation. In this 
way the followers of Lord Śiva devastated all 
the arrange ments for sacrifice. After setting fire 
to the whole arena, they departed for their mas-
ter’s abode, Kailāsa  (26).  
SB 4.6: Brahmā Satisfies Lord Śiva  
All the priests and other members of the sac-
rificial assembly and all the demigods, having 
been defeated b y the soldiers of Lord Śiva and 
injured by weapons like tridents and swords, 
approached Lord Brahmā with great fear. After 
offering him obeisances, they began to speak in 
detail of all the events which had taken place  
(1-2).Both Lord Brahmā and Viṣṇu had a lready 
known that such events would occur in the sac-
rificial arena of Dakṣa, and knowing before-
hand, they did not go to the sacrifice  (3).When 
Lord Brahmā heard everything from the demi-
gods and the members who had attended the 
sacrifice, he replied: You ca nnot be happy in 
executing a sacrifice if you blaspheme a great 
personality and thereby offend his lotus feet. 
You cannot have happiness in that way  (4).You 
have excluded Lord Śiva from taking part in the 
sacrificial results, and therefore you are all of-
fenders at his lotus feet. Still, if you go without 
mental reservations and surrender unto him and 
fall down at his lotus feet, he will be very 
pleased  (5).Lord Brahmā also advised them 
that Lord Śiva is so powerful that by his anger all the planets and thei r chief controllers can be 
destroyed immediately. Also, he said that Lord 
Śiva was especially sorry because he had re-
cently lost his dear wife and was also very 
much afflicted by the unkind words of Dakṣa. 
Under the circumstances, Lord Brahmā sug-
gested, it  would behoove them to go at once and 
beg his pardon  (6).Lord Brahmā said that no 
one  not even himself, Indra, all the members 
assembled in the sacrificial arena or all the 
sages  could know how powerful Lord Śiva is. 
Under the circumstances, who would da re to 
commit an offense at his lotus feet? (7) 
After thus instructing all the demigods, the 
Pitās and the lords of the living entities, Lord 
Brahmā took them with him and left for the 
abode of Lord Śiva, known as the Kailā sa Hill 
(8). The abode known as Ka ilāsa is full of dif-
ferent herbs and vegetables, and it is sanctified 
by Vedic hymns and mystic yoga practice. 
Thus the residents of that abode are demigods 
by birth and have all mystic powers. Besides 
them there are other human beings, who are 
known as Ki nnaras and Gandharvas and are ac-
companied by their beautiful wives, who are 
known as Apsarās, or angels  (9).Kailāsa is full 
of mountains filled with all kinds of valuable 
jewels and minerals and surrounded by all va-
rieties of valuable trees and plants. The  top of 
the hill is nicely decorated by various types of 
deer (10).There are many waterfalls, and in the 
mountains there are many beautiful caves in 
which the very beautiful wives of the mystics 
are found  (11).On Kailāsa Hill there is always 
the rhythmical  sound of the peacocks’ sweet vi-
brations and the bees’ humming. Cuckoos are 
always singing, and other birds whisper 
amongst themselves  (12). There are tall trees 
with straight branches that appear to call the 
sweet birds, and when herds of elephants pass 
through the hills, it appears that the Kailāsa Hill 
moves with them. When the waterfalls resound, 
it appears that Kailāsa Hill does also  (13).  
The whole of Kailāsa Hill is decorated with 
various kinds of trees, of which the following 
names may be mentioned : mandāra, pārijāta, 
sarala, tamāla, tāla, kovidāra, āsana, arjuna, 
āmra -jāti [mango], kadamba, dhūli -kadamba, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

200 
 nāga, punnāga, campaka, pāṭala, aśoka, bakula, 
kunda and kurabaka. The entire hill is deco-
rated with such trees, which produce flowers 
with fragr ant aromas  (14-15).There are other 
trees also which decorate the hill, such as the 
golden lotus flower, the cinnamon tree, mālatī, 
kubja, and mādhavī  (16).Kailāsa Hill is also 
decorated with such trees as kata, jackfruit, ju-
lara, banyan trees, plakṣas, nya grodhas and 
trees producing asafetida. Also there are trees 
of betel nuts and bhūrja -patra, as well as 
rājapūga, blackberries and similar other trees  
(17).There are mango trees, priyāla, madhuka 
and iṅguda. Besides these there are other trees, 
like thin ba mboos, kīcaka and varieties of other 
bamboo trees, all decorating the tract of Kailāsa 
Hill (18).There are different kinds of lotus 
flowers, such as kumuda, utpala and śatapatra. 
The forest appears to be a decorated garden, 
and the small lakes are full of various kinds of 
birds who whisper very sweetly. There are 
many kinds of other animals also, like deer, 
monkeys, boars, lions, ṛkṣas, śalyakas, forest 
cows, forest asses, tigers, small deer, buffalo 
and many other animals, who are fully enjoying 
their live s (19-20).  There are varieties of deer, 
such as karṇāntra, ekapada, aśvāsya, vṛka and 
kastūrī, the deer which bears musk. Besides the 
deer there are many banana trees which deco-
rate the small hillside lakes very nicely  
(21).There is a small lake named Ala kanandā in 
which Satī used to take her bath, and that lake 
is especially auspicious. All the demigods, after 
seeing the specific beauty of Kailāsa Hill, were 
struck with wonder at the great opulence to be 
found there  (22). 
Thus the demigods saw the wonderf ully 
beautiful region known as Alakā in the forest 
known as Saugandhika, which means “full of 
fragrance.” The forest is known as Sau-
gandhika because of its abundance of lotus 
flowers  (23).  They also saw the two rivers 
named Nandā and Alakanandā. These two  riv-
ers are sanctified by the dust of the lotus feet of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda  
(24).My dear Kṣattā, Vidura, the celestial dam-
sels come down to those rivers in their airplanes 
with their husband s, and after sexual enjoy-
ment, they enter the water and enjoy sprinkling their husband s with water  (25).After the dam-
sels of the heavenly planets bathe in the water, 
it becomes yellowish and fragrant due to the 
kuṅkuma from their bodies. Thus the elephants 
come to bathe there with their wives, the  she-
elephants, and they also drink the water, alt-
hough they are not thirsty  (26).  
The airplanes of the heavenly denizens are 
bedecked with pearls, gold and many valuable 
jewels. The heavenly denizens are compared to 
clouds in the sky decorated with occas ional 
flashes of electric lightning  (27).While travel-
ing, the demigods passed over the forest known 
as Saugandhika, which is full of varieties of 
flowers, fruits and desire trees. W hile passing 
over the forest, they also saw the regions of 
Yakṣeśvara  (28).In that celestial forest there 
were many birds whose necks were colored 
reddish and whose sweet sounds mixed with 
the humming of the bees. The lakes were abun-
dantly decorated with c rying swans as well as 
strong -stemmed lotus flowers  (29).All these at-
mospheric influences unsettled the forest ele-
phants who flocked together in the sandalwood 
forest, and the blowing wind agitated the minds 
of the damsels there for further sexual enjoy-
ment (30).They also saw that the bathing ghāṭas 
and their staircases were made of vaidūrya -
maṇi. The water was full of lotus flowers. Pass-
ing by such lakes, the demigods reached a place 
where there was a great banyan tree  (31).  
That banyan tree was eight hundred m iles 
high, and its branches spread over six hundred 
miles around. The tree cast a fine shade which 
permanently cooled the temperature, yet there 
was no noise of birds  (32).The demigods saw 
Lord Śiva sitting under that tree, which was 
competent to give perf ection to mystic yogīs 
and deliver all people. As grave as time eternal, 
he appeared to have given up all anger  
(33).Lord Śiva sat there, surrounded by saintly 
persons like Kuvera, the master of the 
Guhyakas, and the four Kumāras, who were al-
ready liberate d souls. Lord Śiva was grave and 
saintly  (34).The demigods saw Lord Śiva situ-
ated in his perfection as the master of the 
senses, knowledge, fruitive activities and the 
path of achieving perfection. He was the friend 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

201 
 of the entire world, and by virtue of hi s full af-
fection for everyone, he was very auspicious  
(35).He was seated on a deerskin and was prac-
ticing all forms of austerity. Because his body 
was smeared with ashes, he looked like an 
evening cloud. On his hair was the sign of a 
half-moon, a symbolic representation  (36).He 
was seated on a straw mattress and speaking to 
all present, including the great sage Nārada, to 
whom he specifically spoke about the Absolute 
Truth  (37).His left leg was placed on his right 
thigh, and his left hand was placed on his left 
thigh. [This s itting posture is called vīrāsana.] 
In his right hand he held rudrākṣa beads, and 
his finger was in the mode of argument  (38).All 
the sages and demigods, headed by Indra, of-
fered their respectful obeisances unto Lord Śiva 
with folded hands. Lord Śiva was d ressed in 
saffron garments and absorbed in trance, thus 
appearing to be the foremost of all sages  
(39).Lord Śiva’s lotus feet were worshiped by 
both the demigods and demons, but still, in 
spite of his exalted position, as soon as he saw 
that Lord Brahmā wa s there among all the other 
demigods, he immediately stood up and offered 
him respect by bowing down and touching his 
lotus feet, just as Vāmanadeva offered His re-
spectful obeisances to Kaśyapa Muni  (40).All 
the sages who were sitting with Lord Śiva, such 
as Nārada and others, also offered their respect-
ful obeisances to Lord Brahmā. After being so 
worshiped, Lord Brahmā, smiling, began to 
speak to Lord Śiva  (41).  
Lord Brahmā said:  My dear Lord Śiva, I 
know that you are the controller of the entire 
material  manifestation, the combination father 
and mother of the cosmic manifestation, and 
the Supreme Brahman beyond the cosmic man-
ifestation as well. I know you in that way  (42).  
My dear lord, you create this cosmic manifes-
tation, maintain it, and annihilate it  by expan-
sion of your personality, exactly as a spider cre-
ates, maintains and winds up its web  (43).  My 
dear lord, Your Lordship has introduced the 
system of sacrifices through the agency of 
Dakṣa, and thus one may derive the benefits of 
religious activities and economic development. 
Under your regulative principles, the institution 
of the four varṇās and āśramas is respected. The brāhmaṇas therefore vow to follow this system 
strictly  (44).O most auspicious lord, you have 
ordained the heavenly planets, the spiritual 
Vaikuṇṭha planets and the impersonal Brahman 
sphere as the respective destinations of th e per-
formers of auspicious activities. Similarly, for 
others, who are miscreants, you have destined 
different kinds of hells which are horrible and 
ghastly. Yet sometimes it is found that their 
destinations are just the opposite. It is very dif-
ficult to as certain the cause of this  (45).  
My dear Lord, devotees who have fully ded-
icated their lives unto your lotus feet certainly 
observe your presence as Paramātmā in each 
and every being, and as such they do not differ-
entiate between one living being and another. 
Such persons treat all living  entities equally. 
They never become overwhelmed by anger like 
animals, who can see nothing without differen-
tiation  (46).Persons who observe everything 
with differentiation, who are simply attached to 
fruitive activities, who are mean -minded, who 
are alway s pained to see the flourishing condi-
tion of others and who thus give distress to 
them by uttering harsh and piercing words have 
already been killed by providence. Thus there 
is no need for them to be killed again by an ex-
alted personality like you  (47).My dear lord, if 
in some places materialists, who are already be-
wildered by the insurmountable illusory energy 
of the Supreme Godhead, sometimes commit 
offenses, a saintly person, with compassion, 
does not take this seriously. Knowing that they 
commit offens es because they are overpowered 
by the illusory energy, he does not show his 
prowess to counteract them  (48).  
My dear lord, you are never bewildered by 
the formidable influence of the illusory energy 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There-
fore you ar e omniscient and should be merciful 
and compassionate toward those who are be-
wildered by the same illusory energy and are 
very much attached to fruitive activities  
(49).My dear Lord Śiva, you are a shareholder 
of a portion of the sacrifice, and you are the  
giver of the result. The bad priests did not de-
liver your share, and therefore you destroyed 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

202 
 everything, and the sacrifice remains unfin-
ished. Now you can do the needful and take 
your rightful share  (50).My dear lord, by your 
mercy the performer of the sa crifice [King 
Dakṣa] may get back his life, Bhaga may get 
back his eyes, Bhṛgu his mustache, and Pūṣā his 
teeth  (51).O Lord Śiva, may the demigods and 
the priests whose limbs have been broken by 
your soldiers recover from the injuries by your 
grace  (52).O destroyer of the sacrifice, please 
take your portion of the sacrifice and let the 
sacrifice be completed by your grace  (53).  
SB 4.7: The Sacrifice Performed by 
Dakṣa  
The sage Maitreya said:  O mighty -armed 
Vidura, Lord Śiva, being thus pacified by the 
word s of Lord Brahmā, spoke as follows in an-
swer to Lord Brahmā’s request  (1).  
Lord Śiva said:  My dear father, Brahmā, I 
do not mind the offenses created by the demi-
gods. Because these demigods are childish and 
less intelligent, I do not take a serious view o f 
their offenses, and I have punished them only 
in order to right them  (2).Lord Śiva continued: 
Since the head of Dakṣa has already been 
burned to ashes, he will have the head of a goat. 
The demigod known as Bhaga will be able to 
see his share of sacrifice  through the eyes of 
Mitra  (3).The demigod Pūṣā will be able to 
chew only through the teeth of his disciples, 
and if alone, he will have to satisfy himself by 
eating dough made from chickpea flour. But the 
demigods who have agreed to give me my share 
of th e sacrifice will recover from all their inju-
ries (4).Those who have had their arms cut off 
will have to work with the arms of Aśvinī -
kumāra, and those whose hands were cut off 
will have to do their work with the hands of 
Pūṣā. The priests will also have to  act in that 
manner. As for Bhṛgu, he will have the beard 
from the goat’s head  (5).  
The great sage Maitreya said:  My dear 
Vidura, all the personalities present were very 
much satisfied in heart and soul upon hearing 
the words of Lord Śiva, who is the best  among 
the benedictors  (6).Thereafter, Bhṛgu, the chief 
of the great sages, invited Lord Śiva to come to the sacrificial arena. Thus the demigods, ac-
companied by the sages, Lord Śiva, and Lord 
Brahmā, all went to the place where the great 
sacrifice was bei ng performed  (7).After every-
thing was executed exactly as directed by Lord 
Śiva, Dakṣa’s body was joined to the head of 
the animal meant to be killed in the sacrifice  
(8).When the animal’s head was fixed on the 
body of King Dakṣa, Dakṣa was immediately 
brought to consciousness, and as he awakened 
from sleep, the King saw Lord Śiva standing 
before him  (9).At that time, when Dakṣa saw 
Lord Śiva, who rides upon a bull, his heart, 
which was polluted by envy of Lord Śiva, was 
immediately cleansed, just as the wa ter in a 
lake is cleansed by autumn rains  (10).King 
Dakṣa wanted to offer prayers to Lord Śiva, but 
as he remembered the ill -fated death of his 
daughter Satī, his eyes filled with tears, and in 
bereavement his voice choked up and he could 
not say anything  (11).At this time, King Dakṣa, 
afflicted by love and affection, was very much 
awakened to his real senses. With great en-
deavor, he pacified his mind, checked his feel-
ings, and with pure consciousness began to of-
fer prayers to Lord Śiva  (12).  
King Dakṣa sa id: My dear Lord Śiva, I 
committed a great offense against you, but you 
are so kind that instead of withdrawing your 
mercy, you have done me a great favor by pun-
ishing me. You and Lord Viṣṇu never neglect 
even useless, unqualified brāhmaṇas. Why, 
then, sho uld you neglect me, who am engaged 
in performing sacrifices? (13) My dear great 
and powerful Lord Śiva, you were created first 
from the mouth of Lord Brahmā in order to pro-
tect the brāhmaṇas in pursuing education, aus-
terities, vows and self -realization. As  protector 
of the brāhmaṇas, you always protect the regu-
lative principles they follow, just as a cowherd 
boy keeps a stick in his hand to give protection 
to the cows  (14).I did not know your full glo-
ries. For this reason, I threw arrows of sharp 
words at y ou in the open assembly, although 
you did not take them into account. I was going 
down to hell because of my disobedience to 
you, who are the most respectable personality, 
but you took compassion upon me and saved 
me by awarding punishment. I request that you 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

203 
 be pleased by your own mercy, since I cannot 
satisfy you by my words  (15).  
The great sage Maitreya said:  Thus being 
pardoned by Lord Śiva, King Dakṣa, with the 
permission of Lord Brahmā, again began the 
performance of the yajña, along with the great 
learned sages, the priests and others  (16). 
Thereafter, in order to resume the activities of 
sacrifice, the brāhmaṇas first a rranged to purify 
the sacrificial arena of the contamination 
caused by the touch of Vīrabhadra and the other 
ghostly followers of Lord Śiva. Then they ar-
ranged to offer into the fire the oblations known 
as puroḍāśa  (17).The great sage Maitreya said 
to Vidu ra: My dear Vidura, as soon as King 
Dakṣa offered the clarified butter with Yajur 
Veda mantras in sanctified meditation, Lord 
Viṣṇu appeared there in His original form as 
Nārāyaṇa  (18).Lord Nārāyaṇa was seated on 
the shoulder of Stotra, or Garuḍa, who had big 
wings. As soon as the Lord appeared, all direc-
tions were illuminated, diminishing the luster 
of Brahmā and the others present  (19).His com-
plexion was blackish, His garment yellow like 
gold, and His helmet as dazzling as the sun. His 
hair was bluish, th e color of black bees, and His 
face was decorated with earrings. His eight 
hands held a conchshell, wheel, club, lotus 
flower, arrow, bow, shield and sword, and they 
were decorated with golden ornaments such as 
bangles and bracelets. His whole body resem-
bled a blossoming tree beautifully decorated 
with various kinds of flowers  (20).Lord Viṣṇu 
looked extraordinarily beautiful because the 
goddess of fortune and a garland were situated 
on His chest. His face was beautifully deco-
rated with a smiling attitude which can capti-
vate the entire world, especially the devotees. 
Fans of white ha ir appeared on both sides of the 
Lord like white swans, and the white canopy 
overhead looked like the moon  (21).  
As soon as Lord Viṣṇu was visible, all the 
demigods  Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, the 
Gandharvas and all present there  immediately 
offered thei r respectful obeisances by falling 
down straight before Him  (22).In the presence 
of the glaring effulgence of the bodily luster of 
Nārāyaṇa, everyone else’s luster faded away, and everyone stopped speaking. Fearful with 
awe and veneration, all present touc hed their 
hands to their heads and prepared to offer their 
prayers to the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Adhokṣaja  (23).  Although the mental 
scope of even demigods like Brahmā was una-
ble to comprehend the unlimited glories of the 
Supreme Lord, they were all able to perceive 
the transcendental form of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead by His grace. Only by such 
grace could they offer their respectful prayers 
according to their different capacities  
(24).When Lord Viṣṇu accepted the oblations 
offered in the  sacrifice, Dakṣa, the Prajāpati, 
began with great pleasure to offer respectful 
prayers unto Him. The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is actually the master of all sacrifices 
and preceptor of all the Prajāpatis, and He is 
served even by such personalities a s Nanda and 
Sunanda  (25).  
Dakṣa addressed  the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead: My dear Lord, You are transcen-
dental to all speculative positions. You are 
completely spiritual, devoid of all fear, and 
You are always in control of the material en-
ergy. Even t hough You appear in the material 
energy, You are situated transcendentally. You 
are always free from material contamination 
because You are completely self -sufficient  
(26).  
The priests addressed  the Lord, saying: O 
Lord, transcendental to material contami nation, 
by the curse offered by Lord Śiva’s men we 
have become attached to fruitive activities, and 
thus we are now fallen and therefore do not 
know anything about You. On the contrary, we 
are now involved in the injunctions of the three 
departments of the  Vedic knowledge under the 
plea of executing rituals in the name of yajña. 
We know that You have made arrangements for 
distributing the respective shares of the demi-
gods  (27).  
The members of the assembly addressed  
the Lord: O exclusive shelter for all who  are sit-
uated in troubled life, in this formidable fort of 
conditional existence the time element, like a 
snake, is always looking for an opportunity to 
strike. This world is full of ditches of so -called 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

204 
 distress and happiness, and there are many fe-
rocious  animals always ready to attack. The fire 
of lamentation is always blazing, and the mi-
rage of false happiness is always alluring, but 
one has no shelter from them. Thus foolish per-
sons live in the cycle of birth and death, always 
overburdened in dischargin g their so -called du-
ties, and we do not know when they will accept 
the shelter of Your lotus feet. (28) 
Lord Śiva said:  My dear Lord, my mind 
and consciousness are always fixed on Your lo-
tus feet, which, as the source of all benediction 
and the fulfillment of all desires, are worshiped 
by all liberated great sages because Your lotus 
feet are worthy of worshi p. With my mind fixed 
on Your lotus feet, I am no longer disturbed by 
persons who blaspheme me, claiming that my 
activities are not purified. I do not mind their 
accusations, and I excuse them out of compas-
sion, just as You exhibit compassion toward all 
living entities  (29).  
Śrī Bhṛgu said:  My dear Lord, all living en-
tities, beginning from the highest, namely Lord 
Brahmā, down to the ordinary ant, are under the 
influence of the insurmountable spell of illu-
sory energy, and thus they are ignorant of their 
constitutional position . Everyone believes in 
the concept of the body, and all are thus sub-
merged in the darkness of illusion. They are ac-
tually unable to understand how You live in 
every living entity as the Supersoul, nor can 
they understand Your absolute position. But 
You are  the eternal friend and protector of all 
surrendered souls. Therefore, please be kind to-
ward us and forgive all our offenses  (30).  
Lord Brahmā said : My dear Lord, Your 
personality and eternal form cannot be under-
stood by any person who is trying to know You 
through the different processes of acquiring 
knowledge. Your position is always transcen-
dental to the material creation, whereas the em-
piric attempt to understand You is material, as 
are its objectives and instruments  (31).  
King Indra said:  My dear Lord, Your tran-
scendental form with eight hands and weapons 
in each of them appears for the welfare of the 
entire universe, and it is v ery pleasing to the 
mind and eyes. In such a form, Your Lordship is always prepared to punish the demons, who 
are envious of Your devotees  (32).  
The wives of the performers of the sacri-
fice said : My dear Lord, this sacrifice was ar-
ranged under the instruc tion of Brahmā, but un-
fortunately Lord Śiva, being angry at Dakṣa, 
devastated the entire scene, and because of his 
anger the animals meant for sacrifice are lying 
dead. Therefore the preparations of the yajña 
have been lost. Now, by the glance of Your lo-
tus eyes, the sanctity of this sacrificial arena 
may be again invoked  (33).  
The sages prayed:  Dear Lord, Your activi-
ties are most wonderful, and although You do 
everything by Your different potencies, You 
are not at all attached to such activities. You are 
not even attached to the goddess of fortune, 
who is worshiped by the great demigods like 
Brahmā, who pray to achieve her mercy  (34).  
The Siddhas prayed : Like an elephant that 
has suffered in a forest fire but can forget all its 
troubles by entering a rive r, our minds, O Lord, 
always merge in the nectarean river of Your 
transcendental pastimes, and they desire never 
to leave such transcendental bliss, which is as 
good as the pleasure of merging in the Absolute  
(35).  
The wife of Dakṣa prayed as follows : My 
dear Lord, it is very fortunate that You have ap-
peared in this arena of sacrifice. I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You, and I request that 
You be pleased on this occasion. The sacrificial 
arena is not beautiful without You, just as a 
body is not beau tiful without the head  (36).  
The governors of various planets spoke as 
follows:  Dear Lord, we believe only in our di-
rect perception, and therefore we see You as a 
creation of the material world. But under the 
circumstances we do not know whether we 
have a ctually seen You with our material 
senses. By our material senses we can simply 
perceive the cosmic manifestation, but You are 
beyond the five elements. You are the sixth  
(37).  
The great mystics said:  Dear Lord, persons 
who see You as nondifferent from th emselves, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

205 
 knowing that You are the Supersoul of all liv-
ing entities, are certainly very, very dear to 
You. You are very favorable toward those who 
engage in devotional service, accepting You as 
the Lord and themselves as the servants. By 
Your mercy, You ar e always inclined in their 
favor  (38).We offer our respectful obeisances 
unto the Supreme, who has created varieties of 
manifestations and put them under the spell of 
the three qualities of the material world in order 
to create, maintain and annihilate the m. He 
Himself is not under the control of the external 
energy: in His personal feature He is com-
pletely devoid of the variegated manifestation 
of material qualities, and He is under no illu-
sion of false identification  (39).  
The personified Vedas said : We offer our 
respectful obeisances unto You, the Lord, the 
shelter of the quality of goodness and therefore 
the source of all religion, austerity and penance, 
for You are transcendental to all material qual-
ities and no one knows You or Your actual sit-
uation  (40).  
The fire -god said:  My dear Lord, I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto You because by 
Your favor I am as luminous as blazing fire and 
I accept the offerings mixed with butter and of-
fered in sacrifice. The five kinds of offerings 
according to the Yaju r Veda are all Your dif-
ferent energies, and You are worshiped by five 
kinds of Vedic hymns. Sacrifice means You, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead  (41).  
The demigods said:  Dear Lord, formerly, 
when there was a devastation, You conserved 
all the different  energies of material manifesta-
tion. At that time, all the inhabitants of the 
higher planets, represented by such liberated 
souls as 7 Sanaka, were meditating on You by 
philosophical speculation. You are therefore 
the original person, and You rest in the wa ter of 
devastation on the bed of the Śeṣa snake. Now, 
today, You are visible to us, who are all Your 
servants. Please give us protection  (42).  
The Gandharvas said : Dear Lord, all the 
demigods, including Lord Śiva, Lord Brahmā 
and Indra, along with Marīci and the other great 
sages, are all only differentiated parts and par-cels of Your body. You are the Supreme Al-
mighty Great; the whole creation is just like a 
plaything for You. We always accept You as 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and we 
offer our res pectful obeisances unto You  (43).  
The Vidyādharas said:  Dear Lord, this hu-
man form of body is meant for attaining the 
highest perfectional objective, but, impelled by 
Your external energy, the living entity misiden-
tifies himself with his body and with the mate-
rial energy, and therefore, in fluenced by māyā, 
he wants to become happy by material enjoy-
ment. He is misled and always attracted by tem-
porary, illusory happiness. But Your transcen-
dental activities are so powerful that if one en-
gages in hearing and chanting such topics, he 
can be deli vered from illusion  (44).  
The brāhmaṇas said:  Dear Lord, You are 
sacrifice personified. You are the offering of 
clarified butter, You are the fire, You are the 
chanting of Vedic hymns by which the sacrifice 
is conducted, You are the fuel, You are the 
flame, You are the kuśa grass, and You are the 
sacrificial pots. You are the priests who per-
form the yajña, You are the demigods headed 
by Indra, and You are the sacrificial animal. 
Everything that is sacrificed is You or Your en-
ergy (45).Dear Lord, O personif ied Vedic 
knowledge, in the past millennium, long, long 
ago, when You appeared as the great boar in-
carnation, You picked up the world from the 
water, as an elephant picks up a lotus flower 
from a lake. When You vibrated transcendental 
sound in that giganti c form of a boar, the sound 
was accepted as a sacrificial hymn, and great 
sages like Sanaka meditated upon it and offered 
prayers for Your glorification  (46).Dear Lord, 
we were awaiting Your audience because we 
have been unable to perform the yajñas accord-
ing to the Vedic rituals. We pray unto You, 
therefore, to be pleased with us. Simply by 
chanting Your holy name, one can surpass all 
obstacles. We offer our respectful obeisances 
unto You in Your presence  (47).  
Śrī Maitreya said:  After Lord Viṣṇu was 
glorified by all present, Dakṣa, his conscious-
ness purified, arranged to begin again the yajña 
which had been devastated by the followers of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

206 
 Lord Śiva  (48).Maitreya continued: My dear 
sinless Vidura, Lord Viṣṇu is actually the en-
joyer of the results of all sac rifices, yet because 
of His being the Supersoul of all living entities, 
He was satisfied simply with His share of the 
sacrificial offerings. He therefore addressed 
Dakṣa in a pleasing attitude  (49).  
Lord Viṣṇu replied:  Brahmā, Lord Śiva 
and I are the supr eme cause of the material 
manifestation. I am the Supersoul, the self -suf-
ficient witness. But impersonally there is no 
difference between Brahmā, Lord Śiva and Me  
(50). The Lord continued: My dear Dakṣa 
Dvija, I am the original Personality of God-
head, but in order to create, maintain and anni-
hilate this cosmic manifestation, I act through 
My material energy, and according to the dif-
ferent grades of activity, My representations 
are differently named  (51).The Lord continued: 
One who is not in proper knowledge  thinks that 
demigods like Brahmā and Śiva are independ-
ent, or he even thinks that the living entities are 
independent  (52).A person with average intel-
ligence does not think the head and other parts 
of the body to be separate. Similarly, My devo-
tee does no t differentiate Viṣṇu, the all -pervad-
ing Personality of Godhead, from any thing or 
any living entity  (53).The Lord continued: One 
who does not consider Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva or 
the living entities in general to be separate from 
the Supreme, and who knows Bra hman, actu-
ally realizes peace; others do not  (54).  
The sage Maitreya said:  Thus Dakṣa, the 
head of all Prajāpatis, having been nicely in-
structed by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, worshiped Lord Viṣṇu. After worshiping 
Him by performing the prescribed  sacrificial 
ceremonies, Dakṣa separately worshiped Lord 
Brahmā and Lord Śiva  (55).With all respect, 
Dakṣa worshiped Lord Śiva with his share of 
the remnants of the yajña. After finishing the 
ritualistic sacrificial activities, he satisfied all 
the other d emigods and the other people assem-
bled there. Then, after finishing all these duties 
with the priests, he took a bath and was fully 
satisfied  (56).Thus worshiping the Supreme 
Lord Viṣṇu by the ritualistic performance of 
sacrifice, Dakṣa was completely situ ated on the religious path. Moreover, all the demigods who 
had assembled at the sacrifice blessed him that 
he might increase his piety, and then they left  
(57).  
Maitreya said: I have heard that after giving 
up the body she had received from Dakṣa, 
Dākṣāya ṇī (his daughter) took her birth in the 
kingdom of the Himālayas. She was born as the 
daughter of Menā. I heard this from authorita-
tive sources  (58).Ambikā [goddess Durgā], 
who was known as Dākṣāyiṇī [Satī], again ac-
cepted Lord Śiva as her husband , just as  differ-
ent energies of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead act during the course of a new crea-
tion (59). Maitreya said: My dear Vidura, I 
heard this story of the Dakṣa yajña, which was 
devastated by Lord Śiva, from Uddhava, a great 
devotee and a disciple of  Bṛhaspati  (60). The 
great sage Maitreya concluded: If one hears and 
again narrates, with faith and devotion, this 
story of the Dakṣa yajña as it was conducted by 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, 
then certainly one is cleared of all contamina-
tion of material existence, O son of Kuru  (61). 
SB 4.8: Dhruva Mahārāja Leaves Home 
for the Forest  
The great sage Maitreya said : The four 
great Kumāra sages headed by Sanaka, as well 
as Nārada, Ṛbhu, Haṁsa, Aruṇi and Yati, all 
sons of Brahmā, did not live at h ome, but be-
came ūrdhva -retā, or naiṣṭhika -brahmacārīs, 
unadulterated celibates  (1).Another son of Lord 
Brahmā was Irreligion, whose wife’s name was 
Falsity. From their combination were born two 
demons named Dambha, or Bluffing, and 
Māyā, or Cheating. These  two demons were 
taken by a demon named Nirṛti, who had no 
children  (2).  Maitreya told Vidura: O great 
soul, from Dambha and Māyā were born Greed 
and Nikṛti, or Cunning. From their combination 
came children named Krodha [Anger] and 
Hiṁsā [Envy], and from their combination 
were born Kali and his sister Durukti (Harsh 
Speech)  (3).O greatest of all good men, by the 
combination of Kali and Harsh Speech were 
born children named Mṛtyu (Death) and Bhīti 
(Fear). From the combination of Mṛtyu and 
Bhīti came childre n named Yātanā (Excessive 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

207 
 Pain) and Niraya (Hell)  (4).My dear Vidura, I 
have summarily explained the causes of devas-
tation. One who hears this description three 
times attains piety and washes the sinful con-
tamination from his soul  (5).Maitreya contin-
ued: O  best of the Kuru dynasty, I shall now 
describe to you the descendants of 
Svāyambhuva Manu, who was born of a part of 
a plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead  (6).  
Svāyambhuva Manu had two sons by his 
wife, Śatarūpā, and the names of the sons were 
Uttānapāda and Priyavrata. Because both of 
them were descendants of a plenary expansion 
of Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, they were very competent to rule the uni-
verse to maintain and protect the citizens  (7). 
King Uttānapāda had t wo queens, named Sunīti 
and Suruci. Suruci was much more dear to the 
King; Sunīti, who had a son named Dhruva, 
was not his favorite  (8). 
Once upon a time, King Uttānapāda was pat-
ting the son of Suruci, Uttama, placing him on 
his lap. Dhruva Mahārāja was al so trying to get 
on the King’s lap, but the King did not very 
much welcome him  (9).While the child, 
Dhruva Mahārāja, was trying to get on the lap 
of his father, Suruci, his stepmother, became 
very envious of the child, and with great pride 
she began to spe ak so as to be heard by the King 
himself  (10).Queen Suruci told Dhruva 
Mahārāja: My dear child, you do not deserve to 
sit on the throne or on the lap of the King. 
Surely you are also the son of the King, but be-
cause you did not take your birth from my 
womb , you are not qualified to sit on your fa-
ther’s lap  (11).  My dear child, you are unaware 
that you were born not of my womb but of an-
other woman. Therefore you should know that 
your attempt is doomed to failure. You are try-
ing to fulfill a desire which is impossible to ful-
fill (12).If you at all desire to rise to the throne 
of the King, then you have to undergo severe 
austerities. First of all you must satisfy the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, and 
then, when you are favored by Him because of 
such worship, you shall have to take your next 
birth from my womb  (13).  The sage Maitreya continued:  My dear 
Vidura, as a snake, when struck by a stick, 
breathes very heavily, Dhruva Mahārāja, hav-
ing been struck by the strong words of his step-
mother, began to breathe very heavily bec ause 
of great anger. When he saw that his father was 
silent and did not protest, he immediately left 
the palace and went to his mother  (14).  
When Dhruva Mahārāja reached his mother, 
his lips were trembling in anger, and he was 
crying very grievously. Quee n Sunīti immedi-
ately lifted her son onto her lap, while the pal-
ace residents who had heard all the harsh words 
of Suruci related everything in detail. Thus 
Sunīti also became greatly aggrieved  (15).This 
incident was unbearable to Sunīti’s patience. 
She beg an to burn as if in a forest fire, and in 
her grief she became just like a burnt leaf and 
so lamented. As she remembered the words of 
her co -wife, her bright, lotuslike face filled 
with tears, and thus she spoke  (16).She also was 
breathing very heavily, an d she did not know 
the factual remedy for the painful situation. Not 
finding any remedy, she said to her son: My 
dear son, don’t wish for anything inauspicious 
for others. Anyone who inflicts pains upon oth-
ers suffers himself from that pain  (17).Sunīti 
said: My dear boy, whatever has been spoken 
by Suruci is so, because the King, your father, 
does not consider me his wife or even his maid-
servant. He feels ashamed to accept me. There-
fore it is a fact that you have taken birth from 
the womb of an u nfortunate woman, and by be-
ing fed from her breast you have grown up  
(18).My dear boy, whatever has been spoken 
by Suruci, your stepmother, although very 
harsh to hear, is factual. Therefore, if you desire 
at all to sit on the same throne as your step-
broth er, Uttama, then give up your envious at-
titude and immediately try to execute the in-
structions of your stepmother. Without further 
delay, you must engage yourself in worshiping 
the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead  (19).Sunīti continued: The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is so great that simply 
by worshiping His lotus feet, your great -grand-
father, Lord Brahmā, acquired the necessary 
qualifications to create this universe. Although 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

208 
 he is unborn and is the chief of all li ving crea-
tures, he is situated in that exalted post because 
of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, whom even great yogīs worship by 
controlling the mind and regulating the life air 
[prāṇa]  (20).Sunīti informed her son: Your 
grandfather Svāyamb huva Manu executed 
great sacrifices with distribution of charity, and 
thereby, with unflinching faith and devotion, he 
worshiped and satisfied the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead. By acting in that way, he 
achieved the greatest success in material happi-
ness and afterwards achieved liberation, which 
is impossible to obtain by worshiping the dem-
igods  (21).My dear boy, you also should take 
shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is very kind to His devotees. Persons seek-
ing liberation from the cycle of birth and death 
always take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord 
in devotional service. Becoming purified by ex-
ecuting your allotted occupation, just situate 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in your 
heart, and without deviating for a moment, en-
gage a lways in His service  (22).My dear 
Dhruva, as far as I am concerned, I do not find 
anyone who can mitigate your distress but the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose eyes 
are like lotus petals. Many demigods such as 
Lord Brahmā seek the pleasure of the goddess 
of fortune, but the goddess of fortune herself, 
with a lotus flower in her hand, is always ready 
to render service to the Supreme Lord  (23).  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  The 
instruction of Dhruva Mahārāja’s mother, 
Sunīti, was actually meant for fulfilling his de-
sired objective. Therefore, after deliberate con-
sideration and with intelligence and fixed de-
termination, he left his father’s house  (24).The 
great sage Nārada overheard this news, and un-
derstanding all the activities of Dhruva 
Mahārāja, he was struck with wonde r. He ap-
proached Dhruva, and touching the boy’s head 
with his all -virtuous hand, he spoke as follows  
(25).How wonderful are the powerful kṣatri-
yas! They cannot tolerate even a slight infringe-
ment upon their prestige. Just imagine! This 
boy is only a small child, yet harsh words from 
his stepmother proved unbearable to him  (26).  The great sage Nārada told Dhruva : My 
dear boy, you are only a little boy whose attach-
ment is to sports and other frivolities. Why are 
you so affected by words insulting your honor?  
(27)  My dear Dhruva, if you feel that your 
sense of honor has been insulted, you still have 
no cause for dissatisfaction. This kind of dissat-
isfaction is another feature of the illusory en-
ergy; every living entity is controlled by his 
previous actions, a nd therefore there are differ-
ent varieties of life for enjoying or suffering  
(28).The process of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is very wonderful. One who is intelli-
gent should accept that process and be satisfied 
with whatever comes, favorable or unfa vora-
ble, by His supreme will  (29). Now you have 
decided to undertake the mystic process of 
meditation under the instruction of your 
mother, just to achieve the mercy of the Lord, 
but in my opinion such austerities are not pos-
sible for any ordinary man. It is very difficult 
to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead  
(30).Nārada Muni continued: After trying this 
process for many, many births and remaining 
unattached to material contamination, placing 
themselves continually in trance and executing 
many types of austerities, many mystic yogīs 
were unable to find the end of t he path of God 
realization  (31).For this reason, my dear boy, 
you should not endeavor for this; it will not be 
successful. It is better that you go home. When 
you are grown up, by the mercy of the Lord you 
will get a chance for these mystic perfor-
mances. A t that time you may execute this 
function  (32).One should try to keep himself 
satisfied in any condition of life  whether dis-
tress or happiness  which is offered by the su-
preme will. A person who endures in this way 
is able to cross over the darkness of ne science 
very easily  (33).Every man should act like this: 
when he meets a person more qualified than 
himself, he should be very pleased; when he 
meets someone less qualified than himself, he 
should be compassionate toward him; and 
when he meets someone equa l to himself, he 
should make friendship with him. In this way 
one is never affected by the threefold miseries 
of this material world  (34).  
Dhruva Mahārāja said : My dear Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

209 
 Nāradajī, for a person whose heart is disturbed 
by the material conditions of happiness and dis-
tress, whatever you have so kindly explained 
for attainment of peace of mind is certainly a 
very good instruction. But as far as I am con-
cerned, I am covered by ignorance, and this 
kind of philosophy does not touch my heart  
(35).My dear lord, I am very impudent for not 
accepting your instructions, but this is not my 
fault. It is due to my having been born in a kṣat-
riya family. My  stepmother, Suruci, has pierced 
my heart with her harsh words. Therefore your 
valuable instruction does not stand in my heart  
(36).O learned brāhmaṇa, I want to occupy a 
position more exalted than any yet achieved 
within the three worlds by anyone, even b y my 
father and grandfather. If you will oblige, 
kindly advise me of an honest path to follow by 
which I can achieve the goal of my life  (37).My 
dear lord, you are a worthy son of Lord 
Brahmā, and you travel, playing on your musi-
cal instrument, the vīṇā, f or the welfare of the 
entire universe. You are like the sun, which ro-
tates in the universe for the benefit of all living 
beings  (38).  
The sage Maitreya continued : The great 
personality Nārada Muni, upon hearing the 
words of Dhruva Mahārāja, became very co m-
passionate toward him, and in order to show 
him his causeless mercy, he gave him the fol-
lowing expert advice  (39).  
The great sage Nārada told  Dhruva 
Mahārāja: The instruction given by your 
mother, Sunīti, to follow the path of devotional 
service to the S upreme Personality of Godhead, 
is just suitable for you. You should therefore 
completely absorb yourself in the devotional 
service of the Lord  (40).  Any person who de-
sires the fruits of the four principles religiosity, 
economic development, sense gratific ation 
and, at the end, liberation, should engage him-
self in the devotional service of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, for worship of His lo-
tus feet yields the fulfillment of all of these  
(41).My dear boy, I therefore wish all good for-
tune for you. You should go to the bank of the 
Yamunā, where there is a virtuous forest named Madhuvana, and there be purified. Just by go-
ing there, one draws nearer to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who always lives there  
(42).Nārada Muni instructed: My dear boy, in 
the waters of the Yamunā River, which is 
known as Kālindī, you should take three baths 
daily because the water is very auspicious, sa-
cred and clear. After bathing, you should per-
form the necessary regulative principles for 
aṣṭāṅga -yoga and then sit down on your āsana 
[sitting place] in a calm and quiet position  
(43).After sitting on your seat, practice the 
three kinds of breathing exercises, and thus 
gradually control the life air, the mind and the 
senses. Completely free yourself from all mate-
rial contamina tion, and with great patience 
begin to meditate on the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead  (44).  
[The form of the Lord is described herein.] 
The Lord’s face is perpetually very beautiful 
and pleasing in attitude. To the devotees who 
see Him, He appears never t o be displeased, 
and He is always prepared to award benedic-
tions to them. His eyes, His nicely decorated 
eyebrows, His raised nose and His broad fore-
head are all very beautiful. He is more beautiful 
than all the demigods  (45).Nārada Muni contin-
ued: The Lord’s form is always youthful. Every 
limb and every part of His body is properly 
formed, free from defect. His eyes and lips are 
pinkish like the rising sun. He is always pre-
pared to give shelter to the surrendered soul, 
and an yone so fortunate as to look upon Him 
feels all satisfaction. The Lord is always worthy 
to be the master of the surrendered soul, for He 
is the ocean of mercy  (46).The Lord is further 
described as having the mark of Śrīvatsa, or the 
sitting place of the go ddess of fortune, and His 
bodily hue is deep bluish. The Lord is a person, 
He wears a garland of flowers, and He is eter-
nally manifest with four hands, which hold [be-
ginning from the lower left hand] a conchshell, 
wheel, club and lotus flower  (47).The enti re 
body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Vāsudeva, is decorated. He wears a valuable 
jeweled helmet, necklaces and bracelets, His 
neck is adorned with the Kaustubha jewel, and 
He is dressed in yellow silk garments  (48).The 
Lord is decorated with smal l golden bells 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

210 
 around His waist, and His lotus feet are deco-
rated with golden ankle bells. All His bodily 
features are very attractive and pleasing to the 
eyes. He is always peaceful, calm and quiet and 
very pleasing to the eyes and the mind  
(49).Real yogī s meditate upon the transcenden-
tal form of the Lord as He stands on the whorl 
of the lotus of their hearts, the jewellike nails of 
His lotus feet glittering  (50).The Lord is always 
smiling, and the devotee should constantly see 
the Lord in this form, as He  looks very merci-
fully toward the devotee. In this way the medi-
tator should look toward the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, the bestower of all benedic-
tions  (51).One who meditates in this way, con-
centrating his mind upon the always auspicious 
form of the L ord, is very soon freed from all 
material contamination, and he does not come 
down from meditation upon the Lord  (52).  
O son of the King, now I shall speak unto 
you the mantra which is to be chanted with this 
process of meditation. One who carefully 
chant s this mantra for seven nights can see the 
perfect human beings flying in the sky  (53).Oṁ 
namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. This is the 
twelve -syllable mantra for worshiping Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. One should install the physical forms of 
the Lord, and with the chanting of the mantra 
one should offer flowers and fruits and other 
varieties of foodstuffs exactl y according to the 
rules and regulations prescribed by authorities. 
But this should be done in consideration of 
place, time, and attendant conveniences and in-
conveniences  (54).One should worship the 
Lord by offering pure water, pure flower gar-
lands, fruits , flowers and vegetables which are 
available in the forest, or by collecting newly 
grown grasses, small buds of flowers or even 
the skins of trees, and if possible, by of fering 
tulasī leaves, which are very dear to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead  (55).It is possi-
ble to worship a form of the Lord made of phys-
ical elements such as earth, water, pulp, wood 
and metal. In the forest one can make a form 
with no more than eart h and water and worship 
Him according to the above principles. A dev-
otee who has full control over his self should be 
very sober and peaceful and must be satisfied simply with eating whatever fruits and vegeta-
bles are available in the forest  (56).My dear 
Dhruva, besides worshiping the Deity and 
chanting the mantra three times a day, you 
should meditate upon the transcendental activ-
ities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in 
His different incarnations, as exhibited by His 
supreme will and personal potenci es (57).One 
should follow in the footsteps of previous dev-
otees regarding how to worship the Supreme 
Lord with the prescribed paraphernalia, or one 
should offer worship within the heart by recit-
ing the mantra to the Personality of Godhead, 
who is nondiffer ent from the mantra  (58).  
Anyone who thus engages in the devotional 
service of the Lord, seriously and sincerely, 
with his mind, words and body, and who is 
fixed in the activities of the prescribed devo-
tional methods, is blessed by the Lord accord-
ing to h is desire. If a devotee desires material 
religiosity, economic development, sense grat-
ification or liberation from the material world, 
he is awarded these results  (59-60).If one is 
very serious about liberation, he must stick to 
the process of transcendent al loving service, 
engaging twenty -four hours a day in the highest 
stage of ecstasy, and he must certainly be aloof 
from all activities of sense gratification  (61).  
When D hruva Mahārāja, the son of the 
King, was thus advised by the great sage 
Nārada, he circumambulated Nārada, his spir-
itual master, and offered him respectful obei-
sances. Then he started for Madhuvana, which 
is always imprinted with the lotus footprints of 
Lord Kṛṣṇa and which is therefore especially 
auspicious  (62).After Dhruva entered 
Madhuvana Forest to execute devotional ser-
vice, the great sage Nārada thought it wise to 
go to the King to see how he was faring within 
the palace. When Nārada Muni approached,  the 
King received him properly, offering him due 
obeisances. After being seated comfortably, 
Nārada began to speak  (63).  
The great sage Nārada inquired:  My dear 
King, your face appears to be withering up, and 
you look like you have been thinking of some-
thing for a very long time. Why is that? Have 
you been hampered in following your path of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

211 
 religious rites, economic development and 
sense gratification? (64) 
The King replied:  O best of the brāhmaṇas, 
I am very much addicted to my wife, and I am 
so fallen t hat I have abandoned all merciful be-
havior, even to my son, who is only five years 
old. I have banished him and his mother, even 
though he is a great soul and a great devotee  
(65).My dear brāhmaṇa, the face of my son was 
just like a lotus flower. I am thin king of his pre-
carious condition. He is unprotected, and he 
might be very hungry. He might have lain down 
somewhere in the forest, and the wolves might 
have attacked him to eat his body  (66).Alas, 
just see how I was conquered by my wife! Just 
imagine my cr uelty! Out of love and affection 
the boy was trying to get up on my lap, but I did 
not receive him, nor did I even pat him for a 
moment. Just imagine how hardhearted I am  
(67).  
The great sage Nārada replied:  My dear 
King, please do not be aggrieved about your 
son. He is well protected by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Although you have no ac-
tual information of his influence, his reputation 
is already spread all over the worl d (68).My 
dear King, your son is very competent. He will 
perform activities which would be impossible 
even for great kings and sages. Very soon he 
will complete his task and come back home. 
You should know that he will also spread your 
reputation all over the world  (69).  
The great Maitreya continued : The King, 
Uttānapāda, after being advised by Nārada 
Muni, practically gave up all duties in relation 
with his kingdom, which was very vast and 
wide, opulent like the goddess of fortune, and 
he simply began to think of his son Dhruva  
(70).Elsewhere, Dhruv a Mahārāja, having ar-
rived at Madhuvana, took his bath in the river 
Yamunā and observed fasting in the night with 
great care and attention. After that, as advised 
by the great sage Nārada, he engaged himself 
in worshiping the Supreme Personality of God-
head  (71).For the first month Dhruva Mahārāja 
ate only fruits and berries on every third day, 
only to keep his body and soul together, and in this way he progressed in his worship of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead  (72).In the sec-
ond month Dhruva Mahārāja a te only every six 
days, and for his eatables he took dry grass and 
leaves. Thus he continued his worship  (73).In 
the third month he drank water only every nine 
days. Thus he remained completely in trance 
and worshiped the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, wh o is adored by selected verses  
(74).In the fourth month Dhruva Mahārāja be-
came a complete master of the breathing exer-
cise, and thus he inhaled air only every twelfth 
day. In this way he became completely fixed in 
his position and worshiped the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead  (75).By the fif th month, 
Mahārāja Dhruva, the son of the King, had con-
trolled his breathing so perfectly that he was 
able to stand on only one leg, just as a column 
stands, without motion, and concentrate his 
mind fully on the Parabrahman  (76).He com-
pletely controlled hi s senses and their objects, 
and in this way he fixed his mind, without di-
version to anything else, upon the form of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead  (77).When 
Dhruva Mahārāja thus captured the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is the refuge of 
the tota l material creation and who is the master 
of all living entities, the three worlds began to 
tremble  (78).As Dhruva Mahārāja, the King’s 
son, kept himself steadily standing on one leg, 
the pressure of his big toe pushed down half the 
earth, just as an eleph ant being carried on a boat 
rocks the boat left and right with his every step  
(79).When Dhruva Mahārāja became practi-
cally one in heaviness with Lord Viṣṇu, the to-
tal consciousness, due to his fully concentrating 
and his closing all the holes of his body, the to-
tal universal breathing became choked up, and 
all the great demigo ds in all the planetary sys-
tems felt suffocated and thus took shelter of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead  (80).  
The demigods said:  Dear Lord, You are the 
refuge of all moving and non moving living en-
tities. We feel all living entities to be suffocat-
ing, their breathing processes choked up. We 
have never experienced such a thing. Since You 
are the ultimate shelter of all surrendered souls, 
we have therefore approached You; kindly save 
us from this danger  (81).  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

212 
 The Supreme Personality of Godhead re-
plied:  My dear demigods, do not be perturbed 
by this. It is due to the severe austerity and full 
determination of the son of King Uttānapāda, 
who is now fully absorbed in thought of Me. He 
has obstructed the universal breathing process. 
You can safely return to your respective homes. 
I shall stop this boy in his severe acts of auster-
ities, and you will be saved from this situation  
(82).  
SB 4.9: Dhruva Mahārāja Returns 
Home  
The great sage Maitre ya told Vidura : 
When the demigods were thus reassured by the 
Personality of Godhead, they were freed from 
all fears, and after offering their obeisances 
they returned to their heavenly planets. Then 
the Lord, who is nondifferent from the Sa-
hasraśīrṣā incar nation, got on the back of 
Garuḍa, who carried Him to the Madhuvana 
Forest to see His servant Dhruva  (1).The form 
of the Lord, which was brilliant like lightning 
and in which Dhruva Mahārāja, in his mature 
yogic process, was fully absorbed in medita-
tion, a ll of a sudden disappeared. Thus Dhruva 
was perturbed, and his meditation broke. But as 
soon as he opened his eyes he saw the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead personally present, just 
as he had been seeing the Lord in his heart  
(2).When Dhruva Mahārāja saw h is Lord just 
in front of him, he was greatly agitated and of-
fered Him obeisances and respect. He fell flat 
before Him like a rod and became absorbed in 
love of Godhead. Dhruva Mahārāja, in ecstasy, 
looked upon the Lord as if he were drinking the 
Lord with his eyes, kissing the lotus feet of the 
Lord with his mouth, and embracing the Lord 
with his arms  (3).Although Dhruva Mahārāja 
was a small boy, he wanted to offer prayers to 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in suitable 
language. But because he was inexpe rienced, 
he could not adjust himself immediately. The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, being situ-
ated in everyone’s heart, could understand 
Dhruva Mahārāja’s awkward position. Out of 
His causeless mercy He touched His conchshell 
to the forehead of Dhruva Ma hārāja, who stood 
before Him with folded hands  (4).At that time Dhruva Mahārāja became perfectly aware of 
the Vedic conclusion and understood the Abso-
lute Truth and His relationship with all living 
entities. In accordance with the line of devo-
tional servic e to the Supreme Lord, whose fame 
is widespread, Dhruva, who in the future would 
receive a planet which would never be annihi-
lated, even during the time of dissolution, of-
fered his deliberate and conclusive prayers  (5).  
Dhruva Mahārāja said:  My dear Lord,  
You are all -powerful. After entering within me, 
You have enlivened all my sleeping senses  my 
hands, legs, ears, touch sensation, life force and 
especially my power of speech. Let me offer 
my respectful obeisances unto You  (6).My 
Lord, You are the supreme  one, but by Your 
different energies You appear differently in the 
spiritual and material worlds. You create the to-
tal energy of the material world by Your exter-
nal potency, and after creation You enter within 
the material world as the Supersoul. You are 
the Supreme Person, and through the temporary 
modes of material nature You create varieties 
of manifestation, just as fire, entering into 
wood of different shapes, burns brilliantly in 
different varieties  (7).O my master, Lord 
Brahmā is fully surrendered un to You. In the 
beginning You gave him knowledge, and thus 
he could see and understand the entire universe, 
just as a person awakens from sleep and visual-
izes his immediate duties. You are the only 
shelter of all persons who desire liberation, and 
You are t he friend of all who are distressed. 
How, therefore, can a learned person who has 
perfect knowledge ever forget You? (8) Per-
sons who worship You simply for the sense 
gratification of this bag of skin are certainly in-
fluenced by Your illusory energy. In spi te of 
having You, who are like a desire tree and are 
the cause of liberation from birth and death, 
foolish persons, such as me, desire benedic-
tions from You for sense gratification, which is 
available even for those who live in hellish con-
ditions  (9).  My Lord, the transcendental bliss 
derived from meditating upon Your lotus feet 
or hearing about Your glories from pure devo-
tees is so unlimited that it is far beyond the 
stage of brahmānanda, wherein one thinks him-
self merged in the impersonal Brahman as one 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

213 
 with the Supreme. Since brahmānanda is also 
defeated by the transcendental bliss derived 
from devotional service, then what to speak of 
the temporary blissfulness of elevating oneself 
to the heavenly planets, which is ended by the 
separating sword of time?  Although one may 
be elevated to the heavenly planets, he falls 
down in due course of time  (10).  
Dhruva Mahārāja continued: O unlimited 
Lord, kindly bless me so that I may associate 
with great devotees who engage in Your tran-
scendental loving service cons tantly, as the 
waves of a river constantly flow. Such tran-
scendental devotees are completely situated in 
an uncontaminated state of life. By the process 
of devotional service I shall surely be able to 
cross the nescient ocean of material existence, 
which i s filled with the waves of blazing, fire-
like dangers. It will be very easy for me, for I 
am becoming mad to hear about Your transcen-
dental qualities and pastimes, which are eter-
nally existent  (11).O Lord who have a lotus na-
vel, if a person happens to assoc iate with a dev-
otee whose heart always hankers after Your lo-
tus feet, seeking always their fragrance, he is 
never attached to the material body or, in a bod-
ily relationship, to offspring, friends, home, 
wealth and wife, which are very, very dear to 
materia listic persons. Indeed, he does not care 
for them  (12).My dear Lord, O Supreme Un-
born, I know that the different varieties of liv-
ing entities, such as animals, trees, birds, rep-
tiles, demigods and human beings, are spread 
throughout the universe, which is caused by the 
total material energy, and I know that they are 
sometimes manifest and sometimes unmani-
fest; but I have never experienced the supreme 
form I behold as I see You now. Now all kinds 
of methods of theorizing have come to an end  
(13).  
My dear Lo rd, at the end of each millennium 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu dissolves everything 
manifested within the universe into His belly. 
He lies down on the lap of Śeṣa Nāga, from His 
navel sprouts a golden lotus flower on a stem, 
and on that lotus Lord Brahmā is created. I can 
understand that You are the same Supreme Godhead. I therefore offer my respectful obei-
sances unto You  (14).  
My Lord, by Your unbroken transcendental 
glance You are the supreme witness of all 
stages of intellectu al activities. You are eter-
nally liberated, Your existence is situated in 
pure goodness, and You are existent in the Su-
persoul without change. You are the original 
Personality of Godhead, full with six opu-
lences, and You are eternally the master of the 
three modes of material nature. Thus, You are 
always different from the ordinary living enti-
ties. As Lord Viṣṇu, You maintain all the af-
fairs of the entire universe, and yet You stand 
aloof and are the enjoyer of the results of all 
sacrifices  (15).My dear Lord, in Your imper-
sonal manifestation of Brahman there are al-
ways two o pposing elements  knowledge and 
ignorance. Your multi -energies are continually 
manifest, but the impersonal Brahman, which 
is undivided, original, changeless, unlimited 
and blissful, is the cause of the material mani-
festation. Because You are the same impe r-
sonal Brahman, I offer my respectful obei-
sances unto You  (16).  
My Lord, O Supreme Lord, You are the su-
preme personified form of all benediction. 
Therefore, for one who abides in Your devo-
tional service with no other desire, worshiping 
Your lotus feet is better than becoming king 
and lording it over a kingdom. That is the ben-
ediction of worshiping Your lotus feet. To ig-
norant devotees like me, You are the cause-
lessly merciful maintainer, just like a cow, who 
takes care of the newly born calf by supplying 
milk and giving it protection from attack  (17).  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  My 
dear Vidura, when Dhruva Mahārāja, who had 
good intentions in his heart, finished his prayer, 
the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, 
who is very kind to His devotees and servants, 
congratulated him, speaking as follows  (18).  
The Personality of Godhead said:  My dear 
Dhruva, son of the King, you have executed pi-
ous vows, and I also know the desire within 
your heart. Although your desire is very ambi-
tious and very difficult to fulfill, I shall favor 
you with its fulfillment. All good fortune unto 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

214 
 you (19).  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead con-
tinued: My dear Dhruva, I shall award you the 
glowing planet known as the polestar, which 
will continue to exist even after the dissolution 
at the end of the millennium. No one has ever 
ruled this planet, whi ch is surrounded by all the 
solar systems, planets and stars. All the lumi-
naries in the sky circumambulate this planet, 
just as bulls tread around a central pole for the 
purpose of crushing grains. Keeping the 
polestar to their right, all the stars inhabit ed by 
the great sages like Dharma, Agni, Kaśyapa 
and Śukra circumambulate this planet, which 
continues to exist even after the dissolution of 
all others  (20-21).After your father goes to the 
forest and awards you the rule of his kingdom, 
you will rule cont inuously the entire world for 
thirty -six thousand years, and all your senses 
will continue to be as strong as they are now. 
You will never become old  (22).  The Lord con-
tinued: Sometime in the future your brother, 
Uttama, will go hunting in the forest, and  while 
absorbed in hunting, he will be killed. Your 
stepmother, Suruci, being maddened upon the 
death of her son, will go to search him out in 
the forest, but she will be devoured by a forest 
fire (23).The Lord continued: I am the heart of 
all sacrifices. You will be able to perform many 
great sacrifices and also give great charities. In 
this way you will be able to enjoy the blessings 
of material happiness in this life, and at the time 
of your death you will be able to remember Me  
(24).The Personality of G odhead continued: 
My dear Dhruva, after your material life in this 
body, you will go to My planet, wh ich is always 
offered obeisances by the residents of all other 
planetary systems. It is situated above the plan-
ets of the seven ṛṣis, and having gone there you 
will never have to come back again to this ma-
terial world  (25).  
The great sage Maitreya said : After being 
worshiped and honored by the boy [Dhruva 
Mahārāja], and after offering him His abode, 
Lord Viṣṇu, on the back of Garuḍa, returned to 
His abode as Dhruva Mahārāja looked on  
(26).Despite having achieved the desired result 
of his determination by w orshiping the lotus feet of the Lord, Dhruva Mahārāja was not very 
pleased. Thus he returned to his home  (27).  
Śrī Vidura inquired:  My dear brāhmaṇa, 
the abode of the Lord is very difficult to attain. 
It can be attained only by pure devotional ser-
vice, wh ich alone pleases the most affectionate, 
merciful Lord. Dhruva Mahārāja achieved this 
position even in one life, and he was very wise 
and conscientious. Why, then, was he not very 
pleased? (28) 
Maitreya answered : Dhruva Mahārāja’s 
heart, which was pierced by the arrows of the 
harsh words of his stepmother, was greatly ag-
grieved, and thus when he fixed upon his goal 
of life he did not forget her mi SBehavior. He 
did not demand actual liberation from this ma-
terial world, but at the end of his devotional ser-
vice, when the Supreme Personality of God-
head appeared before him, he was simply 
ashamed of the material demands he had in his 
mind  (29).  
Dhruva Mahārāja thought to himself : To 
endeavor to be situated in the shade of the lotus 
feet of the Lord is not an ordinary task, because 
even the great brahmacārīs headed by Sanan-
dana, who practiced aṣṭāṅga -yoga in trance, at-
tained the shelter of the Lor d’s lotus feet only 
after many, many births. Within six months I 
achieved the same result, yet due to my think-
ing differently from the Lord, I fell down from 
my position  (30).Alas, just look at me! I am so 
unfortunate. I approached the lotus feet of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can im-
mediately cut the chain of the repetition of birth 
and death, but still, out of my foolishness, I 
prayed for things which are perishable  (31).  
Since all the demigods who are situated in the 
higher planetary system w ill have to come 
down again, they are all envious of my being 
elevated to Vaikuṇṭhaloka by devotional ser-
vice. These intolerant demigods have dissi-
pated my intelligence, and only for this reason 
could I not accept the genuine benediction of 
the instruction s of Sage Nārada  (32).  Dhruva 
Mahārāja lamented: I was under the influence 
of the illusory energy; being ignorant of the ac-
tual facts, I was sleeping on her lap. Under a 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

215 
 vision of duality, I saw my brother as my en-
emy, and falsely I lamented within my hea rt, 
thinking, “They are my enemies ” (33). It is very 
difficult to satisfy the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, but in my case, although I have satis-
fied the Supersoul of the whole universe, I have 
prayed only for useless things. My activities 
were exactly l ike treatment given to a person 
who is already dead. Just see how unfortunate I 
am, for in spite of meeting the Supreme Lord, 
who can cut one’s link with birth and death, I 
have prayed for the same conditions again  
(34).Because of my state of complete fool ish-
ness and paucity of pious activities, although 
the Lord offered me His personal service, I 
wanted material name, fame and prosperity. 
My case is just like that of the poor man who, 
when he satisfied a great emperor who wanted 
to give him anything he mig ht ask, out of igno-
rance asked only a few broken grains of husked 
rice (35).  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  My 
dear Vidura, persons like you, who are pure 
devotees of the lotus feet of Mukunda [the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who can offer 
liberat ion] and who are always attached to the 
honey of His lotus feet, are always satisfied in 
serving at the lotus feet of the Lord. In any con-
dition of life, such persons remain satisfied, and 
thus they never ask the Lord for material pros-
perity  (36).  
When Ki ng Uttānapāda heard that his son 
Dhruva was coming back home, as if coming 
back to life after death, he could not put his 
faith in this message, for he was doubtful of 
how it could happen. He considered himself the 
most wretched, and therefore he thought t hat it 
was not possible for him to attain such good 
fortune  (37).  Although he could not believe the 
words of the messenger, he had full faith in the 
word of the great sage Nārada. Thus he was 
greatly overwhelmed by the news, and he im-
mediately offered the  messenger a highly valu-
able necklace in great satisfaction  (38). Then 
King Uttānapāda, being very eager to see the 
face of his lost son, mounted a chariot drawn by 
excellent horses and bedecked with golden fil-
igree. Taking with him many learned brāhmaṇas,  all the elderly personalities of his 
family, his officers, his ministers and his imme-
diate friends, he immediately left the city. As 
he proceeded in this parade, there were auspi-
cious sounds of conchshells, kettledrums, 
flutes, and the chanting of Vedic m antras to in-
dicate all good fortune  (39-40).Both the queens 
of King Uttānapāda, namely Sunīti and Suruci, 
along with his other son, Uttama, appeared in 
the procession. The queens were seated on a 
palanquin  (41).Upon seeing Dhruva Mahārāja 
approaching the neighboring small forest, King 
Uttānapāda wi th great haste got down from his 
chariot. He had been very anxious for a long 
time to see his son Dhruva, and therefore with 
great love and affection he went forward to em-
brace his long -lost boy. Breathing very heavily, 
the King embraced him with both arms . But 
Dhruva Mahārāja was not the same as before; 
he was completely sanctified by spiritual ad-
vancement due to having been touched by the 
lotus feet of the Supre me Personality of God-
head (42 -43). Reunion with Dhruva Mahārāja 
fulfilled King Uttānapāda’s lon g-cherished de-
sire, and for this reason he smelled Dhruva’s 
head again and again and bathed him with tor-
rents of very cold tears  (44).  
Then Dhruva Mahārāja, the foremost of all 
nobles, first of all offered his obeisances at the 
feet of his father and was honored by his father 
with various questions. He then bowed his head 
at the feet of his two mothers  (45).Suruci, the 
younger mother of Dhruva Mahārāja, seeing 
that the innocent boy had fallen at her feet, im-
mediately picked him up, embracing him with 
her h ands, and with tears of feeling she blessed 
him with the words “My dear boy, long may 
you live!” (46) Unto one who has transcenden-
tal qualities due to friendly behavior with the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, all living en-
tities offer honor, just as water  automatically 
flows down by nature  (47).The two brothers 
Uttama and Dhruva Mahārāja also exchanged 
their tears. They were overwhelmed by the ec-
stasy of love and affection, and when they em-
braced one another, the hair on their bodies 
stood up  (48).Sunīti, the real mother of Dhruva 
Mahārāja, embr aced the tender body of her son, 
who was dearer to her than her own life, and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

216 
 thus forgot all material grief, for she was very 
pleased  (49).My dear Vidura, Sunīti was the 
mother of a great hero. Her tears, together with 
the milk flowing from her breasts, w et the 
whole body of Dhruva Mahārāja. This was a 
great, auspicious sign  (50).The residents of the 
palace praised the Queen: Dear Queen, your be-
loved son was lost a long time ago, and it is 
your great fortune that he now has come back. 
It appears, therefore , that your son will be able 
to protect you for a very long time and will put 
an end to all your material pangs  (51). Dear 
Queen, you must have worshiped the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who delivers His dev-
otees from the greatest danger. Persons who 
constantly meditate upon Him surpass the 
course of birth and death. This perfection is 
very difficult to achieve  (52).  
The sage Maitreya continued: My dear 
Vidura, when every one was thus praising 
Dhruva Mahārāja, the King was very happy, 
and he had Dhruva and his brother seated on the 
back of a she -elephant. Thus he returned to his 
capital, where he was praised by all classes of 
men (53).The whole city was decorated with 
colum ns of banana trees containing bunches of 
fruits and flowers, and betel -nut trees with 
leaves and branches were seen here and there. 
There were also many gates set up which were 
structured to give the appearance of sharks  
(54).At each and every gate there w ere burning 
lamps and big waterpots decorated with differ-
ently colored cloth, strings of pearls, flower 
garlands and hanging mango leaves  (55).In the 
capital city there were many palaces, city gates 
and surrounding walls, which were already 
very, very beau tiful, and on this occasion all of 
them were decorated with golden ornaments. 
The domes of the city palaces glittered, as did 
the domes of the beautiful airplanes which hov-
ered over the city  (56).All the quadrangles, 
lanes and streets in the city, and the raised sit-
ting places at the crossings, were thoroughly 
cleansed and sprinkled with sandalwood water; 
and auspicious grains such as rice and barley, 
and flowers, fruits and many other auspicious 
presentations, were scattered all over the city  
(57).Thus as Dhruva Mahārāja passed on the 
road, from every place in the neighborhood all the gentle household ladies assembled to see 
him, and out of maternal affection they offered 
their blessings, showering him with white mus-
tard seed, barley, curd, water, newly gro wn 
grass, fruits and flowers. In this way Dhruva 
Mahārāja, while hearing the pleasing songs 
sung by the ladies, entered the palace of his fa-
ther (58-59).  
Dhruva Mahārāja thereafter lived in his fa-
ther’s palace, which had walls bedecked with 
highly valuabl e jewels. His affectionate father 
took particular care of him, and he dwelled in 
that house just as the demigods live in their pal-
aces in the higher planetary systems  (60).The 
bedding in the palace was as white as the foam 
of milk and was very soft. The be dsteads were 
made of ivory with embellishments of gold, and 
the chairs, benches and other sitting places and 
furniture were made of gold  (61).The palace of 
the King was surrounded by walls made of mar-
ble with many engravings made of valuable 
jewels like sa pphires, which depicted beautiful 
women with shining jewel lamps in their hands  
(62).The King’s residence was surrounded by 
gardens wherein there were varieties of trees 
brought from the heavenly planets. In those 
trees there were pairs of sweetly singing birds 
and almost -mad bumblebees, which made a 
very relishable buzzing sound (63).There were 
emerald staircases which led to lakes full of 
variously colored lotus flowers and lilies, and 
swans, kāraṇḍavas, cakravākas, cranes and 
similar other valuable birds were visible in 
those lakes  (64).  
The saintly King Uttānapāda, hearing of the 
glorious deeds of Dhruva Mahārāja and person-
ally seeing also how influential and great he 
was, felt very satisfied, for Dhruva’s activities 
were wonderful to the supreme degree  (65). 
When, after concentration, King Uttānapāda 
saw that Dhruva Mahārāja was s uitably mature 
to take charge of the kingdom and that his min-
isters were agreeable and the citizens were also 
very fond of him, he enthroned Dhruva as em-
peror of this planet  (66).After considering his 
advanced age and deliberating on the welfare of 
his spi ritual self, King Uttānapāda detached 
himself from worldly affairs and entered the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

217 
 forest  (67).  
SB 4.10: Dhruva Mahārāja’s Fight with 
the Yakṣas  
The great sage Maitreya said:  My dear 
Vidura, thereafter Dhruva Mahārāja married 
the daughter of Prajāpati Śiś umāra, whose 
name was Bhrami, and two sons named Kalpa 
and Vatsara were born of her  (1).The greatly 
powerful Dhruva Mahārāja had another wife, 
named Ilā, who was the daughter of the demi-
god Vāyu. By her he begot a son named Utkala 
and a very beautiful daug hter (2).  Dhruva 
Mahārāja’s younger brother Uttama, who was 
still unmarried, once went on a hunting excur-
sion and was killed by a powerful Yakṣa in the 
Himālaya Mountains. Along with him, his 
mother, Suruci, also followed the path of her 
son [she died]  (3).  
When Dhruva Mahārāja heard of the killing 
of his brother Uttama by the Yakṣas in the 
Himālaya Mountains, being overwhelmed with 
lamentation and anger, he got on his chariot and 
went out for victory over the city of the Yakṣas, 
Alakāpur i (4) .Dhruva Mahā rāja went to the 
northern direction of the Himālayan range. In a 
valley he saw a city full of ghostly persons who 
were followers of Lord Śiva  (5).  Maitreya con-
tinued: My dear Vidura, as soon as Dhruva 
Mahārāja reached Alakāpurī, he immediately 
blew his co nchshell, and the sound reverber-
ated throughout the entire sky and in every di-
rection. The wives of the Yakṣas became very 
much frightened. From their eyes it was appar-
ent that they were full of anxiety  (6).  
O hero Vidura, the greatly powerful heroes 
of the Yakṣas, unable to tolerate the resounding 
vibration of the conchshell of Dhruva 
Mahārāja, came forth from their city with 
weapons and attacked Dhruva  (7).Dhruva 
Mahārāja, who was a great charioteer and cer-
tainly a great bowman also, immediately began 
to kill them by simultaneously discharging ar-
rows three at a time  (8).When the heroes of the 
Yakṣas saw that all their heads were being thus 
threatened by Dhruva Mahārāja, they could 
very easily understand their awkward position, 
and they concluded that they  would certainly be 
defeated. But, as heroes, they lauded the action of Dhruva  (9).Just like serpents, who cannot 
tolerate being trampled upon by anyone’s feet, 
the Yakṣas, being intolerant of the wonderful 
prowess of Dhruva Mahārāja, threw twice as 
many a rrows  six from each of their soldiers  
and thus they very valiantly exhibited their 
prowess  (10).The Yakṣa soldiers were 130,000 
strong, all greatly angry and all desiring to de-
feat the wonderful activities of Dhruva 
Mahārāja. With full strength they show ered 
upon Mahārāja Dhruva, along with his chariot 
and charioteer, various types of feathered ar-
rows, parighas [iron bludgeons], nistriṁśas 
[swords], prāsaśūlas [tridents], paraśvadhas 
[lances], śaktis [pikes], ṛṣṭis [spears] and 
bhuśuṇḍī weapons  (11-12).Dhruva Mahārāja 
was completely covered by an incessant shower 
of weapons, just as a mountain is covered by 
incessant rainfall  (13).All the Siddhas from the 
higher planetary systems were observing the 
fight from the sky, and when they saw that 
Dhruva Mahārāja  had been covered by the in-
cessant arrows of the enemy, they roared tu-
multuously, “The grandson of Manu, Dhruva, 
is now lost!” They cried that Dhruva Mahārāja 
was just like the sun and that now he had set 
within the ocean of the Yakṣas  (14).The 
Yakṣas, bei ng temporarily victorious, ex-
claimed that they had conquered Dhruva 
Mahārāja. But in the meantime Dhruva’s char-
iot suddenly appeared, just as the sun suddenly 
appears from within foggy mist  (15).  
Dhruva Mahārāja’s bow and arrows 
twanged and hissed, causin g lamentation in the 
hearts of his enemies. He began to shoot inces-
sant arrows, shattering all their different weap-
ons, just as the blasting wind scatters the as-
sembled clouds in the sky  (16).The sharp ar-
rows released from the bow of Dhruva 
Mahārāja pierce d the shields and bodies of the 
enemy, like the thunderbolts released by the 
King of heaven, which dismantle the bodies of 
the mountains  (17). The great sage Maitreya 
continued: My dear Vidura, the heads of those 
who were cut to pieces by the arrows of Dhr uva 
Mahārāja were decorated very beautifully with 
earrings and turbans. The legs of their bodies 
were as beautiful as golden palm trees, their 
arms were decorated with golden bracelets and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

218 
 armlets, and on their heads there were very val-
uable helmets bedeck ed with gold. All these or-
naments lying on that battlefield were very at-
tractive and could bewilder the mind of a hero  
(18-19).  
The remaining Yakṣas who somehow or 
other were not killed had their limbs cut to 
pieces by the arrows of the great warrior 
Dhru va Mahārāja. Thus they began to flee, just 
as elephants flee when defeated by a lion  
(20).Dhruva Mahārāja, the best of human be-
ings, observed that in that great battlefield not 
one of the opposing soldiers was left standing 
with proper weapons. He then des ired to see the 
city of Alakāpurī, but he thought to himself, 
“No one knows the plans of the mystic Yakṣ as” 
(21). In the meantime, while Dhruva Mahārāja, 
doubtful of his mystic enemies, was talking 
with his charioteer, they heard a tremendous 
sound, as if the whole ocean were there, and 
they found that from the sky a great dust storm 
was coming over them from all directions  (22).  
Within a moment the whole sky was over-
cast with dense clouds, and severe thundering 
was heard. There was glittering electric lig ht-
ning and severe rainfall  (23).My dear faultless 
Vidura, in that rainfall there was blood, mucus, 
pus, stool, urine and marrow falling heavily be-
fore Dhruva Mahārāja, and there were trunks of 
bodies falling from the sky  (24).Next, a great 
mountain was visible in the sky, and from all 
directions hailstones fell, along with lances, 
clubs, swords, iron bludgeons and great pieces 
of stone  (25). Dhruva Mahārāja also saw many 
big serpents with angry eyes, vomiting forth 
fire and coming to devour him, along with 
groups of mad elephants, lions and tigers  
(26).Then, as if it were the time of the dissolu-
tion of the whole world, the fierce sea with 
foaming waves and great roaring sounds came 
forward before him  (27).The demon Yakṣas are 
by nature very heinous, and by their demoniac 
power of illusion  they can create many strange 
phenomena to frighten one who is less intelli-
gent (28). When the great sages heard that 
Dhruva Mahārāja was overpowered by the illu-
sory mystic tricks of the demons, they immedi-ately assembled to offer him auspicious encour-
agem ent (29).  
All the sages said:  Dear Dhruva, O son of 
King Uttānapāda, may the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead known as Śārṅgadhanvā, who re-
lieves the distresses of His devotees, kill all 
your threatening enemies. The holy name of the 
Lord is as powerful as the Lord Himself. There-
fore, simply by chanting and hearing the holy 
name of the Lord, many men can be fully pro-
tected from fierce death without difficulty. 
Thus a devotee is saved  (30).  
SB 4.11: Svāyambhuva Manu Advises 
Dhruva Mahārāja to Stop Fighting  
Śrī Maitreya said:  My dear Vidura, when 
Dhruva Mahārāja heard the encouraging words 
of the great sages, he performed the ācamana 
by touching water and then took up his arrow 
made by Lord Nārāyaṇa and fixed it upon his 
bow (1).As soon as Dhruva Mahārāja join ed the 
nārāyaṇāstra arrow to his bow, the illusion cre-
ated by the Yakṣas was immediately van-
quished, just as all material pains and pleasures 
are vanquished when one becomes fully cogni-
zant of the self  (2).Even as Dhruva Mahārāja 
fixed the weapon made by N ārāyaṇa Ṛṣi onto 
his bow, arrows with golden shafts and feathers 
like the wings of a swan flew out from it. They 
entered the enemy soldiers with a great hissing 
sound, just as peacocks enter a forest with tu-
multuous crowing  (3).Those sharp arrows dis-
mayed the enemy soldiers, who became almost 
unconscious, but various Yakṣas on the battle-
field, in a rage against Dhruva Mahārāja, some-
how or other collected their weapons and at-
tacked. Just as serpents agitated by Garuḍa rush 
towards Garuḍa with upraised hoods,  all the 
Yakṣa soldiers prepared to overcome Dhruva 
Mahārāja with their upraised weapons  (4).  
When Dhruva Mahārāja saw the Yakṣas com-
ing forward, he immediately took his arrows 
and cut the enemies to pieces. Separating their 
arms, legs, heads and bellies from their bodies, 
he delivered the Yakṣas to the planetary system 
which is situated above the sun globe and 
which is attainable only by first -class brah-
macārīs, who have never discharged their se-
men (5).When Svāyambhuva Manu saw that 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

219 
 his grandson Dhruva M ahārāja was killing so 
many of the Yakṣas who were not actually of-
fenders, out of his great compassion he ap-
proached Dhruva with great sages to give him 
good instruction  (6).  
Lord Manu said:  My dear son, please stop. 
It is not good to become unnecessarily  angry  it 
is the path to hellish life. Now you are going 
beyond the limit by killing Yakṣas who are ac-
tually not offenders  (7).My dear son, the killing 
of the sinless Yakṣas which you have under-
taken is not at all approved by authorities, and 
it does not befit our family, which is supposed 
to know the laws of religion and irreligion  
(8).My dear son, it has been proved that you are 
very much affectionate towards your brother 
and are greatly aggrieved at his being killed by 
the Yakṣas, but just consider: for  one Yakṣa’s 
offense, you have killed many others, who are 
innocent  (9). One should not accept the body as 
the self and thus, like the animals, kill the bod-
ies of others. This is especially forbidden by 
saintly persons, who follow the path of devo-
tional se rvice to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead  (10).It is very difficult to achieve the 
spiritual abode of Hari, in the Vaikuṇṭha plan-
ets, but you are so fortunate that you are already 
destined to go to that abode by worshiping Him 
as the supreme abode of all  living entities  (11). 
Because you are a pure devotee of the Lord, the 
Lord is always thinking of you, and you are also 
recognized by all His confidential devotees. 
Your life is meant for exemplary behavior. I am 
therefore surprised  why have you undertake n 
such an abominable task? (12) The Lord is very 
satisfied with His devotee when the devotee 
greets other people with tolerance, mercy, 
friendship and equality  (13).  One who actually 
satisfies the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
during one’s lifetime becom es liberated from 
the gross and subtle material conditions. Thus 
being freed from all material modes of nature, 
he achieves unlimited spiritual bliss  (14).The 
creation of the material world begins with the 
five elements, and thus everything, including 
the body of a man or a woman, is created of 
these elements. By the sexual life of man and 
woman, the number of men and women in this 
material world is further increased  (15).  Manu continued: My dear King Dhruva, it is 
simply by the illusory material energy of  the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead and by the in-
teraction of the three modes of material nature 
that creation, maintenance and annihilation 
take place  (16).My dear Dhruva, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is uncontaminated by 
the material modes of natur e. He is the remote 
cause of the creation of this material cosmic 
manifestation. When He gives the impetus, 
many other causes and effects are produced, 
and thus the whole universe moves, just as iron 
moves by the integrated force of a magnet  
(17).The Supre me Personality of Godhead, by 
His inconceivable supreme energy, time, 
causes the interaction of the three modes of ma-
terial nature, and thus varieties of energy be-
come manifest. It appears that He is acting, but 
He is not the actor. He is killing, but He i s not 
the killer. Thus it is understood that only by His 
inconceivable power is everything happening  
(18).My dear Dhruva, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead is ever existing, but in the form of 
time He is the killer of everything. He has no 
beginning, alth ough He is the beginning of eve-
rything, nor is He ever exhaustible, although 
everything is exhausted in due course of time. 
The living entities are created through the 
agency of the father and killed through the 
agency of death, but He is perpetually free of 
birth and death  (19).The Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, in His feature of eternal time, is 
present in the material world and is neutral to-
wards everyone. No one is His ally, and no one 
is His enemy. Within the jurisdiction of the 
time element, everyone  enjoys or suffers the re-
sult of his own karma, or fruitive activities. As, 
when the wind blows, small particles of dust fly 
in the air, so, according to one’s particular 
karma, one suffers or enjoys material life  
(20).The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Viṣṇu, is all -powerful, and He awards the re-
sults of one’s fruitive activities. Thus, although 
one living entity’s duration of life is very small 
whereas that of another is very great, He is al-
ways in His transcendental position, and there 
is no question of  lessening or increasing His du-
ration of life  (21).The differentiation among 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

220 
 varieties of life and their suffering and enjoy-
ment is explained by some to be the result of 
karma. Others say it is due to nature, others due 
to time, others due to fate, and sti ll others say 
that it is due to desire  (22).The Absolute Truth, 
Transcendence, is never subject to the under-
standing of imperfect sensory endeavor, nor is 
He subject to direct experience. He is the mas-
ter of varieties of energies, like the full material 
energy, and no one can understand His plans or 
actions; therefore it should be concluded that 
although He is the original cause of all causes, 
no one can know Him by mental speculation  
(23). 
My dear son, those Yakṣas, who are de-
scendants of Kuvera, are not a ctually the killers 
of your brother; the birth and death of every liv-
ing entity are caused by the Supreme, who is 
certainly the cause of all causes  (24).The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead creates this ma-
terial world, maintains it, and annihilates it in 
due course of time, but because He is transcen-
dental to such activities, He is never affected by 
ego in such action or by the modes of material 
nature  (25).The Supreme Personality of God-
head is the Supersoul o f all living entities. He 
is the controller and maintainer of everyone; 
through the agency of His external energy, He 
creates, maintains and annihilates everyone  
(26).My dear boy Dhruva, please surrender 
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who 
is the ultimate goal of the progress of the world. 
Everyone, including the demigods headed by 
Lord Brahmā, is working under His control, 
just as a bull, prompted by a rope in its nose, is 
controlled by its owner  (27).My dear Dhruva, 
at the age of only five years you were very 
grievously afflicted by the words of your 
mother’s co -wife, and you very boldly gave up 
the protection of your mother and went to the 
forest to engage in the yogic process for reali-
zation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
As a result of this you have already achieved 
the topmost position in all the three worlds  
(28). Therefore, my dear Dhruva, please turn 
your attention to the Supreme Person, who is 
the infallible Brahman. Face the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead in your original position,  
and thus, by self -realization, you will find this material differentiation to be merely flickering  
(29).Thus regaining your natural position and 
rendering service unto the Supreme Lord, who 
is the all -powerful reservoir of all pleasure and 
who lives in al l living entities as the Supersoul, 
you will very soon forget the illusory under-
standing of “I” and “my.”  (30) 
My dear King, just consider what I have said 
to you, which will act as medicinal treatment 
upon disease. Control your anger, for anger is 
the for emost enemy on the path of spiritual re-
alization. I wish all good fortune for you. Please 
follow my instructions  (31).A person who de-
sires liberation from this material world should 
not fall under the control of anger because 
when bewildered by anger one b ecomes a 
source of dread for all others  (32).My dear 
Dhruva, you thought that the Yakṣas killed 
your brother, and therefore you have killed 
great numbers of them. But by this action you 
have agitated the mind of Lord Śiva’s brother 
Kuvera, who is the treasurer of the demigods. 
Please note that your actions have been very 
disrespectful to Kuvera and Lord Śiva  (33).For 
this reason, my son, you should immediately 
pacify Kuvera with gentle words and prayers, 
and thus his wrath may not affect our family  
(34).  
Thus Svāyambhuva Manu, after giving in-
structi on to Dhruva Mahārāja, his grandson, re-
ceived respectful obeisances from him. Then 
Lord Manu and the great sages went back to 
their respective homes  (35).  
SB 4.12: Dhruva Mahārāja Goes Back to 
Godhead  
The great sage Maitreya said:  My dear 
Vidura, Dhruva M ahārāja’s anger subsided, 
and he completely ceased killing Yakṣas. When 
Kuvera, the most blessed master of the treas-
ury, learned this news, he appeared before 
Dhruva. While being worshiped by Yakṣas, 
Kinnaras and Cāraṇas, he spoke to Dhruva 
Mahārāja, who s tood before him with folded 
hands (1).  
The master of the treasury, Kuvera, said:  
O sinless son of a kṣatriya, I am very glad to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

221 
 know that under the instruction of your grand-
father you have given up your enmity, although 
it is very difficult to avoid. I am very pleased 
with you  (2).Actually, you have not killed the 
Yakṣas, nor have they killed your brother, for 
the ultimate cause of generation and annihila-
tion is the eternal time feature of the Supreme 
Lord  (3).Misidentification of oneself and oth-
ers as “I” and “you” on the basis of the bodily 
concept of life is a product of ignorance. This 
bodily concept is the cause of repeated birth 
and death, and it makes us go on continuously 
in material existence  (4).My dear Dhruva, 
come forward. May the Lord always gra ce you 
with good fortune. The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is beyond our sensory percep-
tion, is the Supersoul of all living entities, and 
thus all entities are one, without distinction. 
Therefore begin rendering service unto the 
transcendental form of the Lord, who is the ul-
timate shelter of all living entities  (5).Engage 
yourself fully, therefore, in the devotional ser-
vice of the Lord, for only He can deliver us 
from this entanglement of materialistic exist-
ence. Although the Lord is attached to His ma-
terial potency, He is aloof from her activities. 
Everything in this material world is happening 
by the inconceivable potency of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead  (6).My dear Dhruva 
Mahārāja, son of Mahārāja Uttānapāda, we 
have heard that you are constantly engaged in 
transcendental loving service to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is known for His 
lotus navel. You are therefore worthy to take all 
benedictions from us. Please, therefore, ask 
without hesitation whatever benediction you 
want from me  (7).  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  My 
dear Vidura, when thus asked to accept a bene-
diction from Kuvera the Yakṣarāja [King of the 
Yakṣas], Dhruva Mahārāja, that most elevated 
pure devotee, who was an intelligent and 
thoughtful king, begged that he might have un-
flinching faith in and remembrance of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, for thus a per-
son can cross over the ocean of nescience very 
easily, although it i s very difficult for others to 
cross  (8).The son of Iḍaviḍā, Lord Kuvera, was 
very pleased, and happily he gave Dhruva Mahārāja the benediction he wanted. Thereaf-
ter he disappeared from Dhruva’s presence, and 
Dhruva Mahārāja returned to his capital city  
(9).As long as he remained at home, Dhruva  
Mahārāja performed many great ceremonial 
sacrifices in order to please the enjoyer of all 
sacrifices, the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Prescribed ceremonial sacrifices are es-
pecially meant to please Lord Viṣṇu, who is the 
objective of all such sacrific es and who awards 
the resultant benedictions  (10).Dhruva 
Mahārāja rendered devotional service unto the 
Supreme, the reservoir of everything, with un-
relenting force. While carrying out his devo-
tional service to the Lord, he could see that eve-
rything is situ ated in Him only and that He is 
situated in all living entities. The Lord is called 
Acyuta because He never fails in His prime 
duty, to give protection to His devotees  
(11).Dhruva Mahārāja was endowed with all 
godly qualities; he was very respectful to the  
devotees of the Supreme Lord and very kind to 
the poor and innocent, and he protected reli-
gious principles. With all these qualifications, 
he was considered to be the direct father of all 
the citizens  (12).Dhruva Mahārāja ruled over 
this planet for thirty -six thousand years; he di-
minished the reactions of pious activities by en-
joyment, and by practicing austerities he dimin-
ished inauspicious reactions  (13).The self -con-
trolled great soul Dhruva Mahārāja thus passed 
many, many years favorably executing three  
kinds of worldly activities, namely religiosity, 
economic development and satisfaction of all 
material desires. Thereafter he handed over the 
charge of the royal throne to his son  (14).Śrīla 
Dhruva Mahārāja realized that this cosmic 
manifestation bewilder s living entities like a 
dream or phantasmagoria because it is a crea-
tion of the illusory, external energy of the Su-
preme Lord  (15).Thus Dhruva Mahārāja, at the 
end, left his kingdom, which extended all over 
the earth and was bounded by the great oceans. 
He considered his body, his wives, his children, 
his friends, his army, his rich treasury, his very 
comfortable palaces and his many enjoyable 
pleasure -grounds to be creations of the illusory 
energy. Thus in due course of time he retired to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

222 
 the forest in th e Himālayas known as Bada-
rikāśrama  (16).  
In Badarikāśrama Dhruva Mahārāja’s 
senses became completely purified because he 
bathed regularly in the crystal -clear, purified 
water. He fixed his sitting position and by yogic 
practice controlled the breathing pr ocess and 
the air of life; in this way his senses were com-
pletely withdrawn. Then he concentrated his 
mind on the arcā -vigraha form of the Lord, 
which is the exact replica of the Lord and, thus 
meditating upon Him, entered into complete 
trance  (17).  Becau se of his transcendental 
bliss, incessant tears flowed from his eyes, his 
heart melted, and there was shivering and 
standing of the hairs all over his body. Thus 
transformed, in a trance of devotional service, 
Dhruva Mahārāja completely forgot his bodily 
existence, and thus he immediately became lib-
erated from material bondage  (18).  
As soon as the symptoms of his liberation 
were manifest, he saw a very beautiful airplane 
coming down from the sky, as if the brilliant 
full moon were coming down, illuminating  all 
the ten directions  (19).Dhruva Mahārāja saw 
two very beautiful associates of Lord Viṣṇu in 
the plane. They had four hands and a blackish 
bodily luster, they were very youthful, and their 
eyes were just like reddish lotus flowers. They 
held clubs in their hands, and they were dre ssed 
in very attractive garments with helmets and 
were decorated with necklaces, bracelets and 
earrings  (20). Dhruva Mahārāja, seeing that 
these uncommon personalities were direct serv-
ants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
immediately stood up. But, b eing puzzled, in 
hastiness he forgot how to receive them in the 
proper way. Therefore he simply offered obei-
sances with folded hands and chanted and glo-
rified the holy names of the Lord  (21). Dhruva 
Mahārāja was always absorbed in thinking of 
the lotus fee t of Lord Kṛṣṇa. His heart was full 
with Kṛṣṇa. When the two confidential servants 
of the Supreme Lord, who were named Nanda 
and Sunanda, approached him, smiling happily, 
Dhruva stood with folded hands, bowing hum-
bly. They then addressed him as follows  (22).  
Nanda and Sunanda, the two confidential associates of Lord Viṣṇu, said:  Dear King, let 
there be all good fortune unto you. Please atten-
tively hear what we shall say. When you were 
only five years old, you underwent severe aus-
terities, and you thereby g reatly satisfied the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead  (23).We are 
representatives of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, the creator of the whole universe, 
who carries in His hand the bow named Śārṅga. 
We have been specifically deputed to take you 
to the spi ritual world  (24).To achieve 
Viṣṇuloka is very difficult, but by your auster-
ity you have conquered. Even the great ṛṣis and 
demigods cannot achieve this position. Simply 
to see the supreme abode [the Viṣṇu planet], the 
sun and moon and all the other planet s, stars, 
lunar mansions and solar systems are circum-
ambulating it. Now please come; you are wel-
come to go there  (25). Dear King Dhruva, nei-
ther your forefathers nor anyone else before 
you ever achieved such a transcendental planet. 
The planet known as Viṣ ṇuloka, where Lord 
Viṣṇu personally resides, is the highest of all. It 
is worshipable by the inhabitants of all other 
planets within the universe. Please come with 
us and live there eternally  (26).O immortal one, 
this unique airplane has been sent by the S u-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is wor-
shiped by selected prayers and who is the chief 
of all living entities. You are quite worthy to 
board such a plane  (27).  
The great sage Maitreya continued : 
Mahārāja Dhruva was very dear to the Supreme 
Personality o f Godhead. When he heard the 
sweet speeches of the Lord’s chief associates in 
the Vaikuṇṭha planet, he immediately took his 
sacred bath, dressed himself with suitable orna-
ments, and performed his daily spiritual duties. 
Thereafter he offered his respectful  obeisances 
to the great sages present there and accepted 
their blessings  (28). Before getting aboard, 
Dhruva Mahārāja worshiped the airplane, cir-
cumambulated it, and also offered obeisances 
to the associates of Viṣṇu. In the meantime he 
became as brillian t and illuminating as molten 
gold. He was thus completely prepared to board 
the transcendental plane  (29). When Dhruva 
Mahārāja was attempting to get on the tran-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

223 
 scendental plane, he saw death personified ap-
proach him. Not caring for death, however, he 
took advantage of the opportunity to put his feet 
on the head of death, and thus he got up on the 
airplane, which was as big as a house  (30).  
At that time drums and kettledrums re-
sounded from the sky, the chief Gandharvas be-
gan to sing, and other demigods sho wered 
flowers like torrents of rain upon Dhruva 
Mahārāja  (31).  
Dhruva was seated in the transcendental air-
plane, which was just about to start, when he 
remembered his poor mother, Sunīti. He 
thought to himself, “How shall I go alone to the 
Vaikuṇṭha plane t and leave behind my poor 
mother?” (32) The great associates of 
Vaikuṇṭhaloka, Nanda and Sunanda, could un-
derstand the mind of Dhruva Mahārāja, and 
thus they showed him that his mother, Sunīti, 
was going forward in another plane (33).While 
Dhruva Mahārāja was passing through space, 
he gradually saw all the planets of the solar sys-
tem, and on the path he saw all the demigods in 
their airplanes showering flowers upon him 
like rain  (34). Dhruva Mahārāja thus surpassed 
the seven planetary systems of the great s ages 
who are known as saptarṣi. Beyond that region, 
he achieved the transcendental situation of per-
manent life in the planet where Lord Viṣṇu 
lives  (35).The self -effulgent Vaikuṇṭha planets, 
by whose illumination alone all the illuminat-
ing planets within t his material world give off 
reflected light, cannot be reached by those who 
are not merciful to other living entities. Only 
persons who constantly engage in welfare ac-
tivities for other living entities can reach the 
Vaikuṇṭha planets  (36).Persons who are p eace-
ful, equipoised, cleansed and purified, and who 
know the art of pleasing all other living entities, 
keep friendship only with devotees of the Lord; 
they alone can very easily achieve the perfec-
tion of going back home, back to Godhead  (37).  
In this way , the fully Kṛṣṇa conscious 
Dhruva Mahārāja, the exalted son of Mahārāja 
Uttānapāda, attained the summit of the three 
statuses of planetary systems  (38). Saint Mait-
reya continued: My dear Vidura, descendant of Kuru, as a herd of bulls circumambulates a cen-
tral pole on their right side, all the luminaries 
within the universal sky unceasingly circum-
ambulate the abode of Dhruva Mahārāja with 
great force and speed  (39).After observing the 
glories of Dhruva Mahārāja, the great sage 
Nārada, playing his vīṇā, went  to the sacrificial 
arena of the Pracetās and very happily chanted 
the following three verses  (40).  
The great sage Nārada said:  Simply by the 
influence of his spiritual advancement and 
powerful austerity, Dhruva Mahārāja, the son 
of Sunīti, who was devote d to her husband , ac-
quired an exalted position not possible to attain 
even for the so -called Vedāntists or strict fol-
lowers of the Vedic principles, not to speak of 
ordinary human beings  (41).The great sage 
Nārada continued: Just see how Dhruva 
Mahārāja, a ggrieved at the harsh words of his 
stepmother, went to the forest at the age of only 
five years and under my direction underwent 
austerity. Although the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is unconquerable, Dhruva Mahārāja 
defeated Him with the specific qualifi cations 
possessed by the Lord’s devotees  (42).  Dhruva 
Mahārāja attained an exalted position at the age 
of only five or six years, after undergoing aus-
terity for six months. Alas, a great kṣatriya can-
not achieve such a position even after undergo-
ing auster ities for many, many years  (43).  
The great sage Maitreya continued : My 
dear Vidura, whatever you have asked from me 
about the great reputation and character of 
Dhruva Mahārāja I have explained to you in all 
detail. Great saintly persons and devotees very 
much like to hear about Dhruva Mahārāja  
(44).By hearing the narration of Dhruva 
Mahārāja one can fulfill desires for wealth, rep-
utation and increased duration of life. It is so 
auspicious that one can even go to a heavenly 
planet or attain Dhruvaloka, whic h was 
achieved by Dhruva Mahārāja, just by hearing 
about him. The demigods also become pleased 
because this narration is so glorious, and it is so 
powerful that it can counteract all the results of 
one’s sinful actions  (45).Anyone who hears the 
narration o f Dhruva Mahārāja, and who repeat-
edly tries with faith and devotion to understand 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

224 
 his pure character, attains the pure devotional 
platform and executes pure devotional service. 
By such activities one can diminish the three-
fold miserable conditions of mater ial life  
(46).Anyone who hears this narration of 
Dhruva Mahārāja acquires exalted qualities 
like him. For anyone who desires greatness, 
prowess or influence, here is the process by 
which to acquire them, and for thoughtful men 
who want adoration, here is t he proper means  
(47).The great sage Maitreya recommended: 
One should chant of the character and activities 
of Dhruva Mahārāja both in the morning and in 
the evening, with great attention and care, in a 
society of brāhmaṇas or other twice -born per-
sons (48).Persons who have completely taken 
shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord should recite 
this narration of Dhruva Mahārāja without tak-
ing remuneration. Specifically, recitation is 
recommended on the full -moon or dark -moon 
day, on the day after Ekādaśī, on the  appear-
ance of the Śravaṇa star, at the end of a partic-
ular tithi, or the occasion of Vyatīpāta, at the 
end of the month, or on Sunday. Such recitation 
should of course be performed before a favora-
ble audience. When recitation is performed this 
way, withou t professional motive, the reciter 
and audience become perfect  (49-50).The nar-
ration of Dhruva Mahārāja is sublime 
knowledge for the attainment of immortality. 
Persons unaware of the Absolute Truth can be 
led to the path of truth. Those who out of tran-
scendental kindness take on the responsibility 
of becoming master -protectors of the poor liv-
ing entities automatically gain the interest and 
blessings of the demigods  (51).The transcen-
dental activities of Dhruva Mahārāja are well 
known all over the world, and they are very 
pure. In childhood Dhruva Mahārāja rejected 
all kinds of toys and playthings, left the protec-
tion of his mother and seriously took shelter of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu. 
My dear Vidura, I therefore conclude this nar-
ration, for I have described to you all its details  
(52).  
SB 4.13: Description of the Descendants 
of Dhruva Mahārāja  
Sūta Gosvāmī, continuing to speak  to all the ṛṣis, headed by Śaunaka, said: After hearing 
Maitreya Ṛṣi describe Dhruva Mahārāja’s as-
cent to Lord Viṣṇu ’s abode, Vidura became 
very much enlightened in devotional emotion, 
and he inquired from Maitreya as follows  (1).  
Vidura inquired  from Maitreya: O greatly 
advanced devotee, who were the Pracetās? To 
which family did they belong? Whose sons 
were they, and  where did they perform the great 
sacrifices?  (2) Vidura continued: I know that 
the great sage Nārada is the greatest of all dev-
otees. He has compiled the pāñcarātrika proce-
dure of devotional service and has directly met 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead  (3).While 
all the Pracetās were executing religious rituals 
and sacrificial ceremonies and thus worshiping 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead for His 
satisfaction, the great sage Nārada described 
the transcendental qualities of Dhruva 
Mahārāja  (4).My dear brāhmaṇa, how did 
Nārada Muni glorify the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, and what pastimes were described 
in that meeting? I am very eager to hear of 
them. Kindly explain fully about that glorifica-
tion of the Lord  (5).  
The great sage Maitreya replied : My  dear 
Vidura, when Mahārāja Dhruva departed for 
the forest, his son, Utkala, did not desire to ac-
cept the opulent throne of his father, which was 
meant for the ruler of all the lands of this planet  
(6).From his very birth, Utkala was fully satis-
fied and un attached to the world. He was equi-
poised, for he could see everything resting in 
the Supersoul and the Supersoul present in eve-
ryone’s heart  (7).By expansion of his 
knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, he had al-
ready attained liberation from the bondage of 
the body. This liberation is known as nirvāṇa. 
He was situated in transcendental bliss, and he 
continued always in that blissful existence, 
which expanded more and more. This was pos-
sible for him by continual practice of bhakti -
yoga, which is compared to fir e because it 
burns away all dirty, material things. He was 
always situated in his constitutional position of 
self-realization, and he could not see anything 
else but the Supreme Lord and himself engaged 
in discharging devotional service  (8-9).Utkala 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

225 
 appear ed to the less intelligent persons on the 
road to be foolish, blind, dumb, deaf and mad, 
although actually he was not so. He remained 
like fire covered with ashes, without blazing 
flames  (10).For this reason the ministers and all 
the elderly members of the  family thought Ut-
kala to be without intelligence and, in fact, 
mad. Thus his younger brother, named Vatsara, 
the son of Bhrami, was elevated to the royal 
throne, and he became king of the world  (11).  
King Vatsara had a very dear wife whose 
name was Svarv īthi, and she gave birth to six 
sons, named Puṣpārṇa, Tigmaketu, Iṣa, Ūrja, 
Vasu and Jaya  (12).Puṣpārṇa had two wives, 
named Prabhā and Doṣā. Prabhā had three sons, 
named Prātar, Madhyandinam and Sāyam  
(13).Doṣā had three sons  Pradoṣa, Niśitha and 
Vyuṣṭa.  Vyuṣṭa’s wife was named Puṣkariṇī, 
and she gave birth to a very powerful son 
named Sarvatejā  (14).Sarvatejā’s wife, Ākūti, 
gave birth to a son named Cākṣuṣa, who be-
came the sixth Manu at the end of the Manu 
millennium. Naḍvalā, the wife of Cākṣuṣa 
Manu, g ave birth to the following faultless 
sons: Puru, Kutsa, Trita, Dyumna, Satyavān, 
Ṛta, Vrata, Agniṣṭoma, Atīrātra, Pradyumna, 
Śibi and Ulmuka  (15-16).Of the twelve sons, 
Ulmuka begot six sons in his wife Puṣkariṇī. 
They were all very good sons, and their na mes 
were Aṅga, Sumanā, Khyāti, Kratu, Aṅgirā and 
Gaya  (17).The wife of Aṅga, Sunīthā, gave 
birth to a son named Vena, who was very 
crooked. The saintly King Aṅga was very dis-
appointed with Vena’s bad character, and he 
left home and kingdom and went out to the for-
est (18).My dear Vidura, when great sages 
curse, their words are as invincible as a thun-
derbolt. Thus when they cursed King Vena out 
of anger, he died. After his death, since there 
was no king, all the rogues and thieves flour-
ished, the kingdom beca me unregulated, and all 
the citizens suffered greatly. On seeing this, the 
great sages took the right hand of Vena as a 
churning rod, and as a result of their churning, 
Lord Viṣṇu in His partial representation made 
His advent as King Pṛthu, the original em peror 
of the world  (19-20).  
Vidura inquired  from the sage Maitreya: My dear brāhmaṇa, King Aṅga was very gen-
tle. He had high character and was a saintly per-
sonality and lover of brahminical culture. How 
is it that such a great soul got a bad son like 
Vena , because of whom he became indifferent 
to his kingdom and left it? (21) Vidura also in-
quired: How is it that the great sages, who were 
completely conversant with religious princi-
ples, desired to curse King Vena, who himself 
carried the rod of punishment, and thus 
awarded him the greatest punishment [brahma -
śāpa]? (22)It is the duty of all citizens in a state 
never to insult the king, even though he some-
times appears to have done something very sin-
ful. Because of his prowess, the king is always 
more influen tial than all other ruling chiefs  
(23).Vidura requested Maitreya: My dear 
brāhmaṇa, you are well conversant with all sub-
jects, both past and future. Therefore I wish to 
hear from you all the activities of King Vena. I 
am your faithful devotee, so please ex plain this  
(24).  
Śrī Maitreya replied:  My dear Vidura, 
once the great King Aṅga arranged to perform 
the great sacrifice known as aśvamedha. All the 
expert brāhmaṇas present knew how to invite 
the demigods, but in spite of their efforts, no 
demigods partic ipated or appeared in that sac-
rifice  (25).The priests engaged in the sacrifice 
then informed King Aṅga: O King, we are 
properly offering the clarified butter in the sac-
rifice, but despite all our efforts the demigods 
do not accept it  (26). O King, we know that the 
paraphernalia to perform the sacrifice is well 
collected by you with great faith and care and 
is not polluted. Our chanting of the Vedic 
hymns is also not deficient in any way, for all 
the brāhmaṇas and priests present here are ex-
pert and are exec uting the performances 
properly  (27).Dear King, we do not find any 
reason that the demigods should feel insulted or 
neglected in any way, but still the demigods 
who are witnesses for the sacrifice do not ac-
cept their shares. We do not know why this is 
so (28).  
Maitreya explained  that King Aṅga, after 
hearing the statements of the priests, was 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

226 
 greatly aggrieved. At that time he took permis-
sion from the priests to break his silence and 
inquired from all the priests who were present 
in the sacrificial arena  (29).King Aṅga ad-
dressed the priestly order: My dear priests, 
kindly tell me what offense I have committed. 
Although invited, the demigods are neither tak-
ing part in the sacrifice nor accepting their 
shares  (30).  
The head priests said : O King, in this life 
we do not find any sinf ul activity, even within 
your mind, so you are not in the least offensive. 
But we can see that in your previous life you 
performed sinful activities due to which, in 
spite of your having all qualifications, you have 
no son  (31).O King, we wish all good for tune 
for you. You have no son, but if you pray at 
once to the Supreme Lord and ask for a son, and 
if you execute the sacrifice for that purpose, the 
enjoyer of the sacrifice, the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, will fulfill your desire  
(32).When Hari, the supreme enjoyer of all sac-
rifices, is invited to fulfill your desire for a son, 
all the demigods will come with Him and take 
their shares in the sacrifice  (33).The performer 
of the sacrifices [under karma -kāṇḍa activities] 
achieves the fulfillment of the d esire for which 
he worships the Lord  (34).  
Thus for the sake of a son for King Aṅga, 
they decided to offer oblations to Lord Viṣṇu, 
who is situated in the hearts of all living entities  
(35).As soon as the oblation was offered in the 
fire, a person appeare d from the fire altar wear-
ing a golden garland and a white dress. He was 
carrying a golden pot filled with rice boiled in 
milk (36).The King was very liberal, and after 
taking permission from the priests, he took the 
preparation in his joined palms, and af ter smell-
ing it he offered a portion to his wife  (37).Alt-
hough the Queen had no son, after eating that 
food, which had the power to produce a male 
child, she became pregnant by her husband , and 
in due course of time she gave birth to a son  
(38).That boy wa s born partially in the dynasty 
of irreligion. His grandfather was death person-
ified, and the boy grew up as his follower; he 
became a greatly irreligious person  (39).  
After fixing his bow and arrow, the cruel boy used to go to the forest and unnecessaril y 
kill innocent deer, and as soon as he came all 
the people would cry, “Here comes cruel Vena! 
Here comes cruel Vena!”  (40)The boy was so 
cruel that while playing with young boys of his 
age he would kill them very mercilessly, as if 
they were animals meant  for slaughter  (41).Af-
ter seeing the cruel and merciless behavior of 
his son, Vena, King Aṅga punished him in dif-
ferent ways to reform him, but was unable to 
bring him to the path of gentleness. He thus be-
came greatly aggrieved  (42).The King thought 
to him self: Persons who have no son are cer-
tainly fortunate. They must have worshiped the 
Lord in their previous lives so that they would 
not have to suffer the unbearable unhappiness 
caused by a bad son  (43).A sinful son causes a 
person’s reputation to vanish. His irreligious 
activities at home cause irreligion and quarrel 
among everyone, and this creates only endless 
anxiety  (44). Who, if he is considerate and in-
telligent, would desire such a worthless son? 
Such a son is nothing but a bond of illusion for 
the living entity, and he makes one’s home mis-
erable  (45).Then the King thought: A bad son 
is better than a good son because a good son 
creates an attachment for home, whereas a bad 
son does not. A bad son creates a hellish home 
from which an intelligent man na turally be-
comes very easily detached  (46).  
Thinking like that, King Aṅga could not 
sleep at night. He became completely indiffer-
ent to household life. Once, therefore, in the 
dead of night, he got up from bed and left 
Vena’s mother [his wife], who was sleeping 
deeply. He gave up all attraction for his greatly 
opulent kingdom, and, unseen by anyone, he 
very silently gave up his home and opulence 
and proceeded towards the forest  (47).When it 
was understood that the King had indifferently 
left home, all the citizens, priests, ministers, 
friends, and pe ople in general were greatly ag-
grieved. They began to search for him all over 
the world, just as a less experienced mystic 
searches out the Supersoul within himself  
(48).When the citizens could not find any trace 
of the King after searching for him everywh ere, 
they were very disappointed, and they returned 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

227 
 to the city, where all the great sages of the coun-
try assembled because of the King’s absence. 
With tears in their eyes the citizens offered re-
spectful obeisances and informed the sages in 
full detail tha t they were unable to find the King 
anywhere  (49).  
SB 4.14: The Story of King Vena  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  O 
great hero Vidura, the great sages, hea ded by 
Bhṛgu, were always thinking of the welfare of 
the people in general. When they saw that in the 
absence of King Aṅga there was no one to pro-
tect the interests of the people, they understood 
that without a ruler the people would become 
independent and  nonregulated  (1).The great 
sages then called for the Queen Mother, 
Sunīthā, and with her permission they installed 
Vena on the throne as master of the world. All 
the ministers, however, disagreed with this  (2). 
It was already known that Vena was very se-
vere and cruel; therefore, as soon as all the 
thieves and rogues in the state heard of his as-
cendance to the royal throne, they became very 
much afraid of him. Indeed, they hid them-
selves here and there as rats hide themselves 
from snakes  (3).When the King a scended to the 
throne, he became all -powerful with eight 
kinds of opulences. Consequently he became 
too proud. By virtue of his false prestige, he 
considered himself to be greater than anyone. 
Thus he began to insult great personalities  (4).  
When he becam e overly blind due to his opu-
lences, King Vena mounted a chariot and, like 
an uncontrolled elephant, began to travel 
through the kingdom, causing the sky and earth 
to tremble wherever he went  (5).All the twice -
born [brāhmaṇas] were forbidden hencefor-
ward t o perform any sacrifice, and they were 
also forbidden to give charity or offer clarified 
butter. Thus King Vena sounded kettledrums 
throughout the countryside. In other words, he 
stopped all kinds of religious rituals  (6).  
Therefore all the great sages as sembled to-
gether and, after observing cruel Vena’s atroc-
ities, concluded that a great danger and catas-
trophe was approaching the people of the 
world. Thus out of compassion they began to 
talk amongst themselves, for they themselves were the performers of t he sacrifices  (7).When 
the great sages consulted one another, they saw 
that the people were in a dangerous position 
from both directions. When a fire blazes on 
both ends of a log, the ants in the middle are in 
a very dangerous situation. Similarly, at that  
time the people in general were in a dangerous 
position due to an irresponsible king on one 
side and thieves and rogues on the other  (8). 
Thinking to save the state from irregularity, the 
sages began to consider that it was due to a po-
litical crisis that they made Vena king although 
he was not qualified. But alas, now the people 
were being disturbed by the king himself. Un-
der such circumstances, how could the people 
be happy?  (9)The sages began to think within 
themselves: Because he was born from the 
womb of Sunīthā, King Vena is by nature very 
mischievous. Supporting this mischievous king 
is exactly like maintaining a snake with milk. 
Now he has become a source of all difficulties  
(10).We appointed this Vena king of the state 
in order to give protection to  the citizens, but 
now he has become the enemy of the citizens. 
Despite all these discrepancies, we should at 
once try to pacify him. By doing so, we may not 
be touched by the sinful results caused by him  
(11).The saintly sages continued thinking: Of 
cours e, we were completely aware of his mis-
chievous nature, yet we nevertheless enthroned 
Vena. If we cannot persuade King Vena to ac-
cept our advice, he will be condemned by the 
public, and we will join them. Thus by our 
prowess we shall burn him to ashes  (12).The 
great sages, having thus decided, approached 
King Vena. Concealing their real anger, they 
pacified him with sweet words and then spoke 
as follows  (13).  
The great sages said:  Dear King, we have 
come to give you good advice. Kindly hear us 
with great at tention. By doing so, your duration 
of life and your opulence, strength and reputa-
tion will increase  (14).Those who live accord-
ing to religious principles and who follow them 
by words, mind, body and intelligence are ele-
vated to the heavenly kingdom, which  is devoid 
of all miseries. Being thus rid of the material 
influence, they achieve unlimited happiness in 
life (15). The sages continued: O great hero, for 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

228 
 this reason you should not be the cause of spoil-
ing the spiritual life of the general populace. If 
their spiritual life is spoiled because of your ac-
tivities, you will certainly fall down from your 
opulent and royal position  (16).The saintly per-
sons continued: When the king protects the cit-
izens from the disturbances of mischievous 
ministers as well as f rom thieves and rogues, he 
can, by virtue of such pious activities, accept 
taxes given by his subjects. Thus a pious king 
can certainly enjoy himself in this world as well 
as in the life after death  (17). The king is sup-
posed to be pious in whose state and  cities the 
general populace strictly observes the system of 
eight social orders of varṇa and āśrama, and 
where all citizens engage in worshiping the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead by their particu-
lar occupations  (18).O noble one, if the king 
sees that the  Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the original cause of the cosmic manifestation 
and the Supersoul within everyone, is wor-
shiped, the Lord will be satisfied  (19).The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead is worshiped by 
the great demigods who are controllers of un i-
versal affairs. When He is satisfied, nothing is 
impossible to achieve. For this reason all the 
demigods, presiding deities of different planets, 
as well as the inhabitants of their planets, take 
great pleasure in offering all kinds of parapher-
nalia for H is worship  (20). Dear King, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, along with the 
predominating deities, is the enjoyer of the re-
sults of all sacrifices in all planets. The Su-
preme Lord is the sum total of the three Vedas, 
the owner of everything, and the ult imate goal 
of all austerity. Therefore your countrymen 
should engage in performing various sacrifices 
for your elevation. Indeed, you should always 
direct them towards the offering of sacrifices  
(21).When all the b rāhmaṇas engage in per-
forming sacrifices in your kingdom, all the 
demigods, who are plenary expansions of the 
Lord, will be very much satisfied by their activ-
ities and will give you your desired result. 
Therefore, O hero, do not stop the sacrificial 
perfor mances. If you stop them, you will disre-
spect the demigods  (22).  
King Vena replied : You are not at all expe-
rienced. It is very much regrettable that you are maintaining something which is not religious 
and are accepting it as religious. Indeed, I think 
you are giving up your real husband , who main-
tains you, and are searching after some para-
mour to worship  (23).Those who, out of gross 
ignorance, do not worship the king, who is ac-
tually the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ex-
perience happiness neither in this  world nor in 
the world after death  (24).You are so much de-
voted to the demigods, but who are they? In-
deed, your affection for these demigods is ex-
actly like the affection of an unchaste woman 
who neglects her married life and gives all at-
tention to her pa ramour  (25).Lord Viṣṇu; Lord 
Brahmā; Lord Śiva; Lord Indra; Vāyu, the mas-
ter of air; Yama, the superintendent of death; 
the sun -god; the director of rainfall; Kuvera, the 
treasurer; the moon -god; the predominating de-
ity of the earth; Agni, the fire -god; Varuṇa, the 
lord of waters; and all others who are great and 
competent to bestow benedictions or to curse  
all abide in the body of the king. For this reason 
the king is known as the reservoir of all demi-
gods, who are simply parts and parcels of the 
king’s body  (26-27).King Vena continued: For 
this reason, O brāhmaṇas, you should abandon 
your envy of me, and by your ritualistic activi-
ties you should worship me and offer me all 
paraphernalia. If you are intelligent, you should 
know that there is no personality superior t o me 
who can accept the first oblations of all sacri-
fices  (28).  
The great sage Maitreya continued : Thus 
the King, who became unintelligent due to his 
sinful life and deviation from the right path, be-
came actually bereft of all good fortune. He 
could not a ccept the requests of the great sages, 
which the sages put before him with great re-
spect, and therefore he was condemned  
(29).My dear Vidura, all good fortune unto you. 
The foolish King, who thought himself very 
learned, thus insulted the great sages, and the 
sages, being brokenhearted by the King’s 
words, became very angry at him  (30)All the 
great saintly sages immediately cried: Kill him! 
Kill him! He is the most dreadful, sinful person. 
If he lives, he will certainly turn the whole 
world into ashes in no  time (31).The saintly 
sages continued: This impious, impudent man 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

229 
 does not deserve to sit on the throne at all. He 
is so shameless that he even dared insult the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu  
(32).But for King Vena, who is simply inauspi-
cious, who would blaspheme the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, by whose mercy one is 
awarded all kinds of fortune and opulence? (33) 
The great sages, thus manifesting their cov-
ert anger, immediately decided to kill the King. 
King Vena was already as good as dead due to 
his blasphemy against the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. Thus w ithout using any weapons, 
the sages killed King Vena simply by high -
sounding words  (34).After all the sages re-
turned to their respective hermitages, the 
mother of King Vena, Sunīthā, became very 
much aggrieved because of her son’s death. She 
decided to preserve the dead body of her son by 
the application of certain ingredients and by 
chantin g mantras [mantra -yogena]  (35).  
Once upon a time, the same saintly persons, 
after taking their bath in the river Sarasvatī, be-
gan to perform their daily duties by offering ob-
lations into the sacrificial fires. After this, sit-
ting on the bank of the river,  they began to talk 
about the transcendental person and His pas-
times  (36). In those days there were various dis-
turbances in the country that were creating a 
panic in society. Therefore all the sages began 
to talk amongst themselves: Since the King is 
dead and there is no protector in the world, mis-
fortune may befall the people in general on ac-
count of rogues and thieves  (37). When the 
great sages were carrying on their discussion in 
this way, they saw a dust storm arising from all 
directions. This storm was  caused by the run-
ning of thieves and rogues, who were engaged 
in plundering the citizens  (38). Upon seeing the 
dust storm, the saintly persons could under-
stand that there were a great deal of irregulari-
ties due to the death of King Vena. Without 
governmen t, the state was devoid of law and or-
der, and consequently there was a great upris-
ing of murderous thieves and rogues, who were 
plundering the riches of the people in general. 
Although the great sages could subdue the dis-
turbance by their powers  just as t hey could kill 
the King  they considered it improper on their part to do so. Thus they did not attempt to stop 
the disturbance  (39-40).The great sages began 
to think that although a brāhmaṇa is peaceful 
and impartial because he is equal to everyone, 
it is still not his duty to neglect poor humans. 
By such neglect, a brāhmaṇa’s spiritual power 
diminishes, just as water kept in a cracked pot 
leaks out  (41).The sages decided that the de-
scendants of the family of the saintly King 
Aṅga should not be stopped, for  in this family 
the semen was very powerful and the children 
were prone to become devotees of the Lord  
(42).After making a decision, the saintly per-
sons and sages churned the thighs of the dead 
body of King Vena with great force and accord-
ing to a specific  method. As a result of this 
churning, a dwarflike person was born from 
King Vena’s body  (43).  This person born from 
King Vena’s thighs was named Bāhuka, and his 
complexion was as black as a crow’s. All the 
limbs of his body were very short, his arms and 
legs were short, and his jaws were large. His 
nose was flat, his eyes were reddish, and his 
hair copper -colored  (44).He was very submis-
sive and meek, and immediately after his birth 
he bowed down and inquired, “Sirs, what shall 
I do?” The great sages replied, “Please sit down 
[niṣīda].” Thus Niṣāda, the father of the 
Naiṣāda race, was born  (45).After his 
[Niṣāda’s] birth, he immediately took charge of 
all the resultant actions of King Vena’s sinful 
activities. As such, this Naiṣāda class are al-
ways engaged in sinful activities like stealing, 
plundering and hunting. Consequently they are 
only allowe d to live in the hills and forests  (46).  
SB 4.15: King Pṛthu’s Appearance and 
Coronation  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  My 
dear Vidura, thus the brāhmaṇas and the great 
sages again churned the two arms of King 
Vena’s dead body. As a result a male and fe-
male couple came out of his arms  (1).The great 
sages were highly learned in Vedic knowledge. 
When they saw the male and female born of the 
arms of Vena’s body, they were very pleased, 
for they could understand that the couple was 
an expansion of a plenar y portion of Viṣṇu, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead  (2).  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

230 
 The great sages said:  The male is a plenary 
expansion of the power of Lord Viṣṇu, who 
maintains the entire universe, and the female is 
a plenary expansion of the goddess of fortune, 
who is never separated from the Lord  (3).Of the 
two, the male will be able to expand his reputa-
tion throughout the world. His name will be 
Pṛthu. Indeed, he will be the first among kings  
(4).The female has such beautiful teeth and 
beautiful qualities that she will actu ally beau-
tify the ornaments she wears. Her name will be 
Arci. In the future she will accept King Pṛthu as 
her husband  (5).In the form of King Pṛthu, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead has appeared 
through a part of His potency to protect the peo-
ple of the world. The goddess of fortune is the 
constant companion of the Lord, and therefore 
she has incarnated partially as Arci to become 
King Pṛthu’s queen  (6).  
The great sage Maitreya continued : My 
dear Vidurajī, at that time all the brāhmaṇas 
highly praised an d glorified King Pṛthu, and the 
best singers of Gandharvaloka chanted his glo-
ries. The inhabitants of Siddhaloka showered 
flowers, and the beautiful women in the heav-
enly planets danced in ecstasy  (7).Conchshells, 
bugles, drums and kettledrums vibrated in outer 
space. Great sages, forefathers and personali-
ties from the heavenly planets all came to earth 
from various planetary systems  (8).Lord 
Brahmā, the master of the entire universe, ar-
rived there accompanied by all the demigods 
and their chiefs. Seeing th e lines of Lord 
Viṣṇu’s palm on King Pṛthu’s right hand and 
impressions of lotus flowers on the soles of his 
feet, Lord Brahmā could understand that King 
Pṛthu was a partial representation of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. One whose 
palm bears the sig n of a disc, as well as other 
such lines, should be considered a partial rep-
resentation or incarnation of the Supreme Lord  
(9-10).  
The learned brāhmaṇas, who were very at-
tached to the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies, then 
arranged for the King’s coronation. People 
from all directions collected all the different 
paraphernalia for the ceremony. Thus every-
thing was complete  (11).All the rivers, seas, hills, mountains, serpents, cows, birds, animals, 
heavenly planets, the earthly planet and all 
other living entit ies collected various presenta-
tions, according to their ability, to offer the 
King  (12).Thus the great King Pṛthu, exquis-
itely dressed with garments and ornaments, was 
coronated and placed on the throne. The King 
and his wife, Arci, who was also exquisitely or-
namented, appeared exactly like fire  (13).  
The great sage continued: My dear Vidur a, 
Kuvera presented the great King Pṛthu with a 
golden throne. The demigod Varuṇa presented 
him with an umbrella that constantly sprayed 
fine particles of water and was as brilliant as the 
moon  (14).The demigod of air, Vāyu, presented 
King Pṛthu with two w hisks [cāmaras] of hair; 
the King of religion, Dharma, presented him 
with a flower garland which would expand his 
fame; the King of heaven, Indra, presented him 
with a valuable helmet; and the superintendent 
of death, Yamarāja, presented him with a scep-
ter with which to rule the world  (15).Lord 
Brahmā presented King Pṛthu with a protective 
garment made of spiritual knowledge. Bhāratī 
[Sarasvatī], the wife of Brahmā, gave him a 
transcendental necklace. Lord Viṣṇu presented 
him with a Sudarśana disc, and Lord  Viṣṇu’s 
wife, the goddess of fortune, gave him imper-
ishable opulences  (16). Lord Śiva presented 
him with a sword within a sheath marked with 
ten moons, and his wife, the goddess Durgā, 
presented him with a shield marked with one 
hundred moons. The moon -demigod presented 
him with horses made of nectar, and the demi-
god Viśvakarmā presented him with a very 
beautiful chariot  (17).The demigod of fire, 
Agni, presented him with a bow made of the 
horns of goats and cows. The sun -god pre-
sented him with arrows as br illiant as sunshine. 
The predominating deity of Bhūrloka presented 
him with slippers full of mystic power. The 
demigods from outer space brought him 
presentations of flowers again and again  
(18).The demigods who always travel in outer 
space gave King Pṛthu  the arts to perform dra-
mas, sing songs, play musical instruments and 
disappear at his will. The great sages also of-
fered him infallible blessings. The ocean of-
fered him a conchshell produced from the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

231 
 ocean  (19). The seas, mountains and rivers 
gave him roo m to drive his chariot without im-
pediments, and a sūta, a māgadha and a vandī 
offered prayers and praises. They all presented 
themselves before him to perform their respec-
tive duties  (20).Thus when the greatly powerful 
King Pṛthu, the son of Vena, saw the profes-
sionals before him, to congratulate them he 
smiled, and with the gravity of the vibrating 
sounds of clouds he spoke as follows  (21).  
King Pṛthu said:  O gentle sūta, māgadha 
and other devotee offering prayers, the qualities 
of which you have spoken a re not distinct in 
me. Why then should you praise me for all 
these qualities when I do not shelter these fea-
tures? I do not wish for these words meant for 
me to go in vain, but it is better that they be of-
fered to someone else  (22).O gentle reciters, of-
fer such prayers in due course of time, when the 
qualities of which you have spoken actually 
manifest themselves in me. The gentle who of-
fer prayers to the Supreme Personality of God-
head do not attribute such qualities to a human 
being, who does not actually have them  
(23).How could an intelligent man competent 
enough to possess such exalted qualities allow 
his followers to praise him if he did not actually 
have them? Praising a man by saying that if he 
were educated he might have become a great 
scholar or gre at personality is nothing but a pro-
cess of cheating. A foolish person who agrees 
to accept such praise does not know that such 
words simply insult him  (24).As a person with 
a sense of honor and magnanimity does not like 
to hear about his abominable actions , a person 
who is very famous and powerful does not like 
to hear himself praised  (25).King Pṛthu contin-
ued: My dear devotees, headed by the sūta, just 
now I am not very famous for my personal ac-
tivities because I have not done anything 
praiseworthy you cou ld glorify. Therefore how 
could I engage you in praising my activities ex-
actly like children? (26) 

SB 4.16: Praise of King Pṛthu by the 
Professional Reciters  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  
While King Pṛthu thus spoke, the humility of his nectarean spee ches pleased the reciters very 
much. Then again they continued to praise the 
King highly with exalted prayers, as they had 
been instructed by the great sages  (1).The recit-
ers continued: Dear King, you are a direct in-
carnation of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Lord Viṣṇu, and by His causeless mercy 
you have descended to this earth. Therefore it 
is not possible for us to actually glorify your 
exalted activities. Although you have appeared 
through the body of King Vena, even great or-
ators and speakers lik e Lord Brahmā and other 
demigods cannot exactly describe the glorious 
activities of Your Lordship  (2).Although we 
are unable to glorify you adequately, we none-
theless have a transcendental taste for glorify-
ing your activities. We shall try to glorify you 
according to the instructions received from au-
thoritative sages and scholars. Whatever we 
speak, however, is always inadequate and very 
insignificant. Dear King, because you are a di-
rect incarnation of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, all your activities  are liberal and ever 
laudable  (3).  
This King, Mahārāja Pṛthu, is the best 
amongst those who are following religious 
principles. As such, he will engage everyone in 
the pursuit of religious principles and give 
those principles all protection. He will also be 
a great chastiser to the irreligi ous and atheistic  
(4).This King alone, in his own body, will be 
able in due course of time to maintain all living 
entities and keep them in a pleasant condition 
by manifesting himself as different demigods 
to perform various departmental activities. 
Thus h e will maintain the upper planetary sys-
tem by inducing the populace to perform Vedic 
sacrifices. In due course of time he will also 
maintain this earthly planet by discharging 
proper rainfall  (5).This King Pṛthu will be as 
powerful as the sun -god, and just as the sun -
god equally distributes his sunshine to every-
one, King Pṛthu will distribute his mercy 
equally. Similarly, just as the sun -god evapo-
rates water for eight months and, during the 
rainy season, returns it profusely, this King will 
also exact taxes from the citizens and return 
these monies in times of need  (6).This King 
Pṛthu will be very, very kind to all citizens. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

232 
 Even though a poor person may trample over 
the King’s head by violating th e rules and reg-
ulations, the King, out of his causeless mercy, 
will be forgetful and forgiving. As a protector 
of the world, he will be as tolerant as the earth 
itself  (7).When there is no rainfall and the citi-
zens are in great danger due to the scarcity o f 
water, this royal Personality of Godhead will be 
able to supply rains exactly like the heavenly 
King Indra. Thus he will very easily be able to 
protect the citizens from drought  (8). This 
King, Pṛthu Mahārāja, by virtue of his affec-
tionate glances and beautiful moonlike face, 
which is always smiling with great affection for 
the citizens, will enhance everyone’s peaceful 
life (9).The reciters continued: No one will be 
able to understand the policies the King will 
follow. His activities will also be very confi-
dential, and it will not be possible for anyone to 
know how he will make every activity success-
ful. His treasury will always remain unknown 
to everyone. He will be the reservoir of un lim-
ited glories and good quali ties, and his position 
will be maintained and covered just as Varuṇa, 
the deity of the seas, is covered all around by 
water  (10).  
King Pṛthu was born of the dead body of 
King Vena as fire is produced from araṇi wood. 
Thus King Pṛthu will always remain jus t like 
fire, and his enemies will not be able to ap-
proach him. Indeed, he will be unbearable to his 
enemies, for although staying very near him, 
they will never be able to approach him but will 
have to remain as if far away. No one will be 
able to overcome  the strength of King Pṛthu  
(11).King Pṛthu will be able to see all the inter-
nal and external activities of every one of his 
citizens. Still, no one will be able to know his 
system of espionage, and he himself will re-
main neutral regarding all matters of g lorifica-
tion or vilification paid to him. He will be ex-
actly like air, the life force within the body, 
which is exhibited internally and externally but 
is always neutral to all affairs  (12).Since this 
King will always remain on the path of piety, 
he will b e neutral to both his son and the son of 
his enemy. If the son of his enemy is not pun-
ishable, he will not punish him, but if his own 
son is punishable, he will immediately punish him (13).Just as the sun -god expands his shin-
ing rays up to the Arctic regio n without imped-
ance, the influence of King Pṛthu will cover all 
tracts of land up to the Arctic region and will 
remain undisturbed as long as he lives  (14).This 
King will please everyone by his practical ac-
tivities, and all of his citizens will remain very  
satisfied. Because of this the citizens will take 
great satisfaction in accepting him as their rul-
ing king  (15).The King will be firmly deter-
mined and always situated in truth. He will be 
a lover of the brahminical culture and will ren-
der all service to o ld men and give shelter to all 
surrendered souls. Giving respect to all, he will 
always be merciful to the poor and innocent  
(16).The King will respect all women as if they 
were his own mother, and he will treat his own 
wife as the other half of his body. He will be 
just like an affectionate father to his citizens, 
and he will treat himself as the most obedient 
servant of the devotees, who always preach the 
glories of the Lord  (17).The King will consider 
all embodied living entities as dear as his own 
self, and he will always be increasing the pleas-
ures of his friends. He will intimately associate 
with liberated persons, and he will be a chastis-
ing hand to all impious persons  (18).  
This King is the master of the three worlds, 
and he is directly empowered by  the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. He is without change, 
and he is an incarnation of the Supreme known 
as a śaktyāveśa -avatāra. Being a liberated soul 
and completely learned, he sees all material va-
rieties as meaningless because their basic prin-
ciple is nescience  (19).This King, being 
uniquely powerful and heroic, will have no 
competitor. He will travel around the globe on 
his victorious chariot, holding his invincible 
bow in his hand and appearing exactly like the 
sun, which rotates in its own orbit from  the 
south  (20).When the King travels all over the 
world, other kings, as well as the demigods, 
will offer him all kinds of presentations. Their 
queens will also consider him the original king, 
who carries in His hands the emblems of club 
and disc, and wil l sing of his fame, for he will 
be as reputable as the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead  (21).This King, this protector of the 
citizens, is an extraordinary king and is equal to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

233 
 the Prajāpati demigods. For the living facility 
of all citizens, he will milk the  earth, which is 
like a cow. Not only that, but he will level the 
surface of the earth with the pointed ends of his 
bow, breaking all the hills exactly as King In-
dra, the heavenly King, breaks mountains with 
his powerful thunderbolt  (22). When the lion 
travels in the forest with its tail turned upward, 
all menial animals hide themselves. Similarly, 
when King Pṛthu will travel over his kingdom 
and vibrate the string of his bow, which is made 
of the horns of goats and bulls and is irresistible 
in battle, all demoniac rogues and thieves will 
hide themselves in all directions  (23).At the 
source of the river Sarasvatī, this King will per-
form one hundred sacrifices known as aśva-
medha. In the course of the last sacrifice, the 
heavenly King Indra will steal the sacr ificial 
horse  (24).This King Pṛthu will meet Sanat -
kumāra, one of the four Kumāras, in the garden 
of his palace compound. The King will worship 
him with devotion and will be fortunate to re-
ceive instructions by which one can enjoy tran-
scendental bliss  (25).In this way, when the 
chivalrous activities of King Pṛthu come to be 
known to the people in general, King Pṛthu will 
always hear about himself and his uniquely 
powerful activities  (26).No one will be able to 
disobey the orders of Pṛthu Mahārāja. After 
conquering the world, he will completely erad-
icate the threefold miseries of the citizens. Then 
he will be recognized all over the world. At that 
time both the suras and the asuras will undoubt-
edly glorify his magnanimous activities  (27).  
SB 4.17: Mahārāja P ṛthu Becomes An-
gry at the Earth  
The great sage Maitreya continued : In this 
way the reciters who were glorifying Mahārāja 
Pṛthu readily described his qualities and chiv-
alrous activities. At the end, Mahārāja Pṛthu of-
fered them various presentations with all  due 
respect and worshiped them adequately  
(1).King Pṛthu thus satisfied and offered all re-
spect to all the leaders of the brāhmaṇas and 
other castes, to his servants, to his ministers and 
to the priests, citizens, general countrymen, 
people from other com munities, admirers and 
others, and thus they all became happy  (2).  Vidura inquired  from the great sage Mait-
reya: My dear brāhmaṇa, since mother earth 
can appear in different shapes, why did she take 
the shape of a cow? And when King Pṛthu 
milked her, who became the calf, and what was 
the milking pot? (3) The surface of the earth is 
by nature low in some places and high in others. 
How did King Pṛthu level the surface of the 
earth, and why did the King of heaven, Indra, 
steal the horse meant for the sacrific e? (4) The 
great saintly King, Mahārāja Pṛthu, received 
knowledge from Sanat -kumāra, who was the 
greatest Vedic scholar. After receiving 
knowledge to be applied practically in his life, 
how did the saintly King attain his desired des-
tination? (5) Pṛthu Mah ārāja was a powerful in-
carnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s potencies; conse-
quently any narration concerning his activities 
is surely very pleasing to hear, and it produces 
all good fortune. As far as I am concerned, I am 
always your devotee as well as a devotee of t he 
Lord, who is known as Adhokṣaja. Please 
therefore narrate all the stories of King Pṛthu, 
who, in the form of the son of King Vena, 
milked the cow -shaped earth  (6-7).  
Sūta Gosvāmī continued : When Vidura 
became inspired to hear of the activities of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa in His various incarnations, Maitreya, 
also being inspired and being very pleased with 
Vidura, began to praise him. Then Maitreya 
spoke as follows  (8).  
The great sage Maitreya continued : My 
dear Vidura, at the time King Pṛthu was en-
throned by the gr eat sages and brāhmaṇas and 
declared to be the protector of the citizens, 
there was a scarcity of food grains. The citizens 
actually became skinny due to starvation. 
Therefore they came before the King and in-
formed him of their real situation  (9). Dear 
King, just as a tree with a fire burning in the 
hollow of the trunk gradually dries up, we are 
drying up due to the fire of hunger in our stom-
achs. You are the protector of surrendered 
souls, and you have been appointed to give em-
ployment to us. Therefore we have all come to 
you for protection. You are not only a king, but 
the incarnation of God as well. Indeed, you are 
the king of all kings. You can give us all kinds 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

234 
 of occupational engagements, for you are the 
master of our livelihood. Therefore, O king of 
all kings, please arrange to satisfy our hunger 
by the proper distribution of food grains. Please 
take care of us, lest we soon die for want of 
food (10-11).  
After hearing this lamentation and seeing 
the pitiable condition of the citizens, King 
Pṛthu conte mplated this matter for a long time 
to see if he could find out the underlying causes  
(12).Having arrived at a conclusion, the King 
took up his bow and arrow and aimed them at 
the earth, exactly like Lord Śiva, who destroys 
the whole world out of anger  (13).When the 
earth saw that King Pṛthu was taking his bow 
and arrow to kill her, she became very much 
afraid and began to tremble. She then began to 
flee, exactly like a deer, which runs very swiftly 
when followed by a hunter. Being afraid of 
King Pṛthu, she  took the shape of a cow and be-
gan to run  (14).  
Seeing this, Mahārāja Pṛthu became very 
angry, and his eyes became as red as the early -
morning sun. Placing an arrow on his bow, he 
chased the cow -shaped earth wherever she 
would run  (15).The cow -shaped eart h ran here 
and there in outer space between the heavenly 
planets and the earth, and wherever she ran, the 
King chased her with his bow and arrows  
(16).Just as a man cannot escape the cruel 
hands of death, the cow -shaped earth could not 
escape the hands of the son of Vena. At length 
the earth, fearful, her heart aggrieved, turned 
back in helplessness  (17).Addressing the great, 
opulent King Pṛthu as the knower of religious 
principles and shelter of the surrendered, she 
said: Please save me. You are the protector of 
all living entities. Now you are situated as the 
King of this planet  (18).  The cow -shaped ea rth 
continued to appeal to the King: I am very poor 
and have not committed any sinful activities. I 
do not know why you want to kill me. Since 
you are supposed to be the knower of all reli-
gious principles, why are you so envious of me, 
and why are you so a nxious to kill a woman?  
(19)Even if a woman does commit some sinful 
activity, no one should place his hand upon her. 
And what to speak of you, dear King, who are so merciful. You are a protector, and you are 
affectionate to the poor  (20).The cow -shaped 
earth continued: My dear King, I am just like a 
strong boat, and all the paraphernalia of the 
world is standing upon me. If you break me to 
pieces, how can you protect yourself and your 
subjects from drowning? (21) 
King Pṛthu replied  to the earthly planet: 
My dear earth, you have disobeyed my orders 
and rulings. In the form of a demigod you ac-
cepted your share of the yajñas we performed, 
but in return you have not produced sufficient 
food grains. For this reason I must kill you  
(22).Although you are eating gre en grass every 
day, you are not filling your milk bag so we can 
utilize your milk. Since you are willfully com-
mitting offenses, it cannot be said that you are 
not punishable due to your assuming the form 
of a cow  (23).You have so lost your intelli-
gence tha t, despite my orders, you do not de-
liver the seeds of herbs and grains formerly cre-
ated by Brahmā and now hidden within your-
self (24). Now, with the help of my arrows, I 
shall cut you to pieces and with your flesh sat-
isfy the hunger -stricken citizens, who are now 
crying for want of grains. Thus I shall satisfy 
the crying citizens of my kingdom  (25).Any 
cruel person  be he a man, woman or impotent 
eunuch  who is only interested in his personal 
maintenance and has no compassion for other 
living entities may b e killed by the king. Such 
killing can never be considered actual killing  
(26).You are very much puffed up with pride 
and have become almost insane. Presently you 
have assumed the form of a cow by your mystic 
powers. Nonetheless I shall cut you into small 
pieces like grain, and I will uphold the entire 
population by my personal mystic powers  (27).  
At this time Pṛthu Mahārāja became exactly 
like Yamarāja, and his whole body appeared 
very angry. In other words, he was anger per-
sonified. After hearing him, th e planet earth be-
gan to tremble. She surrendered, and with 
folded hands began to speak as follows  (28).  
The planet earth spoke : My dear Lord, O 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are tran-
scendental in Your position, and by Your ma-
terial energy You have e xpanded Yourself in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

235 
 various forms and species of life through the in-
teraction of the three modes of material nature. 
Unlike some other masters, You always remain 
in Your transcendental position and are not af-
fected by the material creation, which is subjec t 
to different material interactions. Consequently 
You are not bewildered by material activities  
(29).The planet earth continued: My dear Lord, 
You are the complete conductor of the material 
creation. You have created this cosmic mani-
festation and the thre e material qualities, and 
therefore You have created me, the planet 
earth, the resting place of all living entities. Yet 
You are always fully independent, my Lord. 
Now that You are present before me and ready 
to kill me with Your weapons, let me know 
where  I should go to take shelter, and tell me 
who can give me protection  (30).In the begin-
ning of creation You created all these moving 
and nonmoving living entities by Your incon-
ceivable energy. Through this very same en-
ergy You are now prepared to protect th e living 
entities. Indeed, You are the supreme protector 
of religious principles. Why are You so anxious 
to kill me, even though I am in the form of a 
cow? (31) My dear Lord, although You are one, 
by Your inconceivable potencies You have ex-
panded Yourself in many forms. Through the 
agency of Brahmā, You have created this uni-
verse. You are therefore directly the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Those who are not suf-
ficiently experienced cannot understand Your 
transcendental activities because these persons 
are covered by Your illusory energy  (32).My 
dear Lord, by Your own potencies You are the 
original cause of the material elements, the per-
forming instruments (the senses), the workers 
of the senses (the controlling demigods), the in-
telligence and the ego, as well as everything 
else. By Your energy You manifest this entire 
cosmic creation, maintain it and dissolve it. 
Through Your energy alone everything is 
sometimes manifest and sometimes not mani-
fest. You are therefore the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, the cause of all causes. I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto You  (33). My dear 
Lord, You are always unborn. Once, in the 
form of the original boar, You rescued me from 
the waters in the bottom of the universe. Through Your own energy You created all the 
phys ical elements, the senses and the heart, for 
the maintenance of the world  (34).My dear 
Lord, in this way You once protected me by 
rescuing me f rom the water, and consequently 
Your name has been famous as Dharādhara  He 
who holds the planet earth. Yet at the present 
moment, in the form of a great hero, You are 
about to kill me with sharpened arrows. I am, 
however, just like a boat on the water, ke eping 
everything afloat  (35).My dear Lord, I am also 
the creation of one of Your energies, composed 
of the three modes of material nature. Conse-
quently I am bewildered by Your activities. 
Even the activities of Your devotees cannot be 
understood, and what to speak of Your pas-
times. Thus everything appears to us to be con-
tradictory and wonderful  (36).  
SB 4.18: Pṛthu Mahārāja Milks the 
Earth Planet  
The great saint Maitreya continued to ad-
dress  Vidura: My dear Vidura, at that time, af-
ter the planet earth finished her prayers, King 
Pṛthu was still not pacified, and his lips trem-
bled in great anger. Although t he planet earth 
was frightened, she made up her mind and be-
gan to speak as follows in order to convince the 
King  (1).My dear Lord, please pacify your an-
ger completely and hear patiently whatever I 
submit before you. Please turn your kind atten-
tion to this.  I may be very poor, but a learned 
man takes the essence of knowledge from all 
places, just as a bumblebee collects honey from 
each and every flower  (2).  To benefit all hu-
man society, not only in this life but in the next, 
the great seers and sages have p rescribed vari-
ous methods conducive to the prosperity of the 
people in general  (3).One who follows the prin-
ciples and instructions enjoined by the great 
sages of the past can utilize these instructions 
for practical purposes. Such a person can very 
easily enjoy life and pleasures  (4).A foolish 
person who manufactures his own ways and 
means through mental speculation and does not 
recognize the authority of the sages who lay 
down unimpeachable directions is simply un-
successful again and again in his attempts  
(5).My dear King, the seeds, roots, herbs and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

236 
 grains, which were created by Lord Brahmā in 
the past, are now being used by nondevotees, 
who are devoid of all spiritual understanding  
(6). My dear King, not only are grains and 
herbs being used by nondevotees , but, as far as 
I am concerned, I am not being properly main-
tained. Indeed, I am being neglected by kings 
who are not punishing these rascals who have 
turned into thieves by using grains for sense 
gratification. Consequently I have hidden all 
these seeds,  which were meant for the perfor-
mance of sacrifice  (7).Due to being stocked for 
a very long time, all the grain seeds within me 
have certainly deteriorated. Therefore you 
should immediately arrange to take these seeds 
out by the standard process, which is recom-
mended by the ācāryas or śāstras  (8).O great 
hero, protector of living entities, if you desire 
to relieve the living entities by supplying them 
sufficient grain, and if you desire to nourish 
them by taking milk from me, you should make 
arrangements to  bring a calf suitable for this 
purpose and a pot in which the milk can be 
kept, as well as a milkman to do the work. Since 
I will be very much affectionate towards my 
calf, your desire to take milk from me will be 
fulfilled  (9-10).My dear King, may I info rm 
you that you have to make the entire surface of 
the globe level. This will help me, even when 
the rainy season has ceased. Rainfall comes by 
the mercy of King Indra. Rainfall will remain 
on the surface of the globe, always keeping the 
earth moistened, a nd thus it will be auspicious 
for all kinds of production  (11).  
After hearing the auspicious and pleasing 
words of the planet earth, the King accepted 
them. He then transformed Svāyambhuva 
Manu into a calf and milked all the herbs and 
grains from the eart h in the form of a cow, 
keeping them in his cupped hands  (12).Others, 
who were as intelligent as King Pṛthu, also took 
the essence out of the earthly planet. Indeed, 
everyone took this opportunity to follow in the 
footsteps of King Pṛthu and get whatever h e de-
sired from the planet earth  (13).All the great 
sages transformed Bṛhaspati into a calf, and 
making the senses into a pot, they milked all 
kinds of Vedic knowledge to purify words, 
mind and hearing  (14). All the demigods made Indra, the King of heaven, into a calf, and from 
the earth they milked the beverage soma, which 
is nectar. Thus they became very powerful in 
mental speculation and bodily and sensual 
strength  (15).The sons of Diti and the demons 
transformed Prahlāda Mahārāja, who was born 
in an asur a family, into a calf, and they ex-
tracted various kinds of liquor and beer, which 
they put into a pot made of iron  (16).The inhab-
itants of Gandharvaloka and Apsaroloka made 
Viśvāvasu into a calf, and they drew the milk 
into a lotus -flower pot. The milk too k the shape 
of sweet musical art and beauty  (17).The fortu-
nate inhabitants of Pitṛloka, who preside over 
the funeral ceremonies, made Aryamā into a 
calf. With great faith they milked kavya, food 
offered to the ancestors, into an unbaked 
earthen pot  (18).After this, the inhabitants of 
Siddhaloka, as well as the inhabitants of 
Vidyādhara -loka, transformed the great sage 
Kapila into a calf, and making the whole sky 
into a pot, they milked out specific yogic mys-
tic powers, beginning with aṇimā. Indeed, the 
inhabitants of Vidyādhara -loka acquired the art 
of flying in the sky  (19).Others also, the inhab-
itants of planets known as Kimpuruṣa -loka, 
made the demon Maya into a calf, and they 
milked out mystic powers by which one can 
disappear immediately from another’s vision 
and appear again in a different form  (20).  
Then the Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, ghosts and 
witches, who are habituated to eating flesh, 
transformed Lord Śiva’s incarnation Rudra 
[Bhūtanātha] into a calf and milked out bever-
ages made of blood and put them in a pot made 
of skulls  (21).Thereafter cobras and snakes 
without hoods, large snakes, scorpions and 
many other poisonous animals took poison out 
of the planet earth as their milk and kept this 
poison in snake holes. They made a calf out of 
Takṣaka  (22).The f our-legged animals like the 
cows made a calf out of the bull who carries 
Lord Śiva and made a milking pot out of the 
forest. Thus they got fresh green grasses to eat. 
Ferocious animals like tigers transformed a lion 
into a calf, and thus they were able to get flesh 
for milk. The birds made a calf out of Garuḍa 
and took milk from the planet earth in the form 
of moving insects and nonmoving plants and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

237 
 grasses  (23-24).The trees made a calf out of the 
banyan tree, and thus they derived milk in the 
form of many delicious juices. The mountains 
transformed the Himālayas into a calf, and they 
milked a variety of minerals into a pot made of 
the peaks of hills  (25).The planet earth supplied 
everyone his respective food. During the time 
of King Pṛthu, the earth was ful ly under the 
control of the King. Thus all the inhabitants of 
the earth could get their food supply by creating 
various types of calves and putting their partic-
ular types of milk in various pots  (26).  
My dear Vidura, chief of the Kurus, in this 
way King P ṛthu and all the others who subsist 
on food created different types of calves and 
milked out their respective eatables. Thus they 
received their various foodstuffs, which were 
symbolized as milk  (27).Thereafter King Pṛthu 
was very satisfied with the planet  earth, for she 
sufficiently supplied all food to various living 
entities. Thus he developed an affection for the 
planet earth, just as if she were his own daugh-
ter (28).After this, the king of all kings, 
Mahārāja Pṛthu, leveled all rough places on the 
surface of the globe by breaking up the hills 
with the strength of his bow. By his grace the 
surface of the globe almost became flat  (29).To 
all the citizens of the state, King Pṛthu was as 
good as a father. Thus he was visibly engaged 
in giving them proper s ubsistence and proper 
employment for subsistence. After leveling the 
surface of the globe, he earmarked different 
places for residential quarters, inasmuch as 
they were desirable  (30).In this way the King 
founded many types of villages, settlements 
and tow ns and built forts, residences for cow-
herdsmen, stables for the animals, places for 
the royal camps, mining places, agricultural 
towns and mountain villages  (31).Before the 
reign of King Pṛthu there was no planned ar-
rangement for different cities, villages, pastur-
ing grounds, etc. Everything was scattered, and 
everyone constructed his residential quarters 
according to his own convenience. However, 
from the time of  King Pṛthu, plans were made 
for towns and villages  (32).  
SB 4.19: King Pṛthu’s One Hundred 
Horse Sacrifices  The great sage Maitreya continued : My 
dear Vidura, King Pṛthu initiated the perfor-
mance of one hundred horse sacrifices at the 
spot where the rive r Sarasvatī flows towards 
the east. This piece of land is known as 
Brahmāvarta, and it was controlled by 
Svāyambhuva Manu  (1). When the most pow-
erful Indra, the King of heaven, saw this, he 
considered the fact that King Pṛthu was going 
to exceed him in fru itive activities. Thus Indra 
could not tolerate the great sacrificial ceremo-
nies performed by King Pṛthu  (2). The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, is present 
in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul, and He is 
the proprietor of all planets and the e njoyer of 
the results of all sacrifices. He was personally 
present at the sacrifices made by King Pṛthu  
(3).When Lord Viṣṇu appeared in the sacrifi-
cial arena, Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and all the 
chief predominating personalities of every 
planet, as well as their followers, came with 
Him. When He appeared on the scene, the res-
idents of Gandharvaloka, the great sages, and 
the residents of Apsaroloka all praised Him  
(4).The Lord was accompanied by the residents 
of Siddhaloka and Vidyādhara -loka, all the de-
scend ants of Diti, and the demons and the 
Yakṣas. He was also accompanied by His chief 
associates, headed by Sunanda and Nanda  (5). 
Great devotees, who were always engaged in 
the service of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, as well as the great sages named Ka pila, 
Nārada and Dattātreya, and masters of mystic 
powers, headed by Sanaka Kumāra, all at-
tended the great sacrifice with Lord Viṣṇu  
(6).My dear Vidura, in that great sacrifice the 
entire land came to be like the milk -producing 
kāma -dhenu, and thus, by the  performance of 
yajña, all daily necessities for life were sup-
plied  (7).The flowing rivers supplied all kinds 
of tastes  sweet, pungent, sour, etc.  and very 
big trees supplied fruit and honey in abundance. 
The cows, having eaten sufficient green grass, 
supplied profuse quantities of milk, curd, clari-
fied butter and similar other necessities  (8). 
King Pṛthu was presented with various gifts 
from the general populace and predominating 
deities of all planets. The oceans and seas were 
full of valuable jewels an d pearls, and the hills 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

238 
 were full of chemicals and fertilizers. Four 
kinds of edibles were produced profusely  (9).  
King Pṛthu was dependent on the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is known as 
Adhokṣaja. Because King Pṛthu performed so 
many sacrifices, he was superhumanly en-
hanced by the mercy of the Supreme Lord. 
King Pṛthu’s opulence, however, could not be 
tolerated by the King of heaven, Indra, who 
tried to impede the progress of his opulence  
(10). When Pṛthu Mahārāja was performing the 
last horse sac rifice [aśvamedha -yajña], King 
Indra, invisible to everyone, stole the horse in-
tended for sacrifice. He did this because of his 
great envy of King Pṛthu  (11).  When King In-
dra was taking away the horse, he dressed him-
self to appear as a liberated person. A ctually 
this dress was a form of cheating, for it falsely 
created an impression of religion. When Indra 
went into outer space in this way, the great sage 
Atri saw him and understood the whole situa-
tion (12).When the son of King Pṛthu was in-
formed by Atri o f King Indra’s trick, he imme-
diately became very angry and followed Indra 
to kill him, calling, “Wait! Wait!” (13) King In-
dra was fraudulently dressed as a sannyāsī, hav-
ing knotted his hair on his head and smeared 
ashes all over his body. Upon seeing such dress, 
the son of King Pṛthu considered Indra a reli-
gious man and pious sannyāsī. Therefore he did 
not release his arrows  (14).When Atri Muni 
saw that the son of King Pṛthu did not kill Indra 
but returned deceived by him, Atri Muni again 
instructed him to kill the heavenly King be-
cause he thought that Indra had become the 
lowliest of all demigods due to his impeding the 
execution of King Pṛthu’s sacrifice  (15).  
Being thus informed, the grandson of King 
Vena immediately began to follow Indra, who 
was fleein g through the sky in great haste. He 
was very angry with him, and he chased him 
just as the king of the vultures chased Rāvaṇa  
(16).When Indra saw that the son of Pṛthu was 
chasing him, he immediately abandoned his 
false dress and left the horse. Indeed, h e disap-
peared from that very spot, and the great hero, 
the son of Mahārāja Pṛthu, returned the horse to 
his father’s sacrificial arena  (17).My dear Lord Vidura, when the great sages observed the won-
derful prowess of the son of King Pṛthu, they 
all agreed t o give him the name Vijitāśva  (18).  
My dear Vidura, Indra, being the King of 
heaven and very powerful, immediately 
brought a dense darkness upon the sacrificial 
arena. Covering the whole scene in this way, he 
again took away the horse, which was chained 
with golden shackles near the wooden instru-
ment where animals were sacrificed  (19).The 
great sage Atri again pointed out to the son of 
King Pṛthu that Indra was fleeing through the 
sky. The great hero, the son of Pṛthu, chased 
him again. But when he saw tha t Indra was car-
rying in his hand a staff with a skull at the top 
and was again wearing the dress of a sannyāsī, 
he still chose not to kill him  (20).When the 
great sage Atri again gave directions, the son of 
King Pṛthu became very angry and placed an 
arrow on his bow. Upon seeing this, King Indra 
immediately abandoned the false dress of a 
sannyāsī and, giving up the horse, made him-
self invisible  (21).Then the great hero, Vi-
jitāśva, the son of King Pṛthu, again took the 
horse and returned to his father’s sacr ificial 
arena. Since that time, certain men with a poor 
fund of knowledge have adopted the dress of a 
false sannyāsī. It was King Indra who intro-
duced this  (22). Whatever different forms Indra 
assumed as a mendicant because of his desire 
to seize the horse  were symbols of atheistic phi-
losophy  (23).In this way King Indra, in order to 
steal the horse from King Pṛthu’s sacrifice, 
adopted several orders of sannyāsa. Some 
sannyāsīs go naked, and sometimes they wear 
red garments and pass under the name of 
kāpālik a. These are simply symbolic represen-
tations of their sinful activities. These so -called 
sannyāsīs are very much appreciated by sinful 
men because they are all godless atheists and 
very expert in putting forward arguments and 
reasons to support their case.  We must know, 
however, that they are only passing as adher-
ents of religion and are not so in fact. Unfortu-
nately, bewildered persons accept them as reli-
gious, and being attracted to them, they spoil 
their life  (24-25).  
Mahārāja Pṛthu, who was celebrated as very 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

239 
 powerful, immediately took up his bow and ar-
rows and prepared to kill Indra himself, be-
cause Indra had introduced such irregular 
sannyāsa orders  (26).When the priests and all 
the others saw Mahārāja Pṛthu very angry and 
prepared to kill Indra, they  requested him: O 
great soul, do not kill him, for only sacrificial 
animals can be killed in a sacrifice. Such are the 
directions given by śāstra  (27).Dear King, In-
dra’s powers are already reduced due to his at-
tempt to impede the execution of your sacrific e. 
We shall call him by Vedic mantras which were 
never before used, and certainly he will come. 
Thus by the power of our mantra, we shall cast 
him into the fire because he is your enemy  (28).  
My dear Vidura, after giving the King this 
advice, the priests who had been engaged in 
performing the sacrifice called for Indra, the 
King of heaven, in a mood o f great anger. 
When they were just ready to put the oblation 
in the fire, Lord Brahmā appeared on the scene 
and forbade them to start the sacrifice  (29).Lord 
Brahmā addressed them thus: My dear sacrifi-
cial performers, you cannot kill Indra, the King 
of hea ven. It is not your duty. You should know 
that Indra is as good as the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. Indeed, he is one of the most pow-
erful assistants of the Personality of Godhead. 
You are trying to satisfy all the demigods by the 
performance of this ya jña, but you should know 
that all these demigods are but parts and parcels 
of Indra, the King of heaven. How, then, can 
you kill him in this great sacrifice? (30) In order 
to make trouble and impede the performance of 
King Pṛthu’s great sacrifice, King Indra has 
adopted some means that in the future will de-
stroy the clear path of religious life. I draw your 
attention to this fact. If you oppose him any fur-
ther, he w ill further misuse his power and intro-
duce many other irreligious systems  (31).“Let 
there be only ninety -nine sacrificial perfor-
mances for Mahārāja Pṛthu,” Lord Brahmā 
concluded. Lord Brahmā then turned towards 
Mahārāja Pṛthu and informed him that since he  
was thoroughly aware of the path of liberation, 
what was the use in performing more sacri-
fices? (32)  Lord Brahmā continued: Let there 
be good fortune to both of you, for you and King Indra are both part and parcel of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. T herefore you 
should not be angry with King Indra, who is 
nondifferent from you  (33).My dear King, do 
not be agitated and anxious because your sacri-
fices have not been properly executed due to 
providential impediments. Kindly take my 
words with great respec t. We should always re-
member that if something happens by provi-
dential arrangement, we should not be very 
sorry. The more we try to rectify such reversals, 
the more we enter into the darkest region of ma-
terialistic though t (34) .Lord Brahmā continued: 
Stop the performance of these sacrifices, for 
they have induced Indra to introduce so many 
irreligious aspects. You should know very well 
that even amongst the demigods there are many 
unwanted desires  (35).Just see how Indra, the 
King of heaven, was creating a disturbance in 
the midst of the sacrifice by stealing the sacri-
ficial horse. These attractive sinful activities he 
has introduced will be carried out by the people 
in general  (36).O King Pṛthu, son of Vena, you 
are the part -and-parcel expansion of Lord 
Viṣṇu. Due to the mischievous activities of 
King Vena, religious principles were almost 
lost. At that opportune moment you descended 
as the incarnation of Lord Viṣṇu. Indeed, for 
the protection of religious principles you have 
appeared from the body of King Vena  (37). O 
protector of the people in general, please con-
sider the purpose of your being incarnated by 
Lord Viṣṇu. The irreligious principles created 
by Indra are but mothers of so many unwanted 
religions. Please therefore sto p these imitations 
immediately  (38).  
The great sage Maitreya continued : When 
King Pṛthu was thus advised by the supreme 
teacher, Lord Brahmā, he abandoned his eager-
ness to perform yajñas and with great affection 
concluded a peace with King Indra  (39). After 
this, Pṛthu Mahārāja took his bath, which is 
customarily taken after the performance of a 
yajña, and received the benedictions and due 
blessings of the demigods, who were very 
pleased by his glorious activities  (40).With 
great respect, the original king , Pṛthu, offered 
all kinds of rewards to the brāhmaṇas present at 
the sacrifice. Since all these brāhmaṇas were 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

240 
 very much satisfied, they gave their heartfelt 
blessings to the King  (41).All the great sages 
and brāhmaṇas said: O mighty King, by your 
invitat ion all classes of living entities have at-
tended this assembly. They have come from 
Pitṛloka and the heavenly planets, and great 
sages as well as common men have attended 
this meeting. Now all of them are very much 
satisfied by your dealings and your chari ty to-
wards them  (42).  
SB 4.20: Lord Viṣṇu’s Appearance in the 
Sacrificial Arena of Mahārāja Pṛthu  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  My 
dear Vidura, being very much satisfied by the 
performance of ninety -nine horse sacrifices, 
the Supreme Personality of G odhead, Lord 
Viṣṇu, appeared on the scene. Accompanying 
Him was King Indra. Lord Viṣṇu then began to 
speak  (1).  
Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, said:  My dear King Pṛthu, Indra, the 
King of heaven, has disturbed your execution 
of one hundre d sacrifices. Now he has come 
with Me to be forgiven by you. Therefore ex-
cuse him  (2).O King, one who is advanced in 
intelligence and eager to perform welfare activ-
ities for others is considered best amongst hu-
man beings. An advanced human being is never 
malicious to others. Those with advanced intel-
ligence are always conscious that this material 
body is different from the soul  (3).If a person-
ality like you, who are so much advanced be-
cause of executing the instructions of the previ-
ous ācāryas, is carried a way by the influence of 
My material energy, then all your advancement 
may be considered simply a waste of time  
(4).Those who are in full knowledge of the bod-
ily conception of life, who know that this body 
is composed of nescience, desires and activities 
resulting from illusion, do not become addicted 
to the body  (5).How can a highly learned per-
son who has absolutely no affinity for the bod-
ily conception of life be affected by the bodily 
conception in regard to house, children, wealth 
and similar other bodil y productions? (6) 
The individual soul is one, pure, nonmaterial 
and self -effulgent. He is the reservoir of all 
good qualities, and He is all -pervading. He is without material covering, and He is the wit-
ness of all activities. He is completely distin-
guishe d from other living entities, and He is 
transcendental to all embodied souls  (7).Alt-
hough within the material nature, one who is 
thus situated in full knowledge of the 
Paramātmā and ātmā is never affected by the 
modes of material nature, for he is always s itu-
ated in My transcendental loving service  
(8).The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Viṣṇu, continued: My dear King Pṛthu, when 
one situated in his occupational duty engages in 
My loving service without motive for material 
gain, he gradually becomes ve ry satisfied 
within  (9).When the heart is cleansed of all ma-
terial contamination, the devotee’s mind be-
comes broader and transparent and he can see 
things equally. At that stage of life there is 
peace, and one is situated equally with Me as 
sac-cid-ānanda -vigraha  (10).Anyone who 
knows that this material body, made of the five 
gross elements, the sense organs, the working 
senses and the mind, is simply supervised by 
the fixed soul is eligible to be liberated from 
material bondage  (11).  
Lord Viṣṇu told King Pṛthu: My dear King, 
the constant change of this material world is 
due to the interaction of the three modes of ma-
terial nature. The five elements, the senses, the 
demigods who control the senses, as well as the 
mind, which is agitated by the spirit soul  all 
these taken together comprise the body. Since 
the spirit soul is completely different from this 
combination of gross and subtle material ele-
ments, My devotee who is connected with Me 
in intense friendship and affection, being com-
pletely in knowledge, i s never agitated by ma-
terial happiness and distress  (12).My dear he-
roic King, please keep yourself always equi-
poised and treat people equally, whether they 
are greater than you, in the intermediate stage 
or lower than you. Do not be disturbed by tem-
porary distress or happiness. Fully control your 
mind and senses. In this transcendental posi-
tion, try to execute your duty as king in what-
ever condition of life you may be posted by My 
arrangement, for your only duty here is to give 
protection to the citizens of  your kingdom  
(13).To give protection to the general mass of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

241 
 people who are citizens of the state is the pre-
scribed occupational duty for a king. By acting 
in that way, the king in his next life shares one 
sixth of the result of the pious activities of the  
citizens. But a king or executive head of state 
who simply collects taxes from the citizens but 
does not give them proper protection as human 
beings has the results of his own pious activities 
taken away by the citizens, and in exchange for 
his not giving  protection he becomes liable to 
punishment for the impious activities of his 
subjects  (14).Lord Viṣṇu continued: My dear 
King Pṛthu, if you continue to protect the citi-
zens according to the instructions of the learned 
brāhmaṇa authorities, as they are received by 
the disciplic succession  by hearing  from mas-
ter to disciple, and if you follow t he religious 
principles laid down by them, without attach-
ment to ideas manufactured by mental concoc-
tion, then every one of your citizens will be 
happy and will love you, and very soon you will 
be able to see such already liberated personali-
ties as the fou r Kumāras [Sanaka, Sanātana, 
Sanandana and Sanat -kumāra]  (15).My dear 
King, I am very captivated by your elevated 
qualities and excellent behavior, and thus I am 
very favorably inclined toward you. You may 
therefore ask from Me any benediction you 
like. On e who does not possess elevated quali-
ties and behavior cannot possibly achieve My 
favor simply by performance of sacrifices, se-
vere austerities or mystic yoga. But I always re-
main equipoised in the heart of one who is also 
equipoised in all circumstances  (16).  
The great saint Maitreya continued:  My 
dear Vidura, in this way Mahārāja Pṛthu, the 
conqueror of the entire world, accepted the in-
structions of the Supreme Personality of God-
head on his head  (17).As King Indra was stand-
ing by, he became ashamed of his own activi-
ties and fell down before King  Pṛthu to touch 
his lotus feet. But Pṛthu Mahārāja immediately 
embraced him in great ecstasy and gave up all 
envy against him for his having stolen the horse 
meant for the sacrifice  (18).King Pṛthu abun-
dantly worshiped the lotus feet of the Supreme 
Persona lity of Godhead, who was so merciful 
to him. While worshiping the lotus feet of the 
Lord, Pṛthu Mahārāja gradually increased his ecstasy in devotional service  (19).The Lord 
was just about to leave, but because He was so 
greatly inclined toward the behavior  of King 
Pṛthu, He did not depart. Seeing the behavior of 
Mahārāja Pṛthu with His lotus eyes, He was de-
tained because He is always the well -wisher of 
His devotees  (20).The original king, Mahārāja 
Pṛthu, his eyes full of tears and his voice falter-
ing and ch oked up, could neither see the Lord 
very distinctly nor speak to address the Lord in 
any way. He simply embraced the Lord within 
his heart and remained standing in that way 
with folded hands  (21).The Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead stood with His lotus feet  almost 
touching the ground while He rested the front 
of His hand on the raised shoulder of Garuḍa, 
the enemy of the snakes. Mahārāja Pṛthu, wip-
ing the tears from his eyes, tried to look upon 
the Lord, but it appeared that the King was not 
fully satisfied by looking at Him. Thus the King 
offered the following prayers  (22).  
My dear Lord, You are the best of the dem-
igods who can offer benedictions. Why, there-
fore, should any learned person ask You for 
benedictions meant for living entities bewil-
dered by the modes of nature? Such benedic-
tions are available automatically, even in the 
lives of living entities suffering in hellish con-
ditions. My dear Lord, You can certainly be-
stow merging into Your existence, but I do not 
wish to have such a benediction  (23).My d ear 
Lord, I therefore do not wish to have the bene-
diction of merging into Your existence, a ben-
ediction in which there is no existence of the 
nectarean beverage of Your lotus feet. I want 
the benediction of at least one million ears, for 
thus I may be able  to hear about the glories of 
Your lotus feet from the mouths of Your pure 
devotees  (24).My dear Lord, You are glorified 
by the selected verses uttered by great person-
alities. Such glorification of Your lotus feet is 
just like saffron particles. When the t ranscen-
dental vibration from the mouths of great dev-
otees carries the aroma of the saffron dust of 
Your lotus feet, the forgetful living entity grad-
ually remembers his eternal relationship with 
You. Devotees thus gradually come to the right 
conclusion abou t the value of life. My dear 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

242 
 Lord, I therefore do not need any other bene-
diction but the opportunity to hear from the 
mouth of Your pure devotee  (25).My dear 
highly glorified Lord, if one, in the association 
of pure devotees, hears even once the glories of  
Your activities, he does not, unless he is noth-
ing but an animal, give up the association of 
devotees, for no intelligent person would be so 
careless as to leave their association. The per-
fection of chanting and hearing about Your glo-
ries was accepted eve n by the goddess of for-
tune, who desired to hear of Your unlimited ac-
tivities and transcendental glories  (26).Now I 
wish to engage in the service of the lotus feet of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and to 
serve just like the goddess of fortune, who car-
ries a lotus flower in her hand, because His 
Lordship, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
is the reservoir of all transcendental qualities. I 
am afraid that the goddess of fortune and I 
would quarrel because both of us would be at-
tentively engaged in the same service  (27).My 
dear Lord of the universe, the goddess of for-
tune, Lakṣmī, is the mother of the universe, and 
yet I think that she may be angry with me be-
cause of my intruding upon her service and act-
ing on that very platform to which she is so 
much attached. Yet I am  hopeful that even 
though there is some misunderstanding, You 
will take my part, for You are very much in-
clined to the poor, and You always magnify 
even insignificant service unto You. Therefore 
even though she becomes angry, I think that 
there is no harm for You, because You are so 
self-sufficient that You can do without her  
(28).Great saintly persons who are always lib-
erated take to Your devotional service because 
only by devotional service can one be relieved 
from the illusions of material existence. O m y 
Lord, there is no reason for the liberated souls 
to take shelter at Your lotus feet except that 
such souls are constantly thinking of Your feet  
(29). My dear Lord, what You have said to 
Your unalloyed devotee is certainly very much 
bewildering. The allur ements You offer in the 
Vedas are certainly not suitable for pure devo-
tees. People in general, bound by the sweet 
words of the Vedas, engage themselves again 
and again in fruitive activities, enamored by the results of their actions  (30).My Lord, due to 
Your illusory energy, all living beings in this 
material world have forgotten their real consti-
tutional position, and out of ignorance they are 
always desirous of material happiness in the 
form of society, friendship and love. Therefore, 
please do not ask me  to take some material ben-
efits from You, but as a father, not waiting for 
the son’s demand, does everything for the ben-
efit of the son, please bestow upon me whatever 
You think best for me  (31).  
The great sage Maitreya continued  by 
saying that the Lord, the seer of the universe, 
after hearing Pṛthu Mahārāja’s prayer, ad-
dressed the King: My dear King, may you al-
ways be blessed by engaging in My devotional 
service. Only by such purity of purpose, as you 
yourself very intelligently express, can one 
cross ove r the insurmountable illusory energy 
of māyā  (32). My dear King, O protector of the 
citizens, henceforward be very careful to exe-
cute My orders and not be misled by anything. 
Anyone who lives in that way, simply carrying 
out My orders faithfully, will alwa ys find good 
fortune all over the world  (33).  
The great saint Maitreya told Vidura : The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead amply appre-
ciated the meaningful prayers of Mahārāja 
Pṛthu. Thus, after being properly worshiped by 
the King, the Lord blessed him and d ecided to 
depart  (34).King Pṛthu worshiped the demi-
gods, the great sages, the inhabitants of 
Pitṛloka, the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka, and 
those of Siddhaloka, Cāraṇaloka, Pannagaloka, 
Kinnaraloka, Apsaroloka, the earthly planets 
and the planets of the b irds. He also worshiped 
many other living entities who presented them-
selves in the sacrificial arena. With folded 
hands he worshiped all these, as well as the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead and the personal 
associates of the Lord, by offering sweet words 
and as much wealth as possible. After this func-
tion, they all went back to their respective 
abodes, following in the footsteps of Lord 
Viṣṇu  (35-36).The infallible Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, having captivated the minds 
of the King and the priests who w ere present, 
returned to His abode in the spiritual sky  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

243 
 (37).King Pṛthu then offered his respectful 
obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is the Supreme Lord of all dem-
igods. Although not an object of material vi-
sion, the Lord revealed Hi mself to the sight of 
Mahārāja Pṛthu. After offering obeisances to 
the Lord, the King returned to his home  (38).  
SB 4.21: Instructions by Mahārāja Pṛthu  
The great sage Maitreya told Vidura : 
When the King entered his city, it was very 
beautifully decorated  to receive him with 
pearls, flower garlands, beautiful cloth and 
golden gates, and the entire city was perfumed 
with highly fragrant incense  (1).Fragrant water 
distilled from sandalwood and aguru herb was 
sprinkled everywhere on the lanes, roads and 
small  parks throughout the city, and every-
where were decorations of unbroken fruits, 
flowers, wetted grains, varied minerals, and 
lamps, all presented as auspicious parapherna-
lia (2).At the street crossings there were 
bunches of fruits and flowers, as well as p illars 
of banana trees and betel nut branches. All 
these combined decorations everywhere looked 
very attractive  (3).As the King entered the gate 
of the city, all the citizens received him with 
many auspicious articles like lamps, flowers 
and yogurt. The Ki ng was also received by 
many beautiful unmarried girls whose bodies 
were bedecked with various ornaments, espe-
cially with earrings which collided with one an-
other  (4).When the King entered the palace, 
conchshells and kettledrums were sounded, 
priests chant ed Vedic mantras, and profes-
sional reciters offered different prayers. But in 
spite of all this ceremony to welcome him, the 
King was not the least bit affected  (5).Both the 
important citizens and the common citizens 
welcomed the King very heartily, and he  also 
bestowed upon them their desired blessings  (6).  
King Pṛthu was greater than the greatest soul 
and was therefore worshipable by everyone. He 
performed many glorious activities in ruling 
over the surface of the world and was always 
magnanimous. After achieving such great suc-
cess and a reputation which spread throughout 
the universe, he at last obtained the lotus feet of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead  (7).  Sūta Gosvāmī continued:  O Śaunaka, 
leader of the great sages, after hearing Maitreya 
speak about the various activities of King 
Pṛthu, the origin al king, who was fully quali-
fied, glorified and widely praised all over the 
world, Vidura, the great devotee, very submis-
sively worshiped Maitreya Ṛṣi and asked him 
the following question  (8).  
Vidura said:  My dear brāhmaṇa Maitreya, 
it is very enlightenin g to understand that King 
Pṛthu was enthroned by the great sages and 
brāhmaṇas. All the demigods presented him 
with innumerable gifts, and he also expanded 
his influence upon personally receiving 
strength from Lord Viṣṇu. Thus he greatly de-
veloped the eart h (9).Pṛthu Mahārāja was so 
great in his activities and magnanimous in his 
method of ruling that all the kings and demi-
gods on the various planets still follow in his 
footsteps. Who is there who will not try to hear 
about his glorious activities? I wish to  hear 
more and more about Pṛthu Mahārāja because 
his activities are so pious and auspicious  (10).  
The great saintly sage Maitreya told 
Vidura:  My dear Vidura, King Pṛthu lived in 
the tract of land between the two great rivers 
Ganges and Yamunā. Because he  was very op-
ulent, it appeared that he was enjoying his des-
tined fortune in order to diminish the results of 
his past pious activities  (11).Mahārāja Pṛthu 
was an unrivaled king and possessed the scep-
ter for ruling all the seven islands on the surface 
of th e globe. No one could disobey his irrevo-
cable orders but the saintly persons, the 
brāhmaṇas and the descendants of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead [the Vaiṣṇavas]  
(12).Once upon a time King Pṛthu initiated the 
performance of a very great sacrifice in wh ich 
great saintly sages, brāhmaṇas, demigods from 
higher planetary systems and great saintly 
kings known as rājarṣis all assembled together  
(13).In that great assembly, Mahārāja Pṛthu 
first of all worshiped all the respectable visitors 
according to their r espective positions. After 
this, he stood up in the midst of the assembly, 
and it appeared that the full moon had arisen 
amongst the stars  (14).King Pṛthu’s body was 
tall and sturdy, and his complexion was fair. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

244 
 His arms were full and broad and his eyes as  
bright as the rising sun. His nose was straight, 
his face very beautiful, and his personality 
grave. His teeth were set beautifully in his smil-
ing face  (15).The chest of Mahārāja Pṛthu was 
very broad, his waist was very thick, and his 
abdomen, wrinkled by  lines of skin, resembled 
in construction a leaf of a banyan tree. His na-
vel was coiled and deep, his thighs were of a 
golden hue, and his instep was arched  (16).The 
black, slick hair on his head was very fine and 
curly, and his neck, like a conchshell, wa s dec-
orated with auspicious lines. He wore a very 
valuable dhotī, and there was a nice wrapper on 
the upper part of his body  (17).As Mahārāja 
Pṛthu was being initiated to perform the sacri-
fice, he had to leave aside his valuable dress, 
and therefore his na tural bodily beauty was vis-
ible. It was very pleasing to see him put on a 
black deerskin and wear a ring of kuśa grass on 
his finger, for this increased the natural beauty 
of his body. It appears that Mahārāja Pṛthu ob-
served all the regulative principles b efore he 
performed the sacrifice  (18).Just to encourage 
the members of the assembly and to enhance 
their pleasure, King Pṛthu glanced over them 
with eyes that seemed like stars in a sky wet 
with dew. He then spoke to them in a great 
voice  (19). Mahārāja Pṛ thu’s speech was very 
beautiful, full of metaphorical language, clearly 
understandable and very pleasing to hear. His 
words were all grave and certain. It appears that 
when he spoke, he expressed his personal real-
ization of the Absolute Truth in order to b enefit 
all who were present  (20).  
King Pṛthu said:  O gentle members of the 
assembly, may all good fortune be upon you! 
May all of you great souls who have come to 
attend this meeting kindly hear my prayer at-
tentively. A person who is actually inquisitive 
must present his decision before an  assembly of 
noble souls  (21).King Pṛthu continued: By the 
grace of the Supreme Lord I have been ap-
pointed the king of this planet, and I carry the 
scepter to rule the citizens, protect them from 
all danger, and give them employment accord-
ing to their resp ective positions in the social or-
der established by Vedic injunction  
(22).Mahārāja Pṛthu said: I think that upon the execution of my duties as king, I shall be able 
to achieve the desirable objectives described by 
experts in Vedic knowledge. This destinati on is 
certainly achieved by the pleasure of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is the seer 
of all destiny  (23).Any king who does not teach 
his citizens about their respective duties in 
terms of varṇa and āśrama but who simply ex-
acts tolls and taxes fr om them is liable to suffer 
for the impious activities which have been per-
formed by the citizens. In addition to such deg-
radation, the king also loses his own fortune  
(24).Pṛthu Mahārāja continued: Therefore, my 
dear citizens, for the welfare of your king after 
his death, you should execute your duties 
properly in terms of your positions of varṇa and 
āśrama and should always think of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead within your hearts. By 
doing so, you will protect your own interests, 
and you will bestow mercy upon your king for 
his welfare after death  (25).I request all the 
purehearted demigods, forefathers and saintly 
persons to support my proposal, for after death 
the result of an action is equally shared by its 
doer, its director and its supporter  (26).My dear 
respectable ladies and gentlemen, according to 
the authoritative statements of śāstra, there 
must be a supreme authority who is able to 
award the respective benefits of our present ac-
tivities. Otherwise, why should there be per-
sons who are unusual ly beautiful and powerful 
both in this life and in the life after death? (27) 
This is confirmed not only by the evidence of 
the Vedas but also by the personal behavior of 
great personalities like Manu, Uttānapāda, 
Dhruva, Priyavrata and my grandfather Aṅga , 
as well as by many other great personalities and 
ordinary living entities, exemplified by 
Mahārāja Prahlāda and Bali, all of whom are 
theists, believing in the existence of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who carries a 
club (28-29).  Although abomina ble persons 
like my father, Vena, the grandson of death per-
sonified, are bewildered on the path of religion, 
all the great personalities like those mentioned 
agree that in this world the only bestower of the 
benedictions of religion, economic develop-
ment, sense gratification, liberation or eleva-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

245 
 tion to the heavenly planets is the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead  (30).  
By the inclination to serve the lotus feet of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, suffering 
humanity can immediately cleanse the dirt 
which ha s accumulated in their minds during 
innumerable births. Like the Ganges water, 
which emanates from the toes of the lotus feet 
of the Lord, such a process immediately 
cleanses the mind, and thus spiritual or Kṛṣṇa 
consciousness gradually increases  (31).  Wh en 
a devotee takes shelter at the lotus feet of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is com-
pletely cleansed of all misunderstanding or 
mental speculation, and he manifests renuncia-
tion. This is possible only when one is strength-
ened by practicing bhakti -yoga. Once having 
taken shelter at the root of the lotus feet of the 
Lord, a devotee never comes back to this mate-
rial existence, which is full of the threefold mis-
eries  (32).Pṛthu Mahārāja advised his citizens: 
Engaging your minds, your words, your bodies 
and the results of your occupational duties, and 
being always open -minded, you should all ren-
der devotional service to the Lord. According 
to your abilities and the occupati ons in which 
you are situated, you should engage your ser-
vice at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead with full confidence and without 
reservation. Then you will surely be successful 
in achieving the final objective in your lives  
(33).  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is 
transcendental and not contaminated by this 
material world. But although He is concen-
trated spirit soul without material variety, for 
the benefit of the conditioned soul He neverthe-
less accepts different types of sacrific e per-
formed with various material elements, rituals 
and mantras and offered to the demigods under 
different names according to the interests and 
purposes of the performers  (34).The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is all -pervading, but He 
is also manifested in different types of bodies 
which arise from a combination of material na-
ture, time, desires and occupational duties. 
Thus different types of consciousness develop, 
just as fire, which is always basically the same, blazes in different ways according to th e shape 
and dimension of firewood  (35).The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is the master and en-
joyer of the results of all sacrifices, and He is 
the supreme spiritual master as well. All of you 
citizens on the surface of the globe who have a 
relationship wi th me and are worshiping Him 
by dint of your occupational duties are bestow-
ing your mercy upon me. Therefore, O my cit-
izens, I thank you  (36).The brāhmaṇas and 
Vaiṣṇavas are personally glorified by their 
characteristic powers of tolerance, penance, 
knowledge and education. By dint of all these 
spiritual assets, Vaiṣṇavas are more powerful 
than royalty. It is therefore advised that the 
princely order not exhibit its material prowess 
before these two communities and should avoid 
offending them  (37).The Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, the ancient, eternal Godhead, who 
is foremost amongst all great personalities, ob-
tained the opulence of His staunch  reputation, 
which purifies the entire universe, by worship-
ing the lotus feet of those brāhmaṇas and 
Vaiṣṇavas  (38).The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is everlastingly independent and 
who exists in everyone’s heart, is very pleased 
with those who foll ow in His footsteps and en-
gage without reservation in the service of the 
descendants of brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas, for 
He is always dear to brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas 
and they are always dear to Him  (39).By regu-
lar service to the brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas, one 
can clear the dirt from his heart and thus enjoy 
supreme peace and liberation from material at-
tachment and be satisfied. In this world there is 
no fruitive activity superior to serving the 
brāhmaṇa class, for this can bring pleasure to 
the demigods, for whom  the many sacrifices are 
recommended  (40).  Although the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Ananta, eats through 
the fire sacrifices offered in the names of the 
different demigods, He does not take as much 
pleasure in eating through fire as He does in ac-
cepti ng offerings through the mouths of learned 
sages and devotees, for then He does not leave 
the association of devotees  (41).In brahminical 
culture a brāhmaṇa’s transcendental position is 
eternally maintained because the injunctions of 
the Vedas are accepted with faith, austerity, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

246 
 scriptural conclusions, full sense and mind con-
trol, and meditation. In this way the real goal of 
life is illuminated, just as one’s face is fully re-
flected in a clear mirror  (42).O respectable per-
sonalities present here, I beg the blessings of all 
of you that I may perpetually carry on my 
crown the dust of the lotus feet of such 
brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇava s until the end of my 
life. He who can carry such dust on his head is 
very soon relieved of all the reactions which 
arise from sinful life, and eventually he devel-
ops all good and desirable qualities  (43).Who-
ever acquires the brahminical qualifications  
whose only wealth is good behavior, who is 
grateful, and who takes shelter of experienced 
persons  gets all the opulence of the world. I 
therefore wish that the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and His associates be pleased with the 
brāhmaṇa class, with the co ws and with me  
(44).  
The great sage Maitreya said:  After hear-
ing King Pṛthu speak so nicely, all the demi-
gods, the denizens of Pitṛloka, the brāhmaṇas 
and the saintly persons present at the meeting 
congratulated him by expressing their good 
will (45).They  all declared that the Vedic con-
clusion that one can conquer the heavenly plan-
ets by the action of a putra, or son, was fulfilled, 
for the most sinful Vena, who had been killed 
by the curse of the brāhmaṇas, was now deliv-
ered from the darkest region of hel lish life by 
his son, Mahārāja Pṛthu  (46).Similarly, 
Hiraṇyakaśipu, who by dint of his sinful activ-
ities always defied the supremacy of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, entered into the 
darkest region of hellish life; but by the grace 
of his great son, Prahlāda Mahārāja, he also was 
delivered and went back home, back to God-
head  (47).All the saintly brāhmaṇas thus ad-
dressed Pṛthu Mahārāja: O best of the warriors, 
O father of this globe, may you be blessed with 
a long life, for you have great devotion to t he 
infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is the master of all the universe  (48).The 
audience continued: Dear King Pṛthu, your rep-
utation is the purest of all, for you are preaching 
the glories of the most glorified of all, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the Lord of the 
brāhmaṇas. Since, due to our great fortune, we have you as our master, we think that we are 
living directly under the agency of the Lord  
(49).Our dear lord, it is your occupational duty 
to rule over your citizens. That is not a very 
wonderful task for a personality like you, who 
are so affectionate in seeing to the interests of 
the citizens, because you are full of mercy. That 
is the greatness of your character  (50).The citi-
zens continued: Today you have opened our 
eyes and revea led how to cross to the other side 
of the ocean of darkness. By our past deeds and 
by the arrangement of superior authority, we 
are entangled in a network of fruitive activities 
and have lost sight of the destination of life; 
thus we have been wandering wi thin the uni-
verse  (51).Dear lord, you are situated in your 
pure existential position of goodness; therefore 
you are the perfect representative of the Su-
preme Lord. You are glorified by your own 
prowess, and thus you are maintaining the en-
tire world by intr oducing brahminical culture 
and protecting everyone in your line of duty as 
a kṣatriya  (52).  
SB 4.22: Pṛthu Mahārāja’s Meeting with 
the Four Kumāras  
The great sage Maitreya said:  While the 
citizens were thus praying to the most powerful 
King Pṛthu, the fo ur Kumāras, who were as 
bright as the sun, arrived on the spot  (1). Seeing 
the glowing effulgence of the four Kumāras, 
the masters of all mystic power, the King and 
his associates could recognize them as they de-
scended from the sky  (2). Seeing the four 
Kum āras, Pṛthu Mahārāja was greatly anxious 
to receive them. Therefore the King, with all his 
officers, very hastily got up, as anxiously as a 
conditioned soul whose senses are immediately 
attracted by the modes of material nature  
(3).When the great sages acc epted their recep-
tion, according to the instructions of the śāstras, 
and finally took their seats offered by the King, 
the King, influenced by the glories of the sages, 
immediately bowed down. Thus he worshiped 
the four Kumāras  (4).After this, the King too k 
the water which had washed the lotus feet of the 
Kumāras and sprinkled it over his hair. By such 
respectful actions, the King, as an exemplary 
personality, showed how to receive a spiritually 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

247 
 advanced personality  (5).The four great sages 
were elder to Lo rd Śiva, and when they were 
seated on the golden throne, they appeared just 
like fire blazing on an altar. Mahārāja Pṛthu, out 
of his great gentleness and respect for them, be-
gan to speak with great restraint as follows  (6).  
King Pṛthu spoke : My dear grea t sages, 
auspiciousness personified, it is very difficult 
for even the mystic yogīs to see you. Indeed, 
you are very rarely seen. I do not know what 
kind of pious activity I performed for you to 
grace me by appearing before me without diffi-
culty  (7). Any p erson upon whom the 
brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas are pleased can 
achieve anything which is very rare to obtain in 
this world as well as after death. Not only that, 
but one also receives the favor of the auspicious 
Lord Śiva and Lord Viṣṇu, who accompany the 
brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas  (8). Pṛthu Mahārāja 
continued: Although you are traveling in all 
planetary systems, people cannot know you, 
just as they cannot know the Supersoul, alt-
hough He is within everyone’s heart as the wit-
ness of everything. Even Lord Brahmā a nd 
Lord Śiva cannot understand the Supersoul  (9). 
A person who is not very rich and is attached to 
family life becomes highly glorified when 
saintly persons are present in his home. The 
master and servants who are engaged in offer-
ing the exalted visitors w ater, a sitting place 
and paraphernalia for reception are glorified, 
and the home itself is also glorified  (10).On the 
contrary, even though full of all opulence and 
material prosperity, any householder’s house 
where the devotees of the Lord are never al-
lowed to come in, and where there is no water 
for washing their feet, is to be considered a tree 
in which all venomous serpents live  
(11).Mahārāja Pṛthu offered his welcome to the 
four Kumāras, addressing them as the best of 
the brāhmaṇas. He welcomed them, saying: 
From the beginning of your birth you strictly 
observed the vows of celibacy, and although 
you are experienced in the path of li beration, 
you are keeping yourselves just like small chil-
dren (12).Pṛthu Mahārāja inquired from the 
sages about persons entangled in this danger-
ous material existence because of their previous 
actions. Could such persons, whose only aim is sense gratificat ion, be blessed with any good 
fortune? (13) Pṛthu Mahārāja continued: My 
dear sirs, there is no need to ask about your 
good and bad fortune because you are always 
absorbed in spiritual bliss. The mental concoc-
tion of the auspicious and inauspicious does no t 
exist in you  (14).I am completely assured that 
personalities like you are the only friends for 
persons who are blazing in the fire of material 
existence. I therefore ask you how in this mate-
rial world we can very soon achieve the ulti-
mate goal of life  (15).The Supreme Personality 
of Godhead is always anxious to elevate the liv-
ing entities, who are His parts and parcels, and 
for their special benefit the Lord travels all over 
the world in the form of self -realized persons 
like you  (16).  
The great sage Mai treya continued : Thus 
Sanat -kumāra, the best of the celibates, after 
hearing the speech of Pṛthu Mahārāja, which 
was meaningful, appropriate, full of precise 
words and very sweet to hear, smiled with full 
satisfaction and began to speak as follows  (17).  
Sanat -kumāra said:  My dear King Pṛthu, I 
am very nicely questioned by you. Such ques-
tions are beneficial for all living entities, espe-
cially because they are raised by you, who are 
always thinking of the good of others. Although 
you know everything, you ask  such questions 
because that is the behavior of saintly persons. 
Such intelligence is befitting your position  
(18).When there is a congregation of devotees, 
their discussions, questions and answers be-
come conclusive to both the speaker and the au-
dience. Th us such a meeting is beneficial for 
everyone’s real happiness  (19). Sanat -kumāra 
continued: My dear King, you already have an 
inclination to glorify the lotus feet of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. Such attach-
ment is very difficult to achieve, but when one 
has attained such unflinching faith in the Lord, 
it automati cally cleanses lusty desires from the 
core of the heart  (20).It has been conclusively 
decided in the scriptures, after due considera-
tion, that the ultimate goal for the welfare of 
human society is detachment from the bodily 
concept of life and increased an d steadfast at-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

248 
 tachment for the Supreme Lord, who is tran-
scendental, beyond the modes of material na-
ture (21).Attachment for the Supreme can be 
increased by practicing devotional service, in-
quiring about the Supreme Personality of God-
head, applying bhakti -yoga in life, worshiping 
the Yogeśvara, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, and by hearing and chanting about 
the glories of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. These actions are pious in themselves  
(22).One has to make progress in spiritual life 
by not ass ociating with persons who are simply 
interested in sense gratification and making 
money. Not only such persons, but one who as-
sociates with such persons should be avoided. 
One should mold his life in such a way that he 
cannot live in peace without drinking  the nectar 
of the glorification of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Hari. One can be thus elevated by 
being disgusted with the taste for sense enjoy-
ment  (23).A candidate for spiritual advance-
ment must be nonviolent, must follow in the 
footsteps of grea t ācāryas, must always remem-
ber the nectar of the pastimes of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, must follow the regu-
lative principles without material desire and, 
while following the regulative principles, 
should not blaspheme others. A devotee should 
lead a very simple life and not be disturbed by 
the duality of opposing elements. He should 
learn to tolerate them  (24).The devotee should 
gradually increase the culture of devotional ser-
vice by constant hearing of the transcendental 
qualities of the Supreme  Personality of God-
head. These pastimes are like ornamental dec-
orations on the ears of devotees. By rendering 
devotional service and transcending the mate-
rial qualities, one can easily be fixed in tran-
scendence in the Supreme Personality of God-
head  (25).Upon becoming fixed in his attach-
ment to the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
by the grace of the spiritual master and by 
awakening knowledge and detachment, the liv-
ing entity, situated within the heart of the body 
and covered by the five elements, burns up hi s 
material surroundings exactly as fire, arising 
from wood, burns the wood itself  (26).When a 
person becomes devoid of all material desires 
and liberated from all material qualities, he transcends distinctions between actions exe-
cuted externally and intern ally. At that time the 
difference between the soul and the Supersoul, 
which was existing before self -realization, is 
annihilated. When a dream is over, there is no 
longer a distinction between the dream and the 
dreamer  (27).  
When the soul exists for sense  gratification, 
he creates different desires, and for that reason 
he becomes subjected to designations. But 
when one is in the transcendental position, he 
is no longer interested in anything except ful-
filling the desires of the Lord  (28).Only be-
cause of di fferent causes does a person see a 
difference between himself and others, just as 
one sees the reflection of a body appearing dif-
ferently manifested on water, on oil or in a mir-
ror (29).When one’s mind and senses are at-
tracted to sense objects for enjoymen t, the mind 
becomes agitated. As a result of continually 
thinking of sense objects, one’s real conscious-
ness almost becomes lost, like the water in a 
lake that is gradually sucked up by the big grass 
straws on its bank  (30).When one deviates from 
his origi nal consciousness, he loses the capac-
ity to remember his previous position or recog-
nize his present one. When remembrance is 
lost, all knowledge acquired is based on a false 
foundation. When this occurs, learned scholars 
consider that the soul is lost  (31).There is no 
stronger obstruction to one’s self -interest than 
thinking other subject matters to be more pleas-
ing than one’s self -realization  (32).  
For human society, constantly thinking of 
how to earn money and apply it for sense grat-
ification brings abou t the destruction of every-
one’s interests. When one becomes devoid of 
knowledge and devotional service, he enters 
into species of life like those of trees and stones  
(33).Those who strongly desire to cross the 
ocean of nescience must not associate with the  
modes of ignorance, for hedonistic activities 
are the greatest obstructions to realization of re-
ligious principles, economic development, reg-
ulated sense gratification and, at last, liberation  
(34).Out of the four principles  namely religion, 
economic dev elopment, sense gratification and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

249 
 liberation  liberation has to be taken very seri-
ously. The other three are subject to destruction 
by the stringent law of nature  death  (35).We 
accept as blessings different states of higher 
life, distinguishing them from lower states of 
life, but we should know that such distinctions 
exist only in relation to the interchange of the 
modes of material nature. Actually these states 
of life have no permanent existence, for all of 
them will be destroyed by the supreme control-
ler (36).  
Sanat -kumāra advised the King: Therefore, 
my dear King Pṛthu, try to understand the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is living 
within everyone’s heart along with the individ-
ual soul, in each and every body, either moving 
or not moving. The indi vidual souls are fully 
covered by the gross material body and subtle 
body made of the life air and intelligence  
(37).The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
manifests Himself as one with the cause and ef-
fect within this body, but one who has trans-
cended the ill usory energy by deliberate con-
sideration, which clears the misconception of a 
snake for a rope, can understand that the 
Paramātmā is eternally transcendental to the 
material creation and situated in pure internal 
energy. Thus the Lord is transcendental to all 
material contamination. Unto Him only must 
one surrender  (38).The devotees, who are al-
ways engaged in the service of the toes of the 
lotus feet of the Lord, can very easily overcome 
hard-knotted desires for fruitive activities. Be-
cause this is very dif ficult, the nondevotees  the 
jñānīs and yogīs  although trying to stop the 
waves of sense gratification, cannot do so. 
Therefore you are advised to engage in the de-
votional service of Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva  
(39).The ocean of nescience is very difficult  to 
cross because it is infested with many danger-
ous sharks. Although those who are nondevo-
tees undergo severe austerities and penances to 
cross that ocean, we recommend that you 
simply take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord, 
which are like boats for c rossing the ocean. Alt-
hough the ocean is difficult to cross, by taking 
shelter of His lotus feet you will overcome all 
dangers  (40).  The great sage Maitreya continued : Being 
thus enlightened in complete spiritual 
knowledge by the son of Brahmā  one of the 
Kumāras, who was complete in spiritual 
knowledge  the King worshiped them in the fol-
lowing words  (41).  
The King said:  O brāhmaṇa, O powerful 
one, formerly Lord Viṣṇu  showed me His 
causeless mercy, indicating that you would 
come to my house, and to confirm that blessing, 
you have all come  (42).My dear brāhmaṇa, you 
have carried out the order thoroughly because 
you are also as compassionate as the Lord. It is 
my duty, t herefore, to offer you something, but 
all I possess are but remnants of food taken by 
great saintly persons. What shall I give?  (43) 
The King continued: Therefore, my dear 
brāhmaṇas, my life, wife, children, home, fur-
niture and household paraphernalia, my king-
dom, strength, land and especially my treasury 
are all offered unto you  (44).Since only a per-
son who is completely educated according to 
the principles of Vedic knowledge deserves to 
be commander -in-chief, ruler of the state, the 
first to chastise or t he proprietor of the whole 
planet, Pṛthu Mahārāja offered everything to 
the Kumāras  (45).The kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and 
śūdras eat their food by virtue of the 
brāhmaṇas’ mercy. It is the brāhmaṇas who en-
joy their own property, clothe themselves with 
their own property and give charity with their 
own property  (46).Pṛthu Mahārāja continued: 
How can such persons, who have rendered un-
limited service by explaining the path of self -
realization in relation to the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, and whose explanations are 
given for our enlightenment with complete 
conviction and Vedic evidence, be repaid ex-
cept by folded palms containing water for their 
satisfaction? Such great personalities can be 
satisfied only by their own activities, which are 
distributed amongst hum an society out of their 
unlimited mercy  (47).  
The great sage Maitreya continued : Being 
thus worshiped by Mahārāja Pṛthu, the four 
Kumāras, who were masters of devotional ser-
vice, became very pleased. Indeed, they ap-
peared in the sky and praised the character of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

250 
 the King, and everyone observed them  (48).  
Amongst great personalities, Mahārāja 
Pṛthu was the chief by virtue of his fixed posi-
tion in relation to spiritual enlightenment. He 
remained satisfied as one who has achieved all 
success in spiritual understanding  (49).Being 
self-satisfied, Mahārāja Pṛthu executed his du-
ties as perfe ctly as possible according to the 
time and his situation, strength and financial 
position. His only aim in all his activities was 
to satisfy the Absolute Truth. In this way, he 
duly acted  (50).Mahārāja Pṛthu completely 
dedicated himself to be an eternal se rvant of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, transcenden-
tal to material nature. Consequently all the 
fruits of his activities were dedicated to the 
Lord, and he always thought of himself as the 
servant of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is the prop rietor of everything  
(51).Mahārāja Pṛthu, who was very opulent due 
to the prosperity of his entire empire, remained 
at home as a householder. Since he was never 
inclined to utilize his opulences for the gratifi-
cation of his senses, he remained unattached, 
exactly like the sun, whi ch is unaffected in all 
circumstances  (52).  
Being situated in the liberated position of 
devotional service, Pṛthu Mahārāja not only 
performed all fruitive activities but also begot 
five sons by his wife, Arci. Indeed, all his sons 
were begotten according to his own desire  (53). 
After begetting five sons, named Vijitāśva, 
Dhūmrakeśa, Haryakṣa, Draviṇa and Vṛka, 
Pṛthu Mahārāja continued to rule the planet. He 
accepted all the qualities of the deities who 
governed all other planets  (54).Since Mahārāja 
Pṛthu w as a perfect devotee of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, he wanted to protect 
the Lord’s creation by pleasing the various cit-
izens according to their various desires. There-
fore Pṛthu Mahārāja used to please them in all 
respects by his words, mentality, works and 
gentle behavior  (55).Mahārāja Pṛthu became as 
celebrated a king as Soma -rāja, the king of the 
moon. He was also powerful and exacting, just 
like the sun -god, who distributes heat and light 
and at the same time exacts all the planetary 
waters  (56). Mahārāja Pṛthu was so strong and powerful that no one could disobey his orders, 
any more than one could conquer fire itself. He 
was so strong that he was compared to Indra, 
the King of heaven, whose power is insupera-
ble. On the other hand, Mahārāja Pṛthu  was also 
as tolerant as the earth, and in fulfilling various 
desires of human society, he was like heaven 
itself  (57).Just as rainfall satisfies everyone’s 
desires, Mahārāja Pṛthu used to satisfy every-
one. He was like the sea in that no one could 
understa nd his depths, and he was like Meru, 
the king of hills, in the fixity of his purpose  
(58).  
Mahārāja Pṛthu’s intelligence and education 
were exactly like that of Yamarāja, the super-
intendent of death. His opulence was compara-
ble to the Himālaya Mountains, where all valu-
able jewels and metals are stocked. He pos-
sessed great riches like Kuvera, the treasurer of 
the heavenly planets, and no one could reveal 
his secrets, for they were like the demigod Var-
uṇa’s  (59).In his bodily strength and in the 
strength of his senses, Mahārāja Pṛthu was as 
strong as the wind, which can go anywhere and 
everywhere. As far as his intolerance was con-
cerned, he was just like the all -powerful Rudra 
expansion of Lord Śiva, or Sadāśiva  (60).In his 
bodily beauty he was just like Cupi d, and in his 
thoughtfulness he was like a lion. In his affec-
tion he was just like Svāyambhuva Manu, and 
in his ability to control he was like Lord 
Brahmā  (61).In his personal behavior, Pṛthu 
Mahārāja exhibited all good qualities, and in 
spiritual knowledg e he was exactly like 
Bṛhaspati. In self -control he was like the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead Himself. As far 
as his devotional service was concerned, he was 
a great follower of devotees who were attached 
to cow protection and the rendering of all ser-
vice to the spiritual master and the brāhmaṇas. 
He was perfect in his shyness and in his gentle 
behavior, and when he engaged in some phil-
anthropic activity, he worked as if he were 
working for his own personal self  
(62).Throughout the whole universe  in the 
higher, lower and middle planetary systems  
Pṛthu Mahārāja’s reputation was loudly de-
clared, and all ladies and saintly persons heard 
his glories, which were as sweet as the glories 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

251 
 of Lord Rāmacandra  (63.  
SB 4.23: Mahārāja Pṛthu’s Going Back 
Home  
At the last stage of his life, when Mahārāja 
Pṛthu saw himself getting old, that great soul, 
who was king of the world, divided whatever 
opulence he had accumulated amongst all kinds 
of living entities, moving and nonmoving. He 
arranged pensions for everyone acco rding to re-
ligious principles, and after executing the or-
ders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in 
complete coordination with Him, he dedicated 
his sons unto the earth, which was considered 
to be his daughter. Then Mahārāja Pṛthu left the 
presence of h is citizens, who were almost la-
menting and crying from feeling separation 
from the King, and went to the forest alone with 
his wife to perform austerities  (1-3).After retir-
ing from family life, Mahārāja Pṛthu strictly 
followed the regulations of retired li fe and un-
derwent severe austerities in the forest. He en-
gaged in these activities as seriously as he had 
formerly engaged in leading the government 
and conquering everyone  (4).In the tapo -vana, 
Mahārāja Pṛthu sometimes ate the trunks and 
roots of trees, so metimes he ate fruit and dried 
leaves, and for some weeks he drank only wa-
ter. Finally he lived simply by breathing air  
(5).Following the principles of forest living and 
the footsteps of the great sages and munis, 
Pṛthu Mahārāja accepted five kinds of heat ing 
processes during the summer season, exposed 
himself to torrents of rain in the rainy season 
and, in the winter, stood in water up to his neck. 
He also used to simply lie down on the floor to 
sleep  (6).Mahārāja Pṛthu underwent all these 
severe austeriti es in order to control his words 
and his senses, to refrain from discharging his 
semen and to control the life air within his 
body. All this he did for the satisfaction of 
Kṛṣṇa. He had no other purpose  (7).By thus 
practicing severe austerities, Mahārāja P ṛthu 
gradually became steadfast in spiritual life and 
completely free of all desires for fruitive activ-
ities. He also practiced breathing exercises to 
control his mind and senses, and by such con-
trol he became completely free from all desires 
for fruitive activity  (8).Thus the best amongst human beings, Mahārāja Pṛthu, followed that 
path of spiritual advancement which was ad-
vised by Sanat -kumāra. That is to say, he wor-
shiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa  (9). Mahārāja Pṛthu thus engaged com-
plete ly in devotional service, executing the 
rules and regulations strictly according to prin-
ciples, twenty -four hours daily. Thus his love 
and devotion unto the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, developed and became un-
flinching and fixed  (10).  
By regular ly discharging devotional service, 
Pṛthu Mahārāja became transcendental in mind 
and could therefore constantly think of the lotus 
feet of the Lord. Because of this, he became 
completely detached and attained perfect 
knowledge by which he could transcend al l 
doubt. Thus he was freed from the clutches of 
false ego and the material conception of life  
(11).When he became completely free from the 
conception of bodily life, Mahārāja Pṛthu real-
ized Lord Kṛṣṇa sitting in everyone’s heart as 
the Paramātmā. Being thu s able to get all in-
structions from Him, he gave up all other prac-
tices of yoga and Jnana . He was not even inter-
ested in the perfection of the yoga and Jnana  
systems, for he thoroughly realized that devo-
tional service to Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate goal of 
life and that unless the yogīs and jñānīs become 
attracted to kṛṣṇa -kathā [narrations about 
Kṛṣṇa], their illusions concerning existence can 
never be dispelled  (12).In due course of time, 
when Pṛthu Mahārāja was to give up his body, 
he fixed his mind firmly upo n the lotus feet of 
Kṛṣṇa, and thus, completely situated on the 
brahma -bhūta platform, he gave up the material 
body  (13). When Mahārāja Pṛthu practiced a 
particular yogic sitting posture, he blocked the 
door of his anus with his ankles, pressed his 
right a nd left calves and gradually raised his life 
air upward, passing it on to the circle of his na-
vel, up to his heart and throat, and finally 
pushed it upward to the central position be-
tween his two eyebrows  (14).In this way, Pṛthu 
Mahārāja gradually raised h is air of life up to 
the hole in his skull, whereupon he lost all de-
sire for material existence. Gradually he 
merged his air of life with the totality of air, his 
body with the totality of earth, and the fire 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

252 
 within his body with the totality of fire  (15).In 
this way, according to the different positions of 
the various parts of the body, Pṛthu Mahārāja 
merged the holes of his senses with the sky; his 
bodily liquids, such as blood and various secre-
tions, with the totality of water; and he merged 
earth with w ater, then water with fire, fire with 
air, air with sky, and so on  (16).He amalga-
mated the mind with the senses and the senses 
with the sense objects, according to their re-
spective positions, and he also amalgamated 
the material ego with the total material  energy, 
mahat -tattva  (17).Pṛthu Mahārāja then offered 
the total designation of the living entity unto the 
supreme controller of illusory energy. Being re-
leased from all the designations by which the 
living entity became entrapped, he became free 
by knowledge and renunciation and b y the spir-
itual force of his devotional service. In this 
way, being situated in his original constitu-
tional position of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he gave 
up this body as a prabhu, or controller of the 
senses  (18).  
The Queen, the wife of Pṛthu Mahārāja, 
whose n ame was Arci, followed her husband  
into the forest. Since she was a queen, her body 
was very delicate. Although she did not deserve 
to live in the forest, she voluntarily touched her 
lotus feet to the ground  (19).Although she was 
not accustomed to such dif ficulties, Queen Arci 
followed her husband  in the regulative princi-
ples of living in the forest like great sages. She 
lay down on the ground and ate only fruits, 
flowers and leaves, and because she was not fit 
for these activities, she became frail and thi n. 
Yet because of the pleasure she derived in serv-
ing her husband , she did not feel any difficul-
ties (20).When Queen Arci saw that her hus-
band , who had been so merciful to her and the 
earth, no longer showed symptoms of life, she 
lamented for a little whil e and then built a fiery 
pyre on top of a hill and placed the body of her 
husband  on it  (21).After this, the Queen exe-
cuted the necessary funerary functions and of-
fered oblations of water. After bathing in the 
river, she offered obeisances to various demi-
gods situated in the sky in the different plane-
tary systems. She then circumambulated the 
fire and, while thinking of the lotus feet of her husband , entered its flames (22).After observ-
ing this brave act performed by the chaste wife 
Arci, the wife of the gre at King Pṛthu, many 
thousands of the wives of the demigods, along 
with their husband s, offered prayers to the 
Queen, for they were very much satisfied  
(23).At that time the demigods were situated on 
the top of Mandara Hill, and all their wives be-
gan to sho wer flowers on the funeral pyre and 
began to talk amongst themselves as follows  
(24).  
The wives of the demigods said:  All glo-
ries to Queen Arci! We can see that this queen 
of the great King Pṛthu, the emperor of all the 
kings of the world, has served her husband  with 
mind, speech and body exactly as the goddess 
of fortune serves the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Yajñeśa, or Viṣṇu  (25).The wives of 
the demigods continued: Just see how this 
chaste lady, Arci, by dint of her inconceivable 
pious activities, is still following her husband  
upward, as far as we can see  (26).In this mate-
rial world, every human being has a short span 
of life, but those who are engaged in devotional 
service go back home, back to Godhead, for 
they are actually on the path of liberat ion. For 
such persons, there is nothing which is not 
available  (27). Any person who engages him-
self within this material world in performing 
activities that necessitate great struggle, and 
who, after obtaining a human form of life  
which is a chance to att ain liberation from mis-
eries  undertakes the difficult tasks of fruitive 
activities, must be considered to be cheated and 
envious of his own self  (28).  
The great sage Maitreya continued 
speaking : My dear Vidura, when the wives of 
the denizens of heaven we re thus talking 
amongst themselves, Queen Arci reached the 
planet which her husband , Mahārāja Pṛthu, the 
topmost self -realized soul, had attained  
(29).Maitreya continued: The greatest of all 
devotees, Mahārāja Pṛthu, was very powerful, 
and his character was liberal, magnificent and 
magnanimous. Thus I have described him to 
you as far as possible  (30).Any person who de-
scribes the great characteristics of King Pṛthu 
with faith and determination  whether he reads 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

253 
 or hears of them himself or helps others to hear 
of them  is certain to attain the very planet 
which Mahārāja Pṛthu attained. In o ther words, 
such a person also returns home to the 
Vaikuṇṭha planets, back to Godhead  (31).If one 
hears of the characteristics of Pṛthu Mahārāja 
and is a brāhmaṇa, he becomes perfectly quali-
fied with brahminical powers; if he is a kṣat-
riya, he becomes a ki ng of the world; if he is a 
vaiśya, he becomes a master of other vaiśyas 
and many animals; and if he is a śūdra, he be-
comes the topmost devotee  (32).It does not 
matter whether one is a man or woman. Anyone 
who, with great respect, hears this narration of 
Mahārāja Pṛthu will become the parent of many 
children if without children, and will become 
the richest if without money (33).Also, one who 
hears this narration three times will become 
very reputable if he is not recognized in society, 
and he will become a g reat scholar if he is illit-
erate. In other words, hearing of the narrations 
of Pṛthu Mahārāja is so auspicious that it drives 
away all bad luck  (34).By hearing the narration 
of Pṛthu Mahārāja, one can become great, in-
crease his duration of life, gain promo tion to 
the heavenly planets and counteract the con-
taminations of this Age of Kali. In addition, one 
can promote the causes of religion, economic 
development, sense gratification and liberation. 
Therefore from all sides it is advisable for a ma-
terialistic person who is interested in such 
things to read and hear the narrations of the life 
and character of Pṛthu Mahārāja  (35).If a king, 
who is desirous of attaining victory and ruling 
power, chants the narration of Pṛthu Mahārāja 
three times before going forth  on his chariot, all 
subordinate kings will automatically render all 
kinds of taxes unto him  as they rendered them 
unto Mahārāja Pṛthu  simply upon his order  
(36).A pure devotee who is executing the dif-
ferent processes of devotional service may be 
situate d in the transcendental position, being 
completely absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, 
but even he, while discharging devotional ser-
vice, must hear, read and induce others to hear 
about the character and life of Pṛthu Mahārāja  
(37).The great sage Maitreya con tinued: My 
dear Vidura, I have as far as possible spoken the narrations about Pṛthu Mahārāja, which en-
rich one’s devotional attitude. Whoever takes 
advantage of these benefits also goes back 
home, back to Godhead, like Mahārāja Pṛthu  
(38).Whoever, with gre at reverence and adora-
tion, regularly reads, chants and describes the 
history of Mahārāja Pṛthu’s activities will cer-
tainly increase unflinching faith and attraction 
for the lotus feet of the Lord. The Lord’s lotus 
feet are the boat by which one can cross the 
ocean of nescience  (39).  
SB 4.24: Chanting the Song Sung by 
Lord Śiva  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  Vi-
jitāśva, the eldest son of Mahārāja Pṛthu, who 
had a reputation like his father’s, became em-
peror and gave his younger brothers different 
direct ions of the world to govern, for he was 
very affectionate toward his brothers  
(1).Mahārāja Vijitāśva offered the eastern part 
of the world to his brother Haryakṣa, the south-
ern part to Dhūmrakeśa, the western part to 
Vṛka and the northern part to Draviṇa  (2).For-
merly, Mahārāja Vijitāśva pleased the King of 
heaven, Indra, and from him received the title 
Antardhāna. His wife’s name was Śikhaṇḍinī, 
and by her he begot three good sons  (3).The 
three sons of Mahārāja Antardhāna were named 
Pāvaka, Pavamāna and Śuc i. Formerly these 
three personalities were the demigods of fire, 
but due to the curse of the great sage Vasiṣṭha, 
they became the sons of Mahārāja Antardhāna. 
As such, they were as powerful as the fire -gods, 
and they attained the destination of mystic yoga  
power, being again situated as the demigods of 
fire (4).  
Mahārāja Antardhāna had another wife, 
named Nabhasvatī, and by her he was happy to 
beget another son, named Havirdhāna. Since 
Mahārāja Antardhāna was very liberal, he did 
not kill Indra while the d emigod was stealing 
his father’s horse at the sacrifice  (5).Whenever 
Antardhāna, the supreme royal power, had to 
exact taxes, punish his citizens or fine them se-
verely, he was not willing to do so. Conse-
quently he retired from the execution of such 
duties and engaged himself in the performance 
of different sacrifices  (6).Although Mahārāja 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

254 
 Antardhāna was engaged in performing sacri-
fices,  because he was a self -realized soul he 
very intelligently rendered devotional service 
to the Lord, who eradicates all the f ears of His 
devotees. By thus worshiping the Supreme 
Lord, Mahārāja Antardhāna, rapt in ecstasy, at-
tained His planet very easily  (7).  
Havirdhāna, the son of Mahārāja 
Antardhāna, had a wife named Havirdhānī, 
who gave birth to six sons, named Barhiṣat, 
Gaya , Śukla, Kṛṣṇa, Satya and Jitavrata  (8).The 
great sage Maitreya continued: My dear 
Vidura, Havirdhāna’s very powerful son 
named Barhiṣat was very expert in performing 
various kinds of fruitive sacrifices, and he was 
also expert in the practice of mystic yo ga. By 
his great qualifications, he became known as 
Prajāpati  (9).  Mahārāja Barhiṣat executed 
many sacrifices all over the world. He scattered 
kuśa grasses and kept the tops of the grasses 
pointed eastward  (10).  
Mahārāja Barhiṣat  henceforward known as 
Prācīnabarhi  was ordered by the supreme dem-
igod Brahmā to marry the daughter of the ocean 
named Śatadruti. Her bodily features were 
completely beautiful, and she was very young. 
She was decorated with the proper garments, 
and when she came into the marriag e arena and 
began circumambulating it, the fire -god Agni 
became so attracted to her that he desired her 
company, exactly as he had formerly desired to 
enjoy Śukī  (11).While Śatadruti was thus being 
married, the demons, the denizens of Gandhar-
valoka, the gr eat sages, and the denizens of Sid-
dhaloka, the earthly planets and Nāgaloka, alt-
hough highly exalted, were all captivated by the 
tinkling of her ankle bells  (12).King 
Prācīnabarhi begot ten children in the womb of 
Śatadruti. All of them were equally endowe d 
with religiosity, and all of them were known as 
the Pracetās  (13).When all these Pracetās were 
ordered by their father to marry and beget chil-
dren, they all entered the ocean and practiced 
austerities and penances for ten thousand years. 
Thus they worshi ped the master of all austerity, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead  
(14).When all the sons of Prācīnabarhi left 
home to execute austerities, they met Lord Śiva, who, out of great mercy, instructed them 
about the Absolute Truth. All the sons of 
Prācīnabarhi  meditated upon the instructions, 
chanting and worshiping them with great care 
and attention  (15).  
Vidura asked Maitreya : My dear 
brāhmaṇa, why did the Pracetās meet Lord Śiva 
on the way? Please tell me how the meeting 
happened, how Lord Śiva became very pleased 
with them and how he instructed them. Cer-
tainly such talks are important, and I wish that 
you please be merciful upon me and describe 
them  (16).The great sage Vidura continued: O 
best of the brāhmaṇas, it is very difficult for liv-
ing entities encag ed within this material body 
to have personal contact with Lord Śiva. Even 
great sages who have no material attachments 
do not contact him, despite their always being 
absorbed in meditation to attain his personal 
contact  (17).Lord Śiva, the most powerful d em-
igod, second only to Lord Viṣṇu, is self -suffi-
cient. Although he has nothing to aspire for in 
the material world, for the benefit of those in 
the material world he is always busily engaged 
everywhere and is accompanied by his danger-
ous energies like the goddess Kālī and the god-
dess Durgā  (18).  
The great sage Maitreya continued : My 
dear Vidura, because of their pious nature, all 
the sons of Prācīnabarhi very seriously ac-
cepted the words of their father with heart and 
soul, and with these words on their he ads, they 
went toward the west to execute their father’s 
order  (19).While traveling, the Pracetās hap-
pened to see a great reservoir of water which 
seemed almost as big as the ocean. The water 
of this lake was so calm and quiet that it seemed 
like the mind of a great soul, and its inhabitants, 
the aquatics, appeared very peaceful and happy 
to be under the protection of such a watery res-
ervoir  (20).In that great lake there were differ-
ent types of lotus flowers. Some of them were 
bluish, and some of them were red. Some of 
them grew at night, some in the day and some, 
like the indīvara lotus flower, in the evening. 
Combined together, the lotus flowers filled the 
lake so full that the lake appeared to be a great 
mine of such flowers. Consequently, on the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

255 
 shores t here were swans and cranes, 
cakravākas, kāraṇḍavas and other beautiful wa-
ter birds standing about  (21).There were vari-
ous trees and creepers on all sides of the lake, 
and there were mad bumblebees humming all 
about them. The trees appeared to be very jolly  
due to the sweet humming of the bumblebees, 
and the saffron, which was contained in the lo-
tus flowers, was being thrown into the air. 
These all created such an atmosphere that it ap-
peared as though a festival were taking place 
there  (22).The sons of the K ing became very 
much amazed when they heard vibrations from 
various drums and kettledrums along with 
other orderly musical sounds pleasing to the ear  
(23). The Pracetās were fortunate to see Lord 
Śiva, the chief of the demigods, emerging from 
the water with his associates. His bodily luster 
was just like molten gold, his throat was bluish, 
and he had three eyes, which looked very mer-
cifully upon his devotee s. He was accompanied 
by many musicians, who were glorifying him. 
As soon as the Pracetās saw Lord Śiva, they im-
mediately offered their obeisances in great 
amazement and fell down at the lotus feet of the 
lord (24-25).Lord Śiva became very pleased 
with the  Pracetās because generally Lord Śiva 
is the protector of pious persons and persons of 
gentle behavior. Being very much pleased with 
the princes, he began to speak as follows  (26).  
Lord Śiva said:  You are all the sons of King 
Prācīnabarhi, and I wish all good fortune to 
you. I also know what you are going to do, and 
therefore I am visible to you just to show my 
mercy upon you  (27).Lord Śiva continued: Any 
person who is surrendered to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, the controller of 
everything  material nature as well as the living 
entity  is actually very dear to me  (28). A per-
son who executes his occupational duty 
properly for one hundred births becomes qual-
ified to occupy the post of Brahmā, and if he 
becomes more qualified, he can approach Lo rd 
Śiva. A person who is directly surrendered to 
Lord Kṛṣṇa, or Viṣṇu, in unalloyed devotional 
service is immediately promoted to the spiritual 
planets. Lord Śiva and other demigods attain 
these planets after the destruction of this mate-
rial world  (29).You  are all devotees of the Lord, and as such I appreciate that you are as respect-
able as the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
Himself. I know in this way that the devotees 
also respect me and that I am dear to them. Thus 
no one can be as dear to the devotees a s I am  
(30).Now I shall chant one mantra which is not 
only transcendental, pure and auspicious, but is 
the best prayer for anyone who is aspiring to 
attain the ultimate goal of life. When I chant 
this mantra, please hear it carefully and atten-
tively  (31).  
The great sage Maitreya continued:  Out 
of his causeless mercy, the exalted personality 
Lord Śiva, a great devotee of Lord Nārāyaṇa, 
continued to speak to the King’s sons, who 
were standing with folded hands  (32).  
Lord Śiva addressed the Supreme Per-
sonali ty of Godhead with the following 
prayer : O Supreme Personality of Godhead, all 
glories unto You. You are the most exalted of 
all self -realized souls. Since You are always 
auspicious for the self -realized, I wish that You 
be auspicious for me. You are worsh ipable by 
virtue of the all -perfect instructions You give. 
You are the Supersoul; therefore I offer my 
obeisances unto You as the supreme living be-
ing (33).My Lord, You are the origin of the cre-
ation by virtue of the lotus flower which sprouts 
from Your na vel. You are the supreme control-
ler of the senses and the sense objects, and You 
are also the all -pervading Vāsudeva. You are 
most peaceful, and because of Your self -illumi-
nated existence, You are not disturbed by the 
six kinds of transformations  (34). My dear 
Lord, You are the origin of the subtle material 
ingredients, the master of all integration as well 
as the master of all disintegration, the predom-
inating Deity named Saṅkarṣaṇa, and the mas-
ter of all intelligence, known as the predomi-
nating Deity Prad yumna. Therefore, I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto You  (35).My Lord, 
as the supreme directing Deity known as 
Aniruddha, You are the master of the senses 
and the mind. I therefore offer my obeisances 
unto You again and again. You are known as 
Ananta as  well as Saṅkarṣaṇa because of Your 
ability to destroy the whole creation by the 
blazing fire from Your mouth  (36).My Lord, O 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

256 
 Aniruddha, You are the authority by which the 
doors of the higher planetary systems and lib-
eration are opened. You are always with in the 
pure heart of the living entity. Therefore I offer 
my obeisances unto You. You are the possessor 
of semen which is like gold, and thus, in the 
form of fire, You help the Vedic sacrifices, be-
ginning with cātur -hotra. Therefore I offer my 
obeisances u nto You  (37).  My Lord, You are 
the provider of the Pitṛlokas as well as all the 
demigods. You are the predominating deity of 
the moon and the master of all three Vedas. I 
offer my respectful obeisances unto You be-
cause You are the original source of satis fac-
tion for all living entities  (38).My dear Lord, 
You are the gigantic universal form which con-
tains all the individual bodies of the living en-
tities. You are the maintainer of the three 
worlds, and as such You maintain the mind, 
senses, body, and air of life within them. I 
therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto 
You (39).My dear Lord, by expanding Your 
transcendental vibrations, You reveal the actual 
meaning of everything. You are the all -pervad-
ing sky within and without, and You are the ul-
timate go al of pious activities executed both 
within this material world and beyond it. I 
therefore offer my respectful obeisances again 
and again unto You  (40).My dear Lord, You are 
the viewer of the results of pious activities. You 
are inclination, disinclination  and their result-
ant activities. You are the cause of the misera-
ble conditions of life caused by irreligion, and 
therefore You are death. I offer You my re-
spectful obeisances  (41).My dear Lord, You are 
the topmost of all bestowers of all benediction, 
the o ldest and supreme enjoyer amongst all en-
joyers. You are the master of all the worlds’ 
metaphysical philosophy, for You are the su-
preme cause of all causes, Lord Kṛṣṇa. You are 
the greatest of all religious principles, the su-
preme mind, and You have a brain  which is 
never checked by any condition. Therefore I re-
peatedly offer my obeisances unto You  (42). 
My dear Lord, You are the supreme controller 
of the worker, sense activities and results of 
sense activities [karma]. Therefore You are the 
controller of th e body, mind and senses. You 
are also the supreme controller of egotism, known as Rudra. You are the source of 
knowledge and the activities of the Vedic in-
junctions  (43).  
My dear Lord, I wish to see You exactly in 
the form that Your very dear devotees wor ship. 
You have many other forms, but I wish to see 
Your form that is especially liked by the devo-
tees. Please be merciful upon me and show me 
that form, for only that form worshiped by the 
devotees can perfectly satisfy all the demands 
of the senses  (44).The Lord’s beauty resembles 
a dark cloud during the rainy season. As the 
rainfall glistens, His bodily features also glis-
ten. Indeed, He is the sum total of all beauty. 
The Lord has four arms and an exquisitely 
beautiful face with eyes like lotus petals, a 
beautiful highly raised nose, a mind -attracting 
smile, a beautiful forehead and equally beauti-
ful and fully decorated ears  (45-46).The Lord is 
superexcellently beautiful on account of His 
open and merciful smile and His sidelong 
glance upon His devotees. H is black hair is 
curly, and His garments, waving in the wind, 
appear like flying saffron pollen from lotus 
flowers. His glittering earrings, shining helmet, 
bangles, garland, ankle bells, waist belt and 
various other bodily ornaments combine with 
conchshel l, disc, club and lotus flower to in-
crease the natural beauty of the Kaustubha 
pearl on His chest  (47-48).  The Lord has shoul-
ders just like a lion’s. Upon these shoulders are 
garlands, necklaces and epaulets, and all of 
these are always glittering. Beside s these, there 
is the beauty of the Kaustubha -maṇi pearl, and 
on the dark chest of the Lord there are streaks 
named Śrīvatsa, which are signs of the goddess 
of fortune. The glittering of these streaks excels 
the beauty of the golden streaks on a gold -test-
ing stone. Indeed, such beauty defeats a gold -
testing stone  (49).The Lord’s abdomen is beau-
tiful due to three ripples in the flesh. Being so 
round, His abdomen resembles the leaf of a 
banyan tree, and when He exhales and inhales, 
the movement of the ripples  appears very, very 
beautiful. The coils within the navel of the Lord 
are so deep that it appears that the entire uni-
verse sprouted out of it and yet again wishes to 
go back  (50).The lower part of the Lord’s waist 
is dark and covered with yellow garments a nd 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

257 
 a belt bedecked with golden embroidery work. 
His symmetrical lotus feet and the calves, 
thighs and joints of His legs are extraordinarily 
beautiful. Indeed, the Lord’s entire body ap-
pears to be well built  (51).My dear Lord, Your 
two lotus feet are so be autiful that they appear 
like two blossoming petals of the lotus flower 
which grows during the autumn season. Indeed, 
the nails of Your lotus feet emanate such a great 
effulgence that they immediately dissipate all 
the darkness in the heart of a conditione d soul. 
My dear Lord, kindly show me that form of 
Yours which always dissipates all kinds of 
darkness in the heart of a devotee. My dear 
Lord, You are the supreme spiritual master of 
everyone; therefore all conditioned souls cov-
ered with the darkness of ig norance can be en-
lightened by You as the spiritual master  (52).  
My dear Lord, those who desire to purify 
their existence must always engage in medita-
tion upon Your lotus feet, as described above. 
Those who are serious about executing their oc-
cupational du ties and who want freedom from 
fear must take to this process of bhakti -yoga  
(53).My dear Lord, the king in charge of the 
heavenly kingdom is also desirous of obtaining 
the ultimate goal of life  devotional service. 
Similarly, You are the ultimate destinat ion of 
those who identify themselves with You [ahaṁ 
brahmāsmi]. However, it is very difficult for 
them to attain You, whereas a devotee can very 
easily attain Your Lordship  (54).My dear Lord, 
pure devotional service is even difficult for lib-
erated persons to discharge, but devotional ser-
vice alone can satisfy You. Who will take to 
other processes of self -realization if he is actu-
ally serious about the perfection of life? (55) 
Simply by expansion of His eyebrows, invinci-
ble time personified can immediately v anquish 
the entire universe. However, formidable time 
does not approach the devotee who has taken 
complete shelter at Your lotus feet  (56).If one 
by chance associates with a devotee, even for a 
fraction of a moment, he no longer is subject to 
attraction by  the results of karma or Jnana . 
What interest then can he have in the benedic-
tions of the demigods, who are subject to the 
laws of birth and death? (57) My dear Lord, 
Your lotus feet are the cause of all auspicious things and the destroyer of all the contam ina-
tion of sin. I therefore beg Your Lordship to 
bless me by the association of Your devotees, 
who are completely purified by worshiping 
Your lotus feet and who are so merciful upon 
the conditioned souls. I think that Your real 
benediction will be to allow  me to associate 
with such devotees  (58).The devotee whose 
heart has been completely cleansed by the pro-
cess of devotional service and who is favored 
by Bhaktidevī does not become bewildered by 
the external energy, which is just like a dark 
well. Being com pletely cleansed of all material 
contamination in this way, a devotee is able to 
understand very happily Your name, fame, 
form, activities, etc  (59).My dear Lord, the im-
personal Brahman spreads everywhere, like the 
sunshine or the sky. And that impersonal Brah-
man, which spreads throughout the universe 
and in which the entire universe is manifested, 
is You  (60). 
My dear Lord, You have manifold energies, 
and these energies are manifested in manifold 
forms. With such energies You have also cre-
ated this cosmic manifestation, and although 
You maintain it as if it were permanent, You 
ultimately annihilate it. Although You are 
never disturbed by such changes and altera-
tions, the living entities are disturbed by them, 
and therefore they find the cosmic manifesta-
tion to be different or separated from You. My 
Lord, You are always independent, and I can 
clearly see this fact  (61).My dear Lord, Your 
universal form consists of all five elements, the 
senses, mind, intelligence, false ego (which is 
material) and the Paramātmā, Your partial ex-
pansion, who is the director of everything. 
Yogīs other than the devotees  namely the 
karma -yogī and Jnana -yogī  worship You by 
their respective actions in their respective posi-
tions. It is stated both in the Vedas and in the 
śāstras that are corollaries of the Vedas, and in-
deed everywhere, that it is only You who are to 
be worshiped. That is the e xpert version of all 
the Vedas  (62).My dear Lord, You are the only 
Supreme Person, the cause of all causes. Before 
the creation of this material world, Your mate-
rial energy remains in a dormant condition. 
When Your material energy is agitated, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

258 
 three qu alities  namely goodness, passion and 
ignorance  act, and as a result the total material 
energy  egotism, ether, air, fire, water, earth and 
all the various demigods and saintly persons  
becomes manifest. Thus the material world is 
created  (63).My dear Lor d, after creating by 
Your own potencies, You enter within the cre-
ation in four kinds of forms. Being within the 
hearts of the living entities, You know them 
and know how they are enjoying their senses. 
The so -called happiness of this material crea-
tion is e xactly like the bees’ enjoyment of 
honey after it has been collected in the honey-
comb  (64).  
My dear Lord, Your absolute authority can-
not be directly experienced, but one can guess 
by seeing the activities of the world that every-
thing is being destroyed in  due course of time. 
The force of time is very strong, and everything 
is being destroyed by something else  just as 
one animal is being eaten by another animal. 
Time scatters everything, exactly as the wind 
scatters clouds in the sky  (65).My dear Lord, all  
living entities within this material world are 
mad after planning for things, and they are al-
ways busy with a desire to do this or that. This 
is due to uncontrollable greed. The greed for 
material enjoyment is always existing in the 
living entity, but You r Lordship is always alert, 
and in due course of time You strike him, just 
as a snake seizes a mouse and very easily swal-
lows him  (66).My dear Lord, any learned per-
son knows that unless he worships You, his en-
tire life is spoiled. Knowing this, how could h e 
give up worshiping Your lotus feet? Even our 
father and spiritual master, Lord Brahmā, un-
hesitatingly worshiped You, and the fourteen 
Manus followed in his footsteps  (67). My dear 
Lord, all actually learned persons know You as 
the Supreme Brahman and the  Supersoul. Alt-
hough the entire universe is afraid of Lord Ru-
dra, who ultimately annihilates everything, for 
the learned devotees You are the fearless desti-
nation of all  (68).  
My dear sons of the King, just execute your 
occupational duty as kings with a p ure heart. 
Just chant this prayer fixing your mind on the 
lotus feet of the Lord. That will bring you all good fortune, for the Lord will be very much 
pleased with you  (69).Therefore, O sons of the 
King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Hari, is situate d in everyone’s heart. He is also 
within your hearts. Therefore chant the glories 
of the Lord and always meditate upon Him con-
tinuously  (70). My dear princes, in the form of 
a prayer I have delineated the yoga system of 
chanting the holy name. All of you s hould take 
this important stotra within your minds and 
promise to keep it in order to become great 
sages. By acting silently like a great sage and 
by giving attention and reverence, you should 
practice this method  (71).This prayer was first 
spoken to us by  Lord Brahmā, the master of all 
creators. The creators, headed by Bhṛgu, were 
instructed in these prayers because they wanted 
to create  (72).When all the Prajāpatis were or-
dered to create by Lord Brahmā, we chanted 
these prayers in praise of the Supreme Pe rson-
ality of Godhead and became completely free 
from all ignorance. Thus we were able to create 
different types of living entities  (73).A devotee 
of Lord Kṛṣṇa whose mind is always absorbed 
in Him, who with great attention and reverence 
chants this stotra [prayer], will achieve the 
greatest perfection of life without delay  (74).In 
this material world there are different types of 
achievement, but of all of them the achieve-
ment of knowledge is considered to be the high-
est because one can cross the ocean of ne sci-
ence only on the boat of knowledge. Otherwise 
the ocean is impassable  (75).Although render-
ing devotional service to the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead and worshiping Him are very 
difficult, if one vibrates or simply reads this 
stotra [prayer] composed a nd sung by me, he 
will very easily be able to invoke the mercy of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead  (76).The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the dear-
most objective of all auspicious benedictions. 
A human being who sings this song sung by me 
can please t he Supreme Personality of God-
head. Such a devotee, being fixed in the Lord’s 
devotional service, can acquire whatever he 
wants from the Supreme Lord  (77).A devotee 
who rises early in the morning and with folded 
hands c hants these prayers sung by Lord Śiva, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

259 
 and gives facility to others to hear them, cer-
tainly becomes free from all bondage to fruitive 
activities  (78).My dear sons of the King, the 
prayers I have recited to you are meant for 
pleasing the Supreme Personality  of Godhead, 
the Supersoul. I advise you to recite these pray-
ers, which are as effective as great austerities. 
In this way, when you are mature, your life will 
be successful, and you will certainly achieve all 
your desired objectives without fail  (79). 

SB 4.25: The Descriptions of the Charac-
teristics of King Puranjana  
The great sage Maitreya continued 
speakingto Vidura:  My dear Vidura, in this 
way Lord Śiva instructed the sons of King 
Barhiṣat. The sons of the King also worshiped 
Lord Śiva with great devotion and respect. Fi-
nally, Lord Śiva became invisible to the princes  
(1).All the Pracetā princes simply stood in the 
water for ten thousand years and recited the 
prayers given to them by Lord Śiva  (2). While 
the princes were undergoing severe austerities 
in the water, their father was performing differ-
ent types of fruitive activities. At this time the 
great saint Nārada, master and teacher of all 
spiritual life, became very compassionate upon 
the King and decided to instruct him about spir-
itual life  (3).Nārada Muni asked King 
Prācīnabarhiṣat: My dear King, what do you 
desire to achieve by performing these fruitive 
activiti es? The chief aim of life is to get rid of 
all miseries and enjoy happiness, but these two 
things cannot be realized by fruitive activity  
(4).  
The King replied : O great soul, Nārada, my 
intelligence is entangled in fruitive activities; 
therefore I do not know the ultimate goal of life. 
Kindly instruct me in pure knowledge so that I 
can get out of the entanglement of fruitive ac-
tivities  (5).Those who are interested only in a 
so-called dutiful life  namely remaining as a 
householder entangled by sons and a w ife and 
searching after wealth  think that such things 
are life’s ultimate goal. Such people simply 
wander in different types of bodies throughout 
this material existence without finding out the 
ultimate goal of life  (6).  The great saint Nārada said:  O ruler of the 
citizens, my dear King, please see in the sky 
those animals which you have sacrificed with-
out compassion and without mercy in the sacri-
ficial arena  (7).All these animals are awaiting 
your death so that they can a venge the injuries 
you have inflicted upon them. After you die, 
they will angrily pierce your body with iron 
horns  (8).In this connection I wish to narrate an 
old history connected with the character of a 
king called Puranjana . Please try to hear me 
with g reat attention  (9).  
My dear King, once in the past lived a king 
named Puranjana , who was celebrated for his 
great activities. He had a friend named Avijñāta 
[“the unknown one”]. No one could understand 
the activities of Avijñāta  (10).King Puranjana  
began to search for a suitable place to live, and 
thus he traveled all over the world.  Even after a 
great deal of traveling, he could not find a place 
just to his liking. Finally he became morose and 
disappointed  (11).King Puranjana  had unlim-
ited desires for sense enjoyment; consequently 
he traveled all over the world to find a place 
where all his desires could be fulfilled. Unfor-
tunately he found a feeling of insufficiency 
everywhere  (12).  
Once, while wandering in this way, he saw 
on the southern side of the Himālayas, in a 
place named Bhārata -varṣa [India], a city that 
had nine gates all about and was characterized 
by all auspicious facilities  (13).That city was 
surrounded by walls and parks, and within it 
were towers, canals, windo ws and outlets. The 
houses there were decorated with domes made 
of gold, silver and iron  (14). The floors of the 
houses in that city were made of sapphire, crys-
tal, diamonds, pearls, emeralds and rubies. Be-
cause of the luster of the houses in the capital, 
the city was compared to the celestial town 
named Bhogavatī  (15).In that city there were 
many assembly houses, street crossings, 
streets, restaurants, gambling houses, markets, 
resting places, flags, festoons and beautiful 
parks. All these surrounded the c ity(16).  
On the outskirts of that city were many 
beautiful trees and creepers encircling a nice 
lake. Also surrounding that lake were many 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

260 
 groups of birds and bees that were always 
chanting and humming  (17).The branches of 
the trees standing on the bank o f the lake re-
ceived particles of water carried by the spring 
air from the falls coming down from the icy 
mountain  (18).In such an atmosphere even the 
animals of the forest became nonviolent and 
nonenvious like great sages. Consequently, the 
animals did not  attack anyone. Over and above 
everything was the cooing of the cuckoos. Any 
passenger passing along that path was invited 
by that atmosphere to take rest in that nice gar-
den (19).  
While wandering here and there in that won-
derful garden, King Puranjana  suddenly came 
in contact with a very beautiful woman who 
was walking there without any engagement. 
She had ten servants with her, and each servant 
had hundreds of wives accompanying him  
(20).The woman was protected on all sides by 
a five -hooded snake. She wa s very beautiful 
and young, and she appeared very anxious to 
find a suitable husband  (21).The woman’s 
nose, teeth and forehead were all very beauti-
ful. Her ears were equally very beautiful and 
were bedecked with dazzling earrings  (22).The 
waist and hips of  the woman were very beauti-
ful. She was dressed in a yellow sārī with a 
golden belt. While she walked, her ankle bells 
rang. She appeared exactly like a denizen of the 
heavens  (23).With the end of her sārī the 
woman was trying to cover her breasts, which 
were equally round and well placed side by 
side. She again and again tried to cover them 
out of shyness while she walked exactly like a 
great elephant  (24).  
Puranjana , the hero, became attracted by the 
eyebrows and smiling face of the very beautiful 
girl a nd was immediately pierced by the arrows 
of her lusty desires. When she smiled shyly, she 
looked very beautiful to Puranjana , who, alt-
hough a hero, could not refrain from addressing 
her (25).My dear lotus -eyed, kindly explain to 
me where you are coming fro m, who you are, 
and whose daughter you are. You appear very 
chaste. What is the purpose of your coming 
here? What are you trying to do? Please explain 
all these things to me  (26).My dear lotus -eyed, who are those eleven strong bodyguards with 
you, and who are those ten specific servants? 
Who are those women following the ten serv-
ants, and who is the snake that is preceding 
you? (27) My dear beautiful girl, you are ex-
actly like the goddess of fortune or the wife of 
Lord Śiva or the goddess of learning, the wife 
of Lord Brahmā. Although you must be one of 
them, I see that you are loitering in this forest. 
Indeed, you are as silent as th e great sages. Is it 
that you are searching after your own husband ? 
Whoever your husband  may be, simply by un-
derstanding that you are so faithful to him, he 
will come to possess all opulences. I think you 
must be the goddess of fortune, but I do not see 
the lotus flower in your hand. Therefore I am 
asking you where you have thrown that lotus  
(28).O greatly fortunate one, it appears that you 
are none of the women I have mentioned be-
cause I see that your feet are touching the 
ground. But if you are some woman  of this 
planet, you can, like the goddess of fortune  
who, accompanied by Lord Viṣṇu, increases 
the beauty of the Vaikuṇṭha planets  also in-
crease the beauty of this city by associating 
with me. You should understand that I am a 
great hero and a very powe rful king on this 
planet  (29).Certainly your glancing upon me 
today has very much agitated my mind. Your 
smile, which is full of shyness but at the same 
time lusty, is agitating the most powerful cupid 
within me. Therefore, O most beautiful, I ask 
you to b e merciful upon me  (30). My dear girl, 
your face is so beautiful with your nice eye-
brows and eyes and with your bluish hair scat-
tered about. In addition, very sweet sounds are 
coming from your mouth. Nonetheless, you are 
so covered with shyness that you do  not see me 
face to face. I therefore request you, my dear 
girl, to smile and kindly raise your head to see 
me (31).  
Nārada continued : My dear King, when 
Puranjana  became so attracted and impatient to 
touch the girl and enjoy her, the girl also be-
came att racted by his words and accepted his 
request by smiling. By this time she was cer-
tainly attracted by the King  (32).The girl said: 
O best of human beings, I do not know who has 
begotten me. I cannot speak to you perfectly 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

261 
 about this. Nor do I know the names  or the 
origin of the associates with me  (33).O great 
hero, we only know that we are existing in this 
place. We do not know what will come after. 
Indeed, we are so foolish that we do not care to 
understand who has created this beautiful place 
for our resid ence(34).My dear gentleman, all 
these men and women with me are known as 
my friends, and the snake, who always remains 
awake, protects this city even during my sleep-
ing hours. So much I know. I do not know any-
thing beyond this  (35). O killer of the enemy, 
you have somehow or other come here. This is 
certainly great fortune for me. I wish all auspi-
cious things for you. You have a great desire to 
satisfy your senses, and all my friends and I 
shall try our best in all respects to fulfill your 
desires  (36). My dear lord, I have just arranged 
this city of nine gates for you so that you can 
have all kinds of sense gratification. You may 
live here for one hundred years, and everything 
for your sense gratification will be supplied  
(37).How can I expect to unite with  others, who 
are neither conversant about sex nor capable of 
knowing how to enjoy life while living or after 
death? Such foolish persons are like animals 
because they do not know the process of sense 
enjoyment in this life and after death  (38).The 
woman co ntinued: In this material world, a 
householder’s life brings all kinds of happiness 
in religion, economic development, sense grat-
ification and the begetting of children, sons and 
grandsons. After that, one may desire liberation 
as well as material reputati on. The householder 
can appreciate the results of sacrifices, which 
enable him to gain promotion to superior plan-
etary systems. All this material happiness is 
practically unknown to the transcendentalists. 
They cannot even imagine such happiness  
(39).The w oman continued: According to au-
thorities, the householder life is pleasing not 
only to oneself but to all the forefathers, demi-
gods, great sages, saintly persons and everyone 
else. A householder life is thus beneficial  
(40).O my dear hero, who in this worl d will not 
accept a husband  like you? You are so famous, 
so magnanimous, so beautiful and so easily got-
ten (41).O mighty -armed, who in this world 
will not be attracted by your arms, which are just like the bodies of serpents? Actually you 
relieve the distr ess of husband less women like 
us by your attractive smile and your aggressive 
mercy. We think that you are traveling on the 
surface of the earth just to benefit us only  (42).  
The great sage Nārada continued : My 
dear King, those two  the man and the woman  
supporting one another through mutual under-
standing, entered that city and enjoyed life for 
one hundred years  (43).Many professional 
singers used to sing about the glories of King 
Puranjana  and his glorious activities. When it 
was too hot in the summer, h e used to enter a 
reservoir of water. He would surround himself 
with many women and enjoy their company  
(44).Of the nine gates in that city, seven were 
on the surface and two were subterranean. A to-
tal of nine doors were constructed, and these 
led to diffe rent places. All the gates were used 
by the city’s governor  (45).My dear King, of 
the nine doors, five led toward the eastern side, 
one led toward the northern side, one led to-
ward the southern side, and two led toward the 
western side. I shall try to give  the names of 
these different doors  (46).The two gates named 
Khadyotā and Āvirmukhī were situated facing 
the eastern side, but they were constructed in 
one place. Through those two gates the King 
used to go to the city of Vibhrājita accompanied 
by a friend whose name was Dyumān  (47). 
Similarly i n the east there were two sets of 
gates named Nalinī and Nālinī, and these were 
also constructed in one place. Through these 
gates the King, accompanied by a friend named 
Avadhūta, used to go to the city of Saurabha  
(48).The fifth gate situated on the east ern side 
was named Mukhyā, or the chief. Through this 
gate, accompanied by his friends named 
Rasajña and Vipaṇa, he used to visit two places 
named Bahūdana and Āpaṇa  (49).The southern 
gate of the city was known as Pitṛhū, and 
through that gate King Puranja na used to visit 
the city named Dakṣiṇa -pañcāla, accompanied 
by his friend Śrutadhara  (50).On the northern 
side was the gate named Devahū. Through that 
gate, King Puranjana  used to go with his friend 
Śrutadhara to the place known as Uttara -
pañcāla  (51).On the western side was a gate 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

262 
 named Āsurī. Through that gate King Pu-
ranjana  used to go to the city of Grāmaka, ac-
companied by his friend Durmada  (52).An-
other gate on the western side was known as 
Nirṛti. Puranjana  used to go through this gate to 
the place kn own as Vaiśasa, accompanied by 
his friend Lubdhaka  (53).Of the many inhabit-
ants of this city, there are two persons named 
Nirvāk and Peśaskṛt. Although King Puranjana  
was the ruler of citizens who possessed eyes, he 
unfortunately used to associate with the se blind 
men. Accompanied by them, he used to go here 
and there and perform various activities  (54).  
Sometimes he used to go to his private home 
with one of his chief servants [the mind], who 
was named Viṣūcīna. At that time, illusion, sat-
isfaction and ha ppiness used to be produced 
from his wife and children  (55). Being thus en-
tangled in different types of mental concoction 
and engaged in fruitive activities, King Pu-
ranjana  came completely under the control of 
material intelligence and was thus cheated. In-
deed, he used to fulfill all the desires of his 
wife, the Queen  (56). When the Queen drank 
liquor, King Puranjana  also engaged in drink-
ing. When the Queen dined, he used to dine 
with her, and when she chewed, King Pu-
ranjana  used to chew along with her. Whe n the 
Queen sang, he also sang. Similarly, when the 
Queen cried, he also cried, and when the Queen 
laughed, he also laughed. When the Queen 
talked loosely, he also talked loosely, and when 
the Queen walked, the King walked behind her. 
When the Queen would stand still, the King 
would also stand still, and when the Queen 
would lie down in bed, he would also follow 
and lie down with her. When the Queen sat, he 
would also sit, and when the Queen heard 
something, he would follow her to hear the 
same thing. When the Queen saw something, 
the King would also look at it, and when the 
Queen smelled something, the King would fol-
low her to smell the same thing. When the 
Queen touched something, the King would also 
touch it, and when the dear Queen was lament-
ing, the poo r King also had to follow her in 
lamentation. In the same way, when the Queen 
felt enjoyment, he also enjoyed, and when the Queen was satisfied, the King also felt satisfac-
tion (57-61).In this way, King Puranjana  was 
captivated by his nice wife and was thu s 
cheated. Indeed, he became cheated in his 
whole existence in the material world. Even 
against that poor foolish King’s desire, he re-
mained under the control of his wife, just like a 
pet animal that dances according to the order of 
its master  (62).  
SB 4.26: King Puranjana  Goes to the 
Forest to Hunt, and His Queen Becomes 
Angry  
The great sage Nārada continued : My 
dear King, once upon a time King Puranjana  
took up his great bow, and equipped with 
golden armor and a quiver of unlimited arrows 
and accompanied by eleven commanders, he 
sat on his chariot driven by five swift horses 
and went to the forest named Pañca -prastha. He 
took with him in that chariot two explosive ar-
rows. The chariot itself was situated on two 
wheels and one revolving axle. On the chariot 
were three flags, one rein, one chariot driver, 
one sitting place, two pol es to which the har-
ness was fixed, five weapons and seven cover-
ings. The chariot moved in five different styles, 
and five obstacles lay before it. All the decora-
tions of the chariot were made of gold  (1-3).It 
was almost impossible for King Puranjana  to 
give up the company of his Queen even for a 
moment. Nonetheless, on that day, being very 
much inspired by the desire to hunt, he took up 
his bow and arrow with great pride and went to 
the forest, not caring for his wife  (4).At that 
time King Puranjana  was ver y much influenced 
by demoniac propensities. Because of this, his 
heart became very hard and merciless, and with 
sharp arrows he killed many innocent animals 
in the forest, taking no consideration  (5).If a 
king is too attracted to eating flesh, he may, ac-
cording to the directions of the revealed scrip-
tures on sacrificial performances, go to the for-
est and kill some animals that are recom-
mended for killing. One is not allowed to kill 
animals unnecessarily or without restrictions. 
The Vedas regulate animal -killing to stop the 
extravagance of foolish men influenced by the 
modes of passion and ignorance  (6).Nārada 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

263 
 Muni continued to speak to King 
Prācīnabarhiṣat: My dear King, any person who 
works according to the directions of the Vedic 
scriptures does not become involved in fruitive 
activities  (7).Otherwise, a person who acts 
whimsically falls down due to f alse prestige. 
Thus he becomes involved in the laws of na-
ture, which are composed of the three qualities 
[goodness, passion and ignorance]. In this way 
a living entity becomes devoid of his real intel-
ligence and becomes perpetually lost in the cy-
cle of bir th and death. Thus he goes up and 
down from a microbe in stool to a high position 
in the Brahmaloka planet  (8).  
When King Puranjana  was hunting in this 
way, many animals within the forest lost their 
lives with great pain, being pierced by the sharp 
arrowh eads. Upon seeing these devastating, 
ghastly activities performed by the King, all the 
people who were merciful by nature became 
very unhappy. Such merciful persons could not 
tolerate seeing all this killing  (9).In this way 
King Puranjana  killed many anima ls, including 
rabbits, boars, buffalo, bison, black deer, por-
cupines and other game animals. After killing 
and killing, the King became very tired  
(10).After this, the King, very much fatigued, 
hungry and thirsty, returned to his royal palace. 
After return ing, he took a bath and had an ap-
propriate dinner. Then he took rest and thus be-
came freed from all restlessness  (11).After this, 
King Puranjana  decorated his body with suita-
ble ornaments. He also smeared scented sandal-
wood pulp over his body and put on fl ower gar-
lands. In this way he became completely re-
freshed. After this, he began to search out his 
Queen  (12).  After taking his dinner and having 
his thirst and hunger satisfied, King Puranjana  
felt some joy within his heart. Instead of being 
elevated to a  higher consciousness, he became 
captivated by Cupid, and was moved by a de-
sire to find his wife, who kept him satisfied in 
his household life  (13).  
At that time King Puranjana  was a little anx-
ious, and he inquired from the household 
women: My dear beauti ful women, are you and 
your mistress all very happy like before, or not? 
(14) King Puranjana  said: I do not understand why my household paraphernalia does not at-
tract me as before. I think that if there is neither 
a mother nor devoted wife at home, the hom e is 
like a chariot without wheels. Where is the fool 
who will sit down on such an unworkable char-
iot? (15) Kindly let me know the whereabouts 
of that beautiful woman who always saves me 
when I am drowning in the ocean of danger. By 
giving me good intellig ence at every step, she 
always saves me  (16).  
All the women addressed the King:  O 
master of the citizens, we do not know why 
your dear wife has taken on this sort of exist-
ence. O killer of enemies, kindly look! She is 
lying on the ground without bedding. We can-
not understand why she is acting this way  (17).  
The great sage Nārada continued : My 
dear King Prācīnabarhi, as soon as King Pu-
ranjana  saw his Queen lying on the ground, ap-
pearing like a mendicant, he immediately be-
came bewildered  (18).The King, with  ag-
grieved mind, began to speak to his wife with 
very pleasing words. Although he was filled 
with regret and tried to pacify her, he could not 
see any symptom of anger caused by love 
within the heart of his beloved wife  (19). Be-
cause the King was very expe rt in flattery, he 
began to pacify his Queen very slowly. First he 
touched her two feet, then embraced her nicely, 
seating her on his lap, and began to speak as 
follows  (20).  
King Puranjana  said:  My dear beautiful 
wife, when a master accepts a servant as his 
own man, but does not punish him for his of-
fenses, the servant must be considered unfortu-
nate (21).My dear slender maiden, when a mas-
ter chastises his servant, the servant should ac-
cept this as great mercy. One who becomes an-
gry must be very foolish no t to know that such 
is the duty of his friend  (22).My dear wife, your 
teeth are very beautifully set, and your attrac-
tive features make you appear very thoughtful. 
Kindly give up your anger, be merciful upon 
me, and please smile upon me with loving at-
tachm ent. When I see a smile on your beautiful 
face, and when I see your hair, which is as 
beautiful as the color blue, and see your raised 
nose and hear your sweet talk, you will become 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

264 
 more beautiful to me and thus attract me and 
oblige me. You are my most re spected mistress  
(23).O hero’s wife, kindly tell me if someone 
has offended you. I am prepared to give such a 
person punishment as long as he does not be-
long to the brāhmaṇa caste. But for the servant 
of Muraripu [Kṛṣṇa], I excuse no one within or 
beyond these three worlds. No one can freely 
move after offending you, for I am prepared to 
punish him  (24). My dear wife, until this day I 
have never seen your face wit hout tilaka deco-
rations, nor have I seen you so morose and 
without luster or affection. Nor have I seen 
your two nice breasts wet with tears from your 
eyes. Nor have I ever before seen your lips, 
which are ordinarily as red as the bimba fruit, 
without thei r reddish hue  (25).My dear Queen, 
due to my sinful desires I went to the forest to 
hunt without asking you. Therefore I must ad-
mit that I have offended you. Nonetheless, 
thinking of me as your most intimate subordi-
nate, you should still be very much please d 
with me. Factually I am very much bereaved, 
but being pierced by the arrow of Cupid, I am 
feeling lusty. But where is the beautiful woman 
who would give up her lusty husband  and re-
fuse to unite with him? (26) 
SB 4.27: Attack by Caṇḍavega on the 
City of K ing Puranjana ; the Character of 
Kālakanyā  
The great sage Nārada continued:  My 
dear King, after bewildering her husband  in dif-
ferent ways and bringing him under her control, 
the wife of King Puranjana  gave him all satis-
faction and enjoyed sex life with him  (1).The 
Queen took her bath and dressed herself nicely 
with all auspicious garments and ornaments. 
After taking food and becoming completely 
satisfied, she returned to the King. Upon seeing 
her beautifully decorated attractive face, the 
King welcomed her w ith all devotion  
(2).Queen Purañjanī embraced the King, and 
the King also responded by embracing her 
shoulders. In this way, in a solitary place, they 
enjoyed joking words. Thus King Puranjana  
became very much captivated by his beautiful 
wife and deviated from his good sense.  He for-
got that the passing of days and nights meant that his span of life was being reduced without 
profit  (3). In this way, increasingly over-
whelmed by illusion, King Puranjana , although 
advanced in consciousness, remained always 
lying down with his head  on the pillow of his 
wife’s arms. In this way he considered woman 
to be his ultimate life and soul. Becoming thus 
overwhelmed by the mode of ignorance, he 
could not understand the meaning of self -reali-
zation, whether regarding his own self or the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead  (4).  
My dear King Prācīnabarhiṣat, in this way 
King Puranjana , with his heart full of lust and 
sinful reactions, began to enjoy sex with his 
wife, and in this way his new life and youth ex-
pired in half a moment  (5).The great sage 
Nārada then addressed King Prācīnabarhiṣat: O 
one whose life span is great [virāṭ], in this way 
King Puranjana  begot 1,100 sons within the 
womb of his wife, Purañjanī. However, in this 
business he passed away half of his life span  
(6).O Prajāpati, King Prācī nabarhiṣat, in this 
way King Puranjana  also begot 110 daughters. 
All of these were equally glorified like the fa-
ther and mother. Their behavior was gentle, and 
they possessed magnanimity and other good 
qualities  (7). After this, King Puranjana , King 
of the  Pañcāla country, in order to increase the 
descendants of his paternal family, married his 
sons with qualified wives and married his 
daughters with qualified husband s (8).Of these 
many sons, each produced hundreds and hun-
dreds of grandsons. In this way the  whole city 
of Pañcāla became overcrowded by these sons 
and grandsons of King Puranjana  (9).These 
sons and grandsons were virtually plunderers 
of King Puranjana ’s riches, including his home, 
treasury, servants, secretaries and all other par-
aphernalia. Puranjana ’s attachment for these 
things was very deep -rooted  (10). The great 
sage Nārada continued: My dear King 
Prācīnabarhiṣat, like you King Puranjana  also 
became implicated in so many desires. Thus he 
worshiped demigods, forefathers and social 
leaders with  various sacrifices which were all 
very ghastly because they were inspired by the 
desire to kill animals  (11).Thus King Pu-
ranjana , being attached to fruitive activities 
[karma -kāṇḍīya] as well as kith and kin, and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

265 
 being obsessed with polluted consciousness , 
eventually arrived at that point not very much 
liked by those who are overly attached to mate-
rial things  (12).  
O King! In Gandharvaloka there is a king 
named Caṇḍavega. Under him there are 360 
very powerful Gandharva soldiers  (13).Along 
with Caṇḍavega w ere as many female 
Gandharvīs as there were soldiers, and all of 
them repetitively plundered all the parapherna-
lia for sense enjoyment  (14).When King 
Gandharva -rāja [Caṇḍavega] and his followers 
began to plunder the city of Puranjana , a snake 
with five hoo ds began to defend the city  
(15).The five -hooded serpent, the superinten-
dent and protector of the city of King Pu-
ranjana , fought with the Gandharvas for one 
hundred years. He fought alone, with all of 
them, although they numbered 720  (16).Be-
cause he had to  fight alone with so many sol-
diers, all of whom were great warriors, the ser-
pent with five hoods became very weak. Seeing 
that his most intimate friend was weakening, 
King Puranjana  and his friends and citizens liv-
ing within the city all became very anxiou s 
(17).King Puranjana  collected taxes in the city 
known as Pañcāla and thus was able to engage 
in sexual indulgence. Being completely under 
the control of women, he could not understand 
that his life was passing away and that he was 
reaching the point of d eath (18).  
My dear King Prācīnabarhiṣat, at this time 
the daughter of formidable Time was seeking 
her husband  throughout the three worlds. Alt-
hough no one agreed to accept her, she came  
(19).The daughter of Time [Jarā] was very un-
fortunate. Consequently s he was known as 
Durbhagā [“ill -fated”]. However, she was once 
pleased with a great king, and because the king 
accepted her, she granted him a great benedic-
tion(20).When I once came to this earth from 
Brahmaloka, the highest planetary system, the 
daughter o f Time, wandering over the universe, 
met me. Knowing me to be an avowed brah-
macārī, she became lusty and proposed that I 
accept her  (21).The great sage Nārada contin-
ued: When I refused to accept her request, she became very angry at me and cursed me se-
verely. Because I refused her request, she said 
that I would not be able to stay in one place for 
a long time  (22).After she was thus disap-
pointed by me, with my permission she ap-
proached the King of the Yavanas, whose name 
was Bhaya, or Fear, and she accepted  him as 
her husband  (23).Approaching the King of the 
Yavanas, Kālakanyā addressed him as a great 
hero, saying: My dear sir, you are the best of 
the untouchables. I am in love with you, and I 
want you as my husband . I know that no one is 
baffled if he makes friends with you  (24).One 
who does not give charity according to the cus-
toms or injunctions of the scriptures and one 
who does not accept charity in that way are 
considered to be in the mode of ignorance. 
Such persons follow the path of the foolish. 
Surely they must lament at th e end  
(25).Kālakanyā continued: O gentle one, I am 
now present before you to serve you. Please ac-
cept me and thus show me mercy. It is a gentle-
man’s greatest duty to be compassionate upon 
a person who is distressed  (26).  
After hearing the statement of Kālakanyā, 
daughter of Time, the King of the Yavanas be-
gan to smile and devise a means for executing 
his confidential duty on behalf of providence. 
He then addressed Kālakanyā as follows  (27). 
The King of the Yavanas replied: After much 
consideration, I have arrived at  a husband  for 
you. Actually, as far as everyone is concerned, 
you are inauspicious and mischievous. Since no 
one likes you, how can anyone accept you as 
his wife? (28) This world is a product of frui-
tive activities. Therefore you may impercepti-
bly attack people in general. Helped by my sol-
diers, you can kill them without opposition  
(29).The King of the Yavanas continued: Here 
is my brother Prajvāra. I now accept you as my 
sister. I shall employ both of you, as well as my 
dangerous soldiers, to act imperceptibly within 
this world  (30).  
SB 4.28: Puranjana  Becomes a Woman 
in the Next Life  
The great sage Nārada continued : My 
dear King Prācīnabarhiṣat, afterward the King 
of the Yavanas, whose name is fear itself, as 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

266 
 well as Prajvāra, Kālakanyā, and his soldiers, 
began to travel all over the world  (1).Once the 
dangerous soldiers attacked the c ity of Pu-
ranjana  with great force. Although the city was 
full of paraphernalia for sense gratification, it 
was being protected by the old serpent  (2).  
Gradually Kālakanyā, with the help of danger-
ous soldiers, attacked all the inhabitants of Pu-
ranjana ’s city and thus rendered them useless 
for all purposes  (3).When Kālakanyā, daughter 
of Time, attacked the body, the dangerous sol-
diers of the King of the Yavanas entered the 
city through different gates. They then began to 
give severe trouble to all the citize ns (4). When 
the city was thus endangered by the soldiers 
and Kālakanyā, King Puranjana , being overly 
absorbed in affection for his family, was placed 
in difficulty by the attack of Yavana -rāja and 
Kālakanyā  (5). 
When King Puranjana  was embraced by 
Kālakan yā, he gradually lost all his beauty. 
Having been too much addicted to sex, he be-
came very poor in intelligence and lost all his 
opulence. Being bereft of all possessions, he 
was conquered forcibly by the Gandharvas and 
the Yavanas  (6).King Puranjana  then saw that 
everything in his town was scattered and that 
his sons, grandsons, servants and ministers 
were all gradually opposing him. He also noted 
that his wife was becoming cold and indifferent  
(7).When King Puranjana  saw that all his fam-
ily members, relat ives, followers,  servants, sec-
retaries and everyone else had turned against 
him, he certainly became very anxious. But he 
could not counteract the situation because he 
was thoroughly overwhelmed by Kālakanyā  
(8).The objects of enjoyment became stale by 
the influence of Kā lakanyā. Due to the contin-
uance of his lusty desires, King Puranjana  be-
came very poor in everything. Thus he did not 
understand the aim of life. He was still very af-
fectionate toward his wife and children, and he 
worried about maintaining them  (9).The city  of 
King Puranjana  was overcome by the 
Gandharva and Yavana soldiers, and although 
the King had no desire to leave the city, he was 
circumstantially forced to do so, for it was 
smashed by Kālakanyā  (10).Under the circum-
stances, the elder brother of Yavana -rāja, known as Prajvāra, set fire to the city to please 
his younger brother, whose other name is fear 
itself  (11).  
When the city was set ablaze, all the citizens 
and servants of the King, as well as all family 
members, sons, grandsons, wives and other rel-
atives, were within the fire. King Puranjana  
thus became very unhappy  (12).The city’s su-
perintendent of police, the serpent, saw that the 
citizens were being attacked by Kālakanyā, and 
he became very aggrieved to see his own resi-
dence set ablaze after bein g attacked by the Ya-
vanas  (13).As a serpent living within the cavity 
of a tree wishes to leave when there is a forest 
fire, so the city’s police superintendent, the 
snake, wished to leave the city due to the fire’s 
severe heat  (14).The limbs of the serpent ’s 
body were slackened by the Gandharvas and 
Yavana soldiers, who had thoroughly defeated 
his bodily strength. When he attempted to leave 
the body, he was checked by his enemies. Be-
ing thus baffled in his attempt, he began to cry 
loudly  (15).  
King Puranja na then began to think of his 
daughters, sons, grandsons, daughters -in-law, 
sons-in-law, servants and other associates, as 
well as his house, his household paraphernalia 
and his little accumulation of wealth  (16). King 
Puranjana  was overly attached to his family and 
conceptions of “I” and “mine.” Because he was 
overly attracted to his wife, he was already 
quite poverty -stricken. At the time of separa-
tion, he became very sorry  (17).King Puranjana  
was anxiously thinking, “Alas, my wife is en-
cumbered by so man y children. When I pass 
from this body, how will she be able to main-
tain all these family members? Alas, she will be 
greatly harassed by thoughts of family mainte-
nance.” (18)  King Puranjana  then began to 
think of his past dealings with his wife. He re-
calle d that his wife would not take her dinner 
until he had finished his, that she would not 
take her bath until he had finished his, and that 
she was always very much attached to him, so 
much so that if he would sometimes become 
angry and chastise her, she wou ld simply re-
main silent and tolerate his mi sbehavior  
(19).King Puranjana  continued thinking how, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

267 
 when he was in a state of bewilderment, his 
wife would give him good counsel and how she 
would become aggrieved when he was away 
from home. Although she was th e mother of so 
many sons and heroes, the King still feared that 
she would not be able to maintain the responsi-
bility of household affairs  (20).King Puranjana  
continued worrying: “After I pass from this 
world, how will my sons and daughters, who 
are now ful ly dependent on me, live and con-
tinue their lives? Their position will be similar 
to that of passengers aboard a ship wrecked in 
the midst of the ocean.” (21) 
Although King Puranjana  should not have 
lamented over the fate of his wife and children, 
he nonet heless did so due to his miserly intelli-
gence. In the meantime, Yavana -rāja, whose 
name was fear itself, immediately drew near to 
arrest him  (22).When the Yavanas were taking 
King Puranjana  away to their place, binding 
him like an animal, the King’s follow ers be-
came greatly aggrieved. While they lamented, 
they were forced to go along with him  (23).The 
serpent, who had already been arrested by the 
soldiers of Yavana -rāja and was out of the city, 
began to follow his master along with the oth-
ers. As soon as th ey all left the city, it was im-
mediately dismantled and smashed to dust  
(24).When King Puranjana  was being dragged 
with great force by the powerful Yavana, out of 
his gross ignorance he still could not remember 
his friend and well -wisher, the Supersoul  (25).  
That most unkind king, Puranjana , had 
killed many animals in various sacrifices. Now, 
taking advantage of this opportunity, all these 
animals began to pierce him with their horns. It 
was as though he were being cut to pieces by 
axes (26).Due to his con taminated association 
with women, a living entity like King Pu-
ranjana  eternally suffers all the pangs of mate-
rial existence and remains in the dark region of 
material life, bereft of all remembrance for 
many, many years  (27).King Puranjana  gave up 
his body  while remembering his wife, and con-
sequently in his next life he became a very 
beautiful and well -situated woman. He took his 
next birth as the daughter of King Vidarbha in 
the very house of the King  (28).It was fixed that Vaidarbhī, daughter of King Vidarbha, was to 
be married to a very powerful man, Malayadh-
vaja, an inhabitant of the Pāṇḍu country. After 
conquering other princes, he married the 
daughter of King Vidarbha  (29).King Malaya-
dhvaja fathered on e daughter, who had very 
black eyes. He also had seven sons, who later 
became rulers of that tract of land known as 
Draviḍa. Thus there were seven kings in that 
land (30).My dear King Prācīnabarhiṣat, the 
sons of Malayadhvaja gave birth to many thou-
sands a nd thousands of sons, and all of these 
have been protecting the entire world up to the 
end of one Manu’s life span and even afterward  
(31).The great sage named Agastya married the 
first-born daughter of Malayadhvaja, the 
avowed devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa. From her one 
son was born, whose name was Dṛḍhacyuta, 
and from him another son was born, whose 
name was Idhmavāha  (32).  
After this, the great saintly King Malayadh-
vaja divided his entire kingdom among his 
sons. Then, in order to worship Lord Kṛṣṇa 
with full at tention, he went to a solitary place 
known as Kulācala  (33).Just as the moonshine 
follows the moon at night, immediately after 
King Malayadhvaja departed for Kulācala, his 
devoted wife, whose eyes were very enchant-
ing, followed him, giving up all homely ha ppi-
ness, despite family and children  (34).In the 
province of Kulācala, there were rivers named 
Candravasā, Tāmraparṇī and Vaṭodakā. King 
Malayadhvaja used to go to those pious rivers 
regularly and take his bath there. Thus he puri-
fied himself externally an d internally. He took 
his bath and ate bulbs, seeds, leaves, flowers, 
roots, fruits and grasses and drank water. In this 
way he underwent severe austerities. Eventu-
ally he became very skinny  (35-36).Through 
austerity, King Malayadhvaja in body and mind 
gradually became equal to the dualities of cold 
and heat, happiness and distress, wind and rain, 
hunger and thirst, the pleasant and the unpleas-
ant. In this way he conquered all relativities  
(37).By worshiping, executing austerities and 
following the regulati ve principles, King Mala-
yadhvaja conquered his senses, his life and his 
consciousness. Thus he fixed everything on the 
central point of the Supreme Brahman [Kṛṣṇa]  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

268 
 (38).In this way he stayed immovable in one 
place for one hundred years by the calculation 
of the demigods. After this time, he developed 
pure devotional attraction for Kṛṣṇa, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, and remained 
fixed in that position  (39).King Malayadhvaja 
attained perfect knowledge by being able to 
distinguish the Supersoul from th e individual 
soul. The individual soul is localized, whereas 
the Supersoul is all -pervasive. He became per-
fect in knowledge that the material body is not 
the soul but that the soul is the witness of the 
material body  (40).In this way King Malayadh-
vaja atta ined perfect knowledge because in his 
pure state he was directly instructed by the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. By means of 
such enlightening transcendental knowledge, 
he could understand everything from all angles 
of vision  (41).King Malayadhvaja could  thus 
observe that the Supersoul was sitting by his 
side, and that he, as the individual soul, was sit-
ting by the side of the Supersoul. Since both 
were together, there was no need for separate 
interests; thus he ceased from such activities  
(42).  
The daug hter of King Vidarbha accepted her 
husband  all in all as the Supreme. She gave up 
all sensual enjoyment and in complete renunci-
ation followed the principles of her husband , 
who was so advanced. Thus she remained en-
gaged in his service  (43).The daughter of King 
Vidarbha wore old garments, and she was lean 
and thin because of her vows of austerity. Since 
she did not arrange her hair, it became entan-
gled and twisted in locks. Although she re-
mained always near her husband , she was as si-
lent and unagitated as th e flame of an undis-
turbed fire  (44).The daughter of King Vidarbha 
continued as usual to serve her husband , who 
was seated in a steady posture, until she could 
ascertain that he had passed away from the 
body  (45).While she was serving her husband  
by massagi ng his legs, she could feel that his 
feet were no longer warm and could thus un-
derstand that he had already passed from the 
body. She felt great anxiety upon being left 
alone. Bereft of her husband ’s company, she 
felt exactly as the deer feels upon being s epa-
rated from its mate  (46).Being now alone and a widow in that forest, the daughter of Vidarbha 
began to lament, incessantly shedding tears, 
which soaked her breasts, and crying very 
loudly  (47).O best of kings, please get up! Get 
up! Just see this world surrounded by water and 
infested with rogues and so -called kings. This 
world is very much afraid, and it is your duty to 
protect her  (48).That most obedient wife thus 
fell down at the feet of her dead husband  and 
began to cry pitifully in that solitary for est. 
Thus the tears rolled down from her eyes  
(49).She then prepared a blazing fire with fire-
wood and placed the dead body of her husband  
upon it. When this was finished, she lamented 
severely and prepared herself to perish in the 
fire with her husband  (50).My dear King, one 
brāhmaṇa, who was an old friend of King Pu-
ranjana , came to that place and began to pacify 
the Queen with sweet words  (51).  
The brāhmaṇa inquired as follows:  Who 
are you? Whose wife or daughter are you? Who 
is the man lying here? It app ears you are la-
menting for this dead body. Don’t you recog-
nize Me? I am your eternal friend. You may re-
member that many times in the past you have 
consulted Me  (52).The brāhmaṇa continued: 
My dear friend, even though you cannot imme-
diately recognize Me, ca n’t you remember that 
in the past you had a very intimate friend? Un-
fortunately, you gave up My company and ac-
cepted a position as enjoyer of this material 
world  (53).My dear gentle friend, both you and 
I are exactly like two swans. We live together 
in the  same heart, which is just like the Mānasa 
Lake. Although we have been living together 
for many thousands of years, we are still far 
away from our original home  (54).My dear 
friend, you are now My very same friend. Since 
you left Me, you have become more a nd more 
materialistic, and not seeing Me, you have been 
traveling in different forms throughout this ma-
terial world, which was created by some 
woman  (55).In that city [the material body] 
there are five gardens, nine gates, one protector, 
three apartments, six families, five stores, five 
material elements, and one woman who is lord 
of the house  (56).My dear friend, the five gar-
dens are the five objects of sense enjoyment, 
and the protector is the life air, which passes 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

269 
 through the nine gates. The three apart ments 
are the chief ingredients  fire, water and earth. 
The six families are the aggregate total of the 
mind and five senses  (57).The five stores are 
the five working sensory organs. They transact 
their business through the combined forces of 
the five elem ents, which are eternal. Behind all 
this activity is the soul. The soul is a person and 
an enjoyer in reality. However, because he is 
now hidden within the city of the body, he is 
devoid of knowledge  (58).My dear friend, 
when you enter such a body along wi th the 
woman of material desires, you become overly 
absorbed in sense enjoyment. Because of this, 
you have forgotten your spiritual life. Due to 
your material conceptions, you are placed in 
various miserable conditions  (59).  
Actually, you are not the daug hter of Vidar-
bha, nor is this man, Malayadhvaja, your well -
wishing husband . Nor were you the actual hus-
band  of Purañjanī. You were simply captivated 
in this body of nine gates  (60).Sometimes you 
think yourself a man, sometimes a chaste 
woman and sometimes a neutral eunuch. This 
is all because of the body, which is created by 
the illusory energy. This illusory e nergy is My 
potency, and actually both of us  you and I  are 
pure spiritual identities. Now just try to under-
stand this. I am trying to explain our factual po-
sition  (61).My dear friend, I, the Supersoul, and 
you, the individual soul, are not different in 
quality, for we are both spiritual. In fact, My 
dear friend, you are qualitatively not different 
from Me in your constitutional position. Just try 
to consider this subject. Those who are actually 
advanced scholars, who are in knowledge, do 
not find any qual itative difference between you 
and Me  (62). As a person sees the reflection of 
his body in a mirror to be one with himself and 
not different, whereas others actually see two 
bodies, so in our material condition, in which 
the living being is affected and ye t not affected, 
there is a difference between God and the living 
entity  (63).  
In this way both swans live together in the 
heart. When the one swan is instructed by the 
other, he is situated in his constitutional posi-
tion. This means he regains his origina l Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which was lost because of his 
material attraction  (64).My dear King 
Prācīnabarhi, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the cause of all causes, is celebrated to be 
known indirectly. Thus I have described the 
story of Puranjana  to you.  Actually it is an in-
struction for self -realization  (65).  
SB 4.29: Talks Between Nārada and 
King Prācīnabarhi  
King Prācīnabarhi replied : My dear lord, 
we could not appreciate completely the purport 
of your allegorical story of King Puranjana . Ac-
tually, th ose who are perfect in spiritual 
knowledge can understand, but for us, who are 
overly attached to fruitive activities, to realize 
the purpose of your story is very difficult  (1).  
The great sage Nārada Muni continued : 
You must understand that Puranjana , the living 
entity, transmigrates according to his own work 
into different types of bodies, which may be 
one-legged, two -legged, three -legged, four -
legged, many -legged or simply legless. Trans-
migrating into these various types of bodies, the 
living entity, as  the so -called enjoyer, is known 
as Puranjana  (2).The person I have described as 
unknown is the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the master and eternal friend of the living 
entity. Since the living entities cannot realize 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead by mate-
rial names, activities or qualities, He remains 
everlastingly unknown to the conditioned soul  
(3). When the living entity wants to enjoy the 
modes of material nature in their totality, he 
prefers, out of many bodily forms, to accept 
that body which has nine gates, two hands and 
two legs. Thus he prefers to become a human 
being or a demigod  (4).The great sage Nārada 
continued: The word pramadā mentioned in 
this regard refers to material intelligence, or ig-
norance. It is to be understood as such. When 
one takes shelter of this kind of intelligence, he 
identifies himself with the material body. In flu-
enced by the material consciousness of “I” and 
“mine,” he begins to enjoy and suffer through 
his senses. Thus the living entity is entrapped  
(5).The five working senses and the five senses 
that acquire knowledge are all male friends of 
Purañjanī. The li ving entity is assisted by these 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

270 
 senses in acquiring knowledge and engaging in 
activity. The engagements of the senses are 
known as girlfriends, and the serpent, which 
was described as having five heads, is the life 
air acting within the five circulatory p rocesses  
(6). The eleventh attendant, who is the com-
mander of the others, is known as the mind. He 
is the leader of the senses both in the acquisi-
tion of knowledge and in the performance of 
work. The Pañcāla kingdom is that atmosphere 
in which the five sense objects a re enjoyed. 
Within that Pañcāla kingdom is the city of the 
body, which has nine gates  (7).  
The eyes, nostrils and ears are pairs of gates 
situated in one place. The mouth, genitals and 
rectum are also different gates. Being placed 
into a body having these  nine gates, the living 
entity acts externally in the material world and 
enjoys sense objects like form and taste  
(8).Two eyes, two nostrils and a mouth  all to-
gether five  are situated in the front. The right 
ear is accepted as the southern gate, and the left 
ear is the northern gate. The two holes, or gates, 
situated in the west are known as the rectum 
and genital organ  (9).The two gates named 
Khadyotā and Āvirmukhī, which have been 
spoken of, are the two eyes side by side in one 
place. The town named Vibhrājita should be 
understood as form. In this way the two eyes 
are always engaged in seeing different kinds of 
forms  (10).The two doors named Na linī and 
Nālinī should be known as the two nostrils, and 
the city named Saurabha represents aroma. The 
companion spoken of as Avadhūta is the sense 
of smell. The door called Mukhyā is the mouth, 
and Vipaṇa is the faculty of speech. Rasajña is 
the sense of taste (11).The city called Āpaṇa 
represents engagement of the tongue in speech, 
and Bahūdana is the variety of foodstuffs. The 
right ear is called the gate of Pitṛhū, and the left 
ear is called the gate of Devahū  (12).Nārada 
Muni continued: The city spoken  of as 
Dakṣiṇa -pañcāla represents the scriptures 
meant for directing pravṛtti, the process of 
sense enjoyment in fruitive activities. The other 
city, named Uttara -pañcāla, represents the 
scriptures meant for decreasing fruitive activi-
ties and increasing kn owledge. The living en-
tity receives different kinds of knowledge by means of two ears, and some living entities are 
promoted to Pitṛloka and some to Devaloka. All 
this is made possible by the two ears  (13).The 
city called Grāmaka, which is approached 
throu gh the lower gate of Āsurī [the genital or-
gan], is meant for sex, which is very pleasing to 
common men who are simply fools and rascals. 
The faculty of procreation is called Durmada, 
and the rectum is called Nirṛt i (14) .When it is 
said that Puranjana  goes to Vaiśasa, it is meant 
that he goes to hell. He is accompanied by Lub-
dhaka, which is the working sense in the rec-
tum. Formerly I have also spoken of two blind 
associates. These associates should be under-
stood to be the hands and legs. Being helped by 
the hands and legs, the living entity performs 
all kinds of work and moves hither and thither  
(15). The word antaḥ -pura refers to the heart. 
The word viṣūcīna, meaning “going every-
where,” indicates the mind. Within the mind 
the living entity enjoys the effects  of the modes 
of material nature. These effects sometimes 
cause illusion, sometimes satisfaction and 
sometimes jubilation  (16).  Formerly it was ex-
plained that the Queen is one’s intelligence. 
While one is awake or asleep, that intelligence 
creates differe nt situations. Being influenced 
by contaminated intelligence, the living entity 
envisions something and simply imitates the 
actions and reactions of his intelligence  
(17).Nārada Muni continued: What I referred to 
as the chariot was in actuality the body. The 
senses are the horses that pull that chariot. As 
time passes, year after year, these horses run 
without obstruction, but in fact they make no 
progress. Pious and impio us activities are the 
two wheels of the chariot. The three modes of 
material nature are the chariot’s flags. The five 
types of life air constitute the living entity’s 
bondage, and the mind is considered to be the 
rope. Intelligence is the chariot driver. T he 
heart is the sitting place in the chariot, and the 
dualities of life, such as pleasure and pain, are 
the knotting place. The seven elements are the 
coverings of the chariot, and the working 
senses are the five external processes. The 
eleven senses are t he soldiers. Being engrossed 
in sense enjoyment, the living entity, seated on 
the chariot, hankers after fulfillment of his false 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

271 
 desires and runs after sense enjoyment life after 
life (18-20).  
What was previously explained as 
Caṇḍavega, powerful time, is  covered by days 
and nights, named Gandharvas and 
Gandharvīs. The body’s life span is gradually 
reduced by the passage of days and nights, 
which number 360  (21).What was described as 
Kālakanyā should be understood as old age. No 
one wants to accept old age , but Yavaneśvara 
[Yavana -rāja], who is death, accepts Jarā [old 
age] as his sister  (22).The followers of Ya-
vaneśvara [Yamarāja] are called the soldiers of 
death, and they are known as the various types 
of disturbances that pertain to the body and 
mind. Pr ajvāra represents the two types of fe-
ver: extreme heat and extreme cold  typhoid 
and pneumonia  (23). 
The living entity lying down within the body 
is disturbed by many tribulations pertaining to 
providence, to other living entities and to his 
own body and m ind. Despite all kinds of tribu-
lations, the living entity, subjected to the neces-
sities of the body, mind and senses and suffer-
ing from various types of disease, is carried 
away by many plans due to his lust to enjoy the 
world. Although transcendental to t his material 
existence, the living entity, out of ignorance, 
accepts all these material miseries under the 
pretext of false egoism (“I” and “mine”). In this 
way he lives for a hundred years within this 
body  (24-25).The living entity by nature has 
minute in dependence to choose his own good 
or bad fortune, but when he forgets his supreme 
master, the Personality of Godhead, he gives 
himself up unto the modes of material nature. 
Being influenced by the modes of material na-
ture, he identifies himself with the bo dy and, 
for the interest of the body, becomes attached 
to various activities. Sometimes he is under the 
influence of the mode of ignorance, sometimes 
the mode of passion and sometimes the mode 
of goodness. The living entity thus gets differ-
ent types of bod ies under the modes of material 
nature  (26-27).Those who are situated in the 
mode of goodness act piously according to Ve-
dic injunctions. Thus they are elevated to the 
higher planetary systems where the demigods live. Those who are influenced by the mode o f 
passion engage in various types of productive 
activities in the planetary systems where hu-
man beings live. Similarly, those influenced by 
the mode of darkness are subjected to various 
types of misery and live in the animal kingdom  
(28). Covered by the mo de of ignorance in ma-
terial nature, the living entity is sometimes a 
male, sometimes a female, sometimes a eu-
nuch, sometimes a human being, sometimes a 
demigod, sometimes a bird, an animal, and so 
on. In this way he is wandering within the ma-
terial world. His acceptance of different types 
of bodies is brought about by his activities un-
der the influence of the modes of nature  (29). 
The living entity is exactly like a dog who, 
overcome with hunger, goes from door to door 
for some food. According to his destin y, he 
sometimes receives punishment and is driven 
out and at other times receives a little food to 
eat. Similarly, the living entity, being influ-
enced by so many desires, wanders in different 
species of life according to destiny. Sometimes 
he is high, and sometimes he is low. Sometimes 
he goes to the heavenly planets, sometimes to 
hell, sometimes to the middle planets, and so on  
(30-31).  
The living entities are trying to counteract 
different miserable conditions pertaining to 
providence, other living entit ies or the body and 
mind. Still, they must remain conditioned by 
the laws of nature, despite all attempts to coun-
ter these laws  (32).A man may carry a burden 
on his head, and when he feels it to be too 
heavy, he sometimes gives relief to his head by 
puttin g the burden on his shoulder. In this way 
he tries to relieve himself of the burden. How-
ever, whatever process he devises to counteract 
the burden does nothing more than put the same 
burden from one place to another  (33).Nārada 
continued: O you who are free from all sinful 
activity! No one can counteract the effects of 
fruitive activity simply by manufacturing a dif-
ferent activity devoid of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 
All such activity is due to our ignorance. When 
we have a tro ublesome dream, we cannot re-
lieve it with a troublesome hallucination. One 
can counteract a dream only by awaking. Sim-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

272 
 ilarly, our material existence is due to our igno-
rance and illusion. Unless we awaken to Kṛṣṇa 
consciousness, we cannot be relieved of suc h 
dreams. For the ultimate solution to all prob-
lems, we must awaken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness  
(34).Sometimes we suffer because we see a 
tiger in a dream or a snake in a vision, but ac-
tually there is neither a tiger nor a snake. Thus 
we create some situation i n a subtle form and 
suffer the consequences. These sufferings can-
not be mitigated unless we are awakened from 
our dream  (35).  
The real interest of the living entity is to get 
out of the nescience that causes him to endure 
repeated birth and death. The onl y remedy is to 
surrender unto the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead through His representative. Unless 
one renders devotional  service unto the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, one 
cannot possibly become completely detached 
from this material world, nor can he possibly 
manifest real knowledge  (36-37).O best of 
kings, one who is faithful, who is always hear-
ing the glories  of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is always engaged in the culture 
of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and in hearing of the 
Lord’s activities, very soon becomes eligible to 
see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face 
to face  (38). My dear King, in the place where 
pure devotees live, following the rules and reg-
ulations and thus purely conscious and engaged 
with great eagerness in hearing and chanting 
the glories of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, in that place if one gets a chance to hear 
their constant fl ow of nectar, which is exactly 
like the waves of a river, one will forget the ne-
cessities of life, namely hunger and thirst, and 
become immune to all kinds of fear, lamenta-
tion and illusion  (39-40).Because the condi-
tioned soul is always disturbed by the bo dily 
necessities such as hunger and thirst, he has 
very little time to cultivate attachment to hear-
ing the nectarean words of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead  (41).The most powerful Lord 
Brahmā, the father of all progenitors; Lord 
Śiva; Manu, Dakṣa and t he other rulers of hu-
mankind; the four saintly first -class brah-
macārīs headed by Sanaka and Sanātana; the great sages Marīci, Atri, Aṅgirā, Pulastya, Pu-
laha, Kratu, Bhṛgu and Vasiṣṭha; and my hum-
ble self [Nārada] are all stalwart brāhmaṇas 
who can speak au thoritatively on Vedic litera-
ture. We are very powerful because of austeri-
ties, meditation and education. Nonetheless, 
even after inquiring about the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, whom we always see, we do 
not know perfectly about Him  (42-44).Despite 
the cultivation of Vedic knowledge, which is 
unlimited, and the worship of different demi-
gods by the symptoms of Vedic mantras, dem-
igod worship does not help one to understand 
the supreme powerful Personality of Godhead  
(45).When a person is fully engaged in devo-
tional service, he is favored by the Lord, who 
bestows His causeless mercy. At such a time, 
the awakened devotee gives up all material ac-
tivities and ritualistic performances mentioned 
in the Vedas  (46).  
My dear King Barhiṣmān, you should never 
out of  ignorance take to the Vedic rituals or to 
fruitive activity, which may be pleasing to hear 
about or which may appear to be the goal of 
self-interest. You should never take these to be 
the ultimate goal of life  (47).Those who are less 
intelligent accept th e Vedic ritualistic ceremo-
nies as all in all. They do not know that the pur-
pose of the Vedas is to understand one’s own 
home, where the Supreme Personality of God-
head lives. Not being interested in their real 
home, they are illusioned and search after othe r 
homes  (48).My dear King, the entire world is 
covered with the sharp points of kuśa grass, and 
on the strength of this you have become proud 
because you have killed various types of ani-
mals in sacrifices. Because of your foolishness, 
you do not know that devotional service is the 
only way one can please the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. You cannot understand this 
fact. Your only activities should be those that 
can please the Personality of Godhead. Our ed-
ucation should be such that we can become el-
evated  to Kṛṣṇa consciousness  (49).Śrī Hari, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the Su-
persoul and guide of all living entities who have 
accepted material bodies within this world. He 
is the supreme controller of all material activi-
ties in material nature. He  is also our best 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

273 
 friend, and everyone should take shelter at His 
lotus feet. In doing so, one’s life will be auspi-
cious  (50).One who is engaged in devotional 
service has not the least fear in material exist-
ence. This is because the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead is the Supersoul and friend of eve-
ryone. One who knows this secret is actually 
educated, and one thus educated can become 
the spiritual master of the world. One who is an 
actually bona fide spiritual master, representa-
tive of Kṛṣṇa, is not differen t from Kṛṣṇa (51).  
The great saint Nārada continued : O great 
personality, I have replied properly about all 
that you have asked me. Now hear another nar-
ration that is accepted by saintly persons and is 
very confidential  (52).My dear King, please 
search out  that deer who is engaged in eating 
grass in a very nice flower garden along with 
his wife. That deer is very much attached to his 
business, and he is enjoying the sweet singing 
of the bumblebees in his garden. Just try to un-
derstand his position. He is un aware that before 
him is a tiger, which is accustomed to living at 
the cost of another’s flesh. Behind the deer is a 
hunter, who is threatening to pierce him with 
sharp arrows. Thus the deer’s death is imminent  
(53).  
My dear King, woman, who is very attra c-
tive in the beginning but in the end very dis-
turbing, is exactly like the flower, which is at-
tractive in the beginning and detestable at the 
end. With woman, the living entity is entangled 
with lusty desires, and he enjoys sex, just as one 
enjoys the arom a of a flower. He thus enjoys a 
life of sense gratification  from his tongue to his 
genitals  and in this way the living entity con-
siders himself very happy in family life. United 
with his wife, he always remains absorbed in 
such thoughts. He feels great p leasure in hear-
ing the talks of his wife and children, which are 
like the sweet humming of bumblebees that 
collect honey from flower to flower. He forgets 
that before him is time, which is taking away 
his life span with the passing of day and night. 
He doe s not see the gradual diminishing of his 
life, nor does he care about the superintendent 
of death, who is trying to kill him from behind. Just try to understand this. You are in a precar-
ious position and are threatened from all sides  
(54).My dear King, jus t try to understand the 
allegorical position of the deer. Be fully con-
scious of yourself, and give up the pleasure of 
hearing about promotion to heavenly planets by 
fruitive activity. Give up household life, which 
is full of sex, as well as stories about s uch 
things, and take shelter of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead through the mercy of the lib-
erated souls. In this way, please give up your 
attraction for material existence  (55).  
The King replied : My dear brāhmaṇa, 
whatever you have said I have heard with great 
attention and, considering all of it, have come 
to the conclusion that the ācāryas [teachers] 
who engaged me in fruitive activity did not 
know this confidential knowledge. If they were 
awar e of it, why did they not explain it to me? 
(56) My dear brāhmaṇa, there are contradic-
tions between your instructions and those of my 
spiritual teachers who engaged me in fruitive 
activities. I now can understand the distinction 
between devotional service,  knowledge and re-
nunciation. I had some doubts about them, but 
you have now very kindly dissipated all these 
doubts. I can now understand how even the 
great sages are bewildered by the real purpose 
of life. Of course, there is no question of sense 
gratific ation  (57).The results of whatever a liv-
ing entity does in this life are enjoyed in the 
next life  (58).The expert knowers of the Vedic 
conclusions say that one enjoys or suffers the 
results of his past activities. But practically it is 
seen that the body t hat performed the work in 
the last birth is already lost. So how is it possi-
ble to enjoy or suffer the reactions of that work 
in a different body? (59) 
The great sage Nārada continued : The liv-
ing entity acts in a gross body in this life. This 
body is force d to act by the subtle body, com-
posed of mind, intelligence and ego. After the 
gross body is lost, the subtle body is still there 
to enjoy or suffer. Thus there is no change  
(60).The living entity, while dreaming, gives 
up the actual living body. Through t he activities 
of his mind and intelligence, he acts in another 
body, either as a god or a dog. After giving up 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

274 
 this gross body, the living entity enters either 
an animal body or a demigod’s body on this 
planet or on another planet. He thus enjoys the 
resul ts of the actions of his past life  (61). The 
living entity labors under the bodily conception 
of “I am this, I am that. My duty is this, and 
therefore I shall do it.” These are all mental im-
pressions, and all these activities are tempo-
rary; nonetheless, by  the grace of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, the living entity gets a 
chance to execute all his mental concoctions. 
Thus he gets another body  (62).One can under-
stand the mental or conscious position of a liv-
ing entity by the activities of two kinds of  
senses  the knowledge -acquiring senses and the 
executive senses. Similarly, by the mental con-
dition or consciousness of a person, one can un-
derstand his position in the previous life  
(63).Sometimes we suddenly experience some-
thing that was never experienc ed in the present 
body by sight or hearing. Sometimes we see 
such things suddenly in dreams  (64).Therefore, 
my dear King, the living entity, who has a sub-
tle mental covering, develops all kinds of 
thoughts and images because of his previous 
body. Take this  from me as certain. There is no 
possibility of concocting anything mentally 
without having perceived it in the previous 
body  (65).  
O King, all good fortune unto you! The mind 
is the cause of the living entity’s attaining a cer-
tain type of body in accorda nce with his asso-
ciation with material nature. According to 
one’s mental composition, one can understand 
what the living entity was in his past life as well 
as what kind of body he will have in the future. 
Thus the mind indicates the past and future 
bodies  (66).Sometimes in a dream we see 
something never experienced or heard of in this 
life, but all these incidents have been experi-
enced at different times, in different places and 
in different conditions  (67).The mind of the liv-
ing entity continues to exist in various gross 
bodies, and according to one’s desires for sense 
gratification, the mind records different 
thoughts. In the mind these appear together in 
different combinations; therefore these images 
sometimes appear as things never seen or never 
heard b efore  (68).Kṛṣṇa consciousness means constantly associating with the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead in such a mental state that 
the devotee can observe the cosmic manifesta-
tion exactly as the Supreme Personality of God-
head does. Such observation is not alw ays pos-
sible, but it becomes manifest exactly like the 
dark planet known as Rāhu, which is observed 
in the presence of the full moon  (69).As long as 
there exists the subtle material body composed 
of intelligence, mind, senses, sense objects, and 
the reacti ons of the material qualities, the con-
sciousness of false identification and its rela-
tive objective, the gross body, exist as well  
(70).When the living entity is in deep sleep, 
when he faints, when there is some great shock 
on account of severe loss, at th e time of death, 
or when the body temperature is very high, the 
movement of the life air is arrested. At that time 
the living entity loses knowledge of identifying 
the body with the self  (71).When one is a youth, 
all the ten senses and the mind are complet ely 
visible. However, in the mother’s womb or in 
the boyhood state, the sense organs and the 
mind remain covered, just as the full moon is 
covered by the darkness of the dark -moon night  
(72).When the living entity dreams, the sense 
objects are not actually  present. However, be-
cause one has associated with the sense objects, 
they become manifest. Similarly, the living en-
tity with undeveloped senses does not cease to 
exist materially, even though he may not be ex-
actly in contact with the sense objects  (73).  
The five sense objects, the five sense organs, 
the five knowledge -acquiring senses and the 
mind are the sixteen material expansions. 
These combine with the living entity and are in-
fluenced by the three modes of material nature. 
Thus the existence of the co nditioned soul is 
understood  (74).By virtue of the processes of 
the subtle body, the living entity develops and 
gives up gross bodies. This is known as the 
transmigration of the soul. Thus the soul be-
comes subjected to different types of so -called 
enjoymen t, lamentation, fear, happiness and 
unhappiness  (75).The caterpillar transports it-
self from one leaf to another by capturing one 
leaf before giving up the other. Similarly, ac-
cording to his previous work, the living entity 
must capture another body before giving up the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

275 
 one he has. This is because the mind is the res-
ervoir of all kinds of desires  (76-77).As long as 
we desire to enjoy sense gratification, we create 
material activities. When the living entity acts 
in the material field, he enjoys the senses, a nd 
while enjoying the senses, he creates another 
series of material activities. In this way the liv-
ing entity becomes entrapped as a conditioned 
soul (78).You should always know that this 
cosmic manifestation is created, maintained 
and annihilated by the w ill of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Consequently, everything 
within this cosmic manifestation is under the 
control of the Lord. To be enlightened by this 
perfect knowledge, one should always engage 
himself in the devotional service of the Lord  
(79).  
The great sage Maitreya continued : The 
supreme devotee, the great saint Nārada, thus 
explained to King Prācīnabarhi the constitu-
tional position of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and the living entity. After giving an 
invitation to the King, Nārada Mu ni left to re-
turn to Siddhaloka  (80).In the presence of his 
ministers, the saintly King Prācīnabarhi left or-
ders for his sons to protect the citizens. He then 
left home and went off to undergo austerities in 
a holy place known as Kapilāśrama  (81). Hav-
ing u ndergone austerities and penances at Ka-
pilāśrama, King Prācīnabarhi attained full lib-
eration from all material designations. He con-
stantly engaged in the transcendental loving 
service of the Lord and attained a spiritual po-
sition qualitatively equal to tha t of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead  (82).  
My dear Vidura, one who hears this narra-
tion concerning the understanding of the living 
entity’s spiritual existence, as described by the 
great sage Nārada, or who relates it to others, 
will be liberated from the bodily conception of 
life (83).This narration spoken by the great sage 
Nārada is full of the transcendental fame of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Conse-
quently this narration, when described, cer-
tainly sanctifies this material world. It purifies 
the heart of the living entity and helps him at-
tain his spiritual identity. One who relates this 
transcendental narration will be liberated from all material bondage and will no longer have to 
wander within this material world  (84).The al-
legory of King Puranjana , described herein ac-
cording to authority, was heard by me from my 
spiritual master, and it is full of spiritual 
knowledge. If one can understand the purpose 
of this allegory, he will certainly be relieved 
from the bodily conception and will clearly u n-
derstand life after death. Although one may not 
understand what transmigration of the soul ac-
tually is, one can fully understand it by study-
ing this narration (85).  
Texts 29.1a -2a  A desire to maintain body, 
wife and children is also observed in animal so-
ciety. The animals have full intelligence to 
manage such affairs. If a human being is simply 
advanced in this respect, what is the difference 
between him and an animal? One should be 
very careful to unde rstand that this human life 
is attained after many, many births in the evo-
lutionary process. A learned man who gives up 
the bodily conception of life, both gross and 
subtle, will, by the enlightenment of spiritual 
knowledge, become a prominent individual 
spirit soul, as the Supreme Lord is also.  
Text 29.1b   If a living entity is developed in 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness and is merciful to others, 
and if his spiritual knowledge of self -realiza-
tion is perfect, he will immediately attain liber-
ation from the bondage of material existence.  
Text 29.2b   Everything happening within 
time, which consists of past, present and future, 
is merely a dream. That is the secret under-
standing in all Vedic literature.  
SB 4.30: The Activities of the Pracetās  
Vidura inquired from Maitreya : O 
brāhmaṇa, you formerly spoke about the sons 
of Prācīnabarhi and informed me that they sat-
isfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead by 
chanting a song composed by LordŚiva. What 
did they achieve in this way? (1) My dear 
Bārhaspatya, what did the sons of  King 
Barhiṣat, known as the Pracetās, obtain after 
meeting Lord Śiva, who is very dear to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the bestower of 
liberation? Certainly they were transferred to 
the spiritual world, but apart from that, what did 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

276 
 they obtain wit hin this material world, either in 
this life or in other lives? (2) 
The great sage Maitreya said:  The sons of 
King Prācīnabarhi, known as the Pracetās, un-
derwent severe austerities within the seawater 
to carry out the order of their father. By chant-
ing and  repeating the mantras given by Lord 
Śiva, they were able to satisfy Lord Viṣṇu, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead  (3).At the end 
of ten thousand years of severe austerities per-
formed by the Pracetās, the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, to reward their au sterities, ap-
peared before them in His very pleasing form. 
This appealed to the Pracetās and satisfied the 
labor of their austerities  (4).The Personality of 
Godhead, appearing on the shoulder of Garuḍa, 
seemed like a cloud resting on the summit of 
the moun tain known as Meru. The transcenden-
tal body of the Personality of Godhead was 
covered by attractive yellow garments, and His 
neck was decorated with the jewel known as 
Kaustubha -maṇi. The bodily effulgence of the 
Lord dissipated all the darkness of the uni-
verse (5).  The Lord’s face was very beautiful, 
and His head was decorated with a shining hel-
met and golden ornaments. The helmet was 
dazzling and was very beautifully situated on 
His head. The Lord had eight arms, which each 
held a particular weapon. The L ord was sur-
rounded by demigods, great sages and other as-
sociates. These were all engaged in His service. 
Garuḍa, the carrier of the Lord, glorified the 
Lord with Vedic hymns by flapping his wings. 
Garuḍa appeared to be an inhabitant of the 
planet known as Kinnaraloka  (6).Around the 
neck of the Personality of Godhead hung a 
flower garland that reached to His knees. His 
eight stout and elongated arms were decorated 
with that garland, which challenged the beauty 
of the goddess of fortune. With a merciful 
glanc e and a voice like thunder, the Lord ad-
dressed the sons of King Prācīnabarhiṣat, who 
were very much surrendered unto Him  (7).  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: My dear sons of the King, I am very much 
pleased by the friendly relationships among 
you. All of you are engaged in one occupation  
devotional service. I am so pleased with your mutual friendship that I wish you all good for-
tune. Now you may ask a benediction of Me  
(8).The Lord continued: Those who remember 
you every evening of every day will  become 
friendly with their brothers and with all other 
living entities  (9).Those who will offer Me the 
prayers composed by Lord Śiva, both in the 
morning and in the evening, will be given ben-
edictions by Me. In this way they can both ful-
fill their desires and attain good intelligence  
(10).Because you have with pleasure accepted 
within your hearts the orders of your father and 
have executed those orders very faithfully, your 
attractive qualities will be celebrated all over 
the world  (11).You will have a nice son, who 
will be in no way inferior to Lord Brahmā. Con-
sequently, he will  be very famous all over the 
universe, and the sons and grandsons generated 
by him will fill the three worlds  (12). 
O sons of King Prācīnabarhiṣat, the heav-
enly society girl named Pramlocā kept the lo-
tus-eyed daughter of Kaṇḍu in the care of the 
forest tre es. Then she went back to the heavenly 
planet. This daughter was born by the coupling 
of the Apsarā named Pramlocā with the sage 
Kaṇḍu  (13). Thereafter the child, who was left 
to the care of the trees, began to cry in hunger. 
At that time the king of the f orest, namely the 
king of the moon planet, out of compassion 
placed his finger, which poured forth nectar, 
within the child’s mouth. Thus the child was 
raised by the mercy of the king of the moon  
(14).Since all of you are very much obedient to 
My orders, I  ask you to immediately marry that 
girl, who is so well qualified with beauty and 
good qualities. According to the order of your 
father, create progeny through her  (15).You 
brothers are all of the same nature, being My 
devotees and obedient sons of your fa ther. Sim-
ilarly, that girl is also of the same type and is 
dedicated to all of you. Thus both the girl and 
you, the sons of Prācīnabarhiṣat, are on the 
same platform, being united on a common prin-
ciple  (16).The Lord then blessed all the Prace-
tās, saying: M y dear princes, by My mercy you 
can enjoy all the facilities of this world as well 
as the heavenly world. Indeed, you can enjoy 
all of them without hindrance and with full 
strength for one million celestial years  (17). 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

277 
 Thereafter you will develop unadulter ated de-
votional service unto Me and be freed from all 
material contamination. At that time, being 
completely unattached to material enjoyment in 
the so -called heavenly planets as well as in hell-
ish planets, you will return home, back to God-
head  (18).  
Thos e who are engaged in auspicious activ-
ities in devotional service certainly understand 
that the ultimate enjoyer or beneficiary of all 
activities is the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Thus when one acts, he offers the results 
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and 
passes life always engaged in the topics of the 
Lord. Even though such a person may be par-
ticipating in family life, he is not affected by 
the results of his actions  (19).Always engaging 
in the activities of devotional service, devotees 
feel ev er-increasingly fresh and new in all their 
activities. The all -knower, the Supersoul within 
the heart of the devotee, makes everything in-
creasingly fresh. This is known as the Brahman 
position by the advocates of the Absolute 
Truth. In such a liberated sta ge [brahma -bhūta], 
one is never bewildered. Nor does one lament 
or become unnecessarily jubilant. This is due to 
the brahma -bhūta situation  (20).  
The great sage Maitreya said: After the 
Personality of Godhead spoke thus, the Prace-
tās began to offer Him pr ayers. The Lord is the 
bestower of all success in life and is the su-
preme benefactor. He is also the supreme friend 
who takes away all miserable conditions expe-
rienced by a devotee. In a faltering voice, due 
to ecstasy, the Pracetās began to offer prayers.  
They were purified by the presence of the Lord, 
who was before them face to face  (21).  
The Pracetās spoke as follows : Dear Lord, 
You relieve all kinds of material distress. Your 
magnanimous transcendental qualities and holy 
name are all -auspicious. This conclusion is al-
ready settled. You can go faster than the speed 
of mind and words. You cannot be perceived 
by material senses. We therefore offer You re-
spectful obeisances again and again  (22).Dear 
Lord, we beg to offer our obeisances unto You. 
When the mi nd is fixed upon You, the world of duality, although a place for material enjoy-
ment, appears meaningless. Your transcenden-
tal form is  full of transcendental bliss. We 
therefore offer our respects unto You. Your ap-
pearances as Lord Brahmā, Lord Viṣṇu and 
Lord Śiva are meant for the purpose of creating, 
maintaining and annihilating this cosmic mani-
festation  (23).Dear Lord, we offer our re spect-
ful obeisances unto You because Your exist-
ence is completely independent of all material 
influences. Your Lordship always takes away 
the devotee’s miserable conditions, for Your 
brain plans how to do so. You live everywhere 
as Paramātmā; therefore You  are known as 
Vāsudeva. You also accept Vasudeva as Your 
father, and You are celebrated by the name 
Kṛṣṇa. You are so kind that You always in-
crease the influence of all kinds of devotees  
(24).Dear Lord, we offer our respectful obei-
sances unto You because f rom Your abdomen 
sprouts the lotus flower, the origin of all living 
entities. You are always decorated with a lotus 
garland, and Your feet resemble the lotus 
flower with all its fragrance. Your eyes are also 
like the petals of a lotus flower. Therefore we 
always offer our respectful obeisances unto 
You (25).Dear Lord, the garment You have put 
on is yellowish in color, like the saffron of a 
lotus flower, but it is not made of anything ma-
terial. Since You live in everyone’s heart, You 
are the direct witness o f all the activities of all 
living entities. We offer our respectful obei-
sances unto You again and again  (26). 
Dear Lord, we conditioned souls are always 
covered by ignorance in the bodily conception 
of life. We therefore always prefer the misera-
ble condit ions of material existence. To deliver 
us from these miserable conditions, You have 
advented Yourself in this transcendental form. 
This is evidence of Your unlimited causeless 
mercy upon those of us who are suffering in 
this way. Then what to speak of the devotees to 
whom You are always so favorably disposed? 
(27) Dear Lord, You are the killer of all inaus-
picious things. You are compassionate upon 
Your poor devotees through the expansion of 
Your arcā -vigraha. You should certainly think 
of us as Your eternal  servants  (28). When the 
Lord, out of His natural compassion, thinks of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

278 
 His devotee, by that process only are all desires 
of the neophyte devotee fulfilled. The Lord is 
situated in every living entity’s heart, although 
the living entity may be very insigni ficant. The 
Lord knows everything about the living entity, 
including all his desires. Although we are very 
insignificant, why should the Lord not know 
our desires? (29) O Lord of the universe, You 
are the actual teacher of the science of devo-
tional service . We are satisfied that Your Lord-
ship is the ultimate goal of our life, and we pray 
that You will be satisfied with us. That is our 
benediction. We do not desire anything other 
than Your full satisfaction  (30).Dear Lord, we 
shall therefore pray for Your be nediction be-
cause You are the Supreme, beyond all tran-
scendence, and because there is no end to Your 
opulences. Consequently, You are celebrated 
by the name Ananta  (31).Dear Lord, when the 
bee approaches the celestial tree called the 
pārijāta, it certainly does not leave the tree, be-
cause there is no need for such action. Simi-
larly, when we have approached Your lotus feet 
and taken shelter of them, what further bene-
diction may we ask of You? (32) Dear Lord, as 
long as we have to remain within this material 
world due to our material contamination and 
wander from one type of body to another and 
from one planet to another, we pray that we 
may associate with those who are eng aged in 
discussing Your pastimes. We pray for this 
benediction life after life, in different bodily 
forms and on different planets  (33).Even a mo-
ment’s association with a pure devotee cannot 
be compared to being transferred to heavenly 
planets or even merg ing into the Brahman ef-
fulgence in complete liberation. For living en-
tities who are destined to give up the body and 
die, association with pure devotees is the high-
est benediction  (34).Whenever pure topics of 
the transcendental world are discussed, the 
mem bers of the audience forget all kinds of ma-
terial hankerings, at least for the time being. 
Not only that, but they are no longer envious of 
one another, nor do they suffer from anxiety or 
fear (35). The Supreme Lord, Nārāyaṇa, is pre-
sent among devotees who are engaged in hear-
ing and chanting the holy name of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Lord Nārāyaṇa is the ultimate goal of sannyāsīs, those in the re-
nounced order of life, and Nārāyaṇa is wor-
shiped through this saṅkīrtana movement by 
those who are liberated from material contami-
nation. Indeed, they recite the holy name again 
and again  (36).Dear Lord, Your personal asso-
ciates, devotees, wander all over the world to 
purify even the holy places of  pilgrimage. Is not 
such activity pleasing to those who are actually 
afraid of material existence? (37) 
Dear Lord, by virtue of a moment’s associa-
tion with Lord Śiva, who is very dear to You 
and who is Your most intimate friend, we were 
fortunate to attain  You. You are the most expert 
physician, capable of treating the incurable dis-
ease of material existence. On account of our 
great fortune, we have been able to take shelter 
at Your lotus feet  (38).Dear Lord, we have 
studied the Vedas, accepted a spiritual master 
and offered respect to brāhmaṇas, advanced 
devotees and aged personalities who are spirit-
ually very advanced. We have offered our re-
spects to them, and we have not been envious 
of any brother, friends or anyone else. We have 
also undergone severe au sterities within the 
water and have not taken food for a long time. 
All these spiritual assets of ours are simply of-
fered for Your satisfaction. We pray for this 
benediction only, and nothing more  (39-
40).Dear Lord, even great yogīs and mystics 
who are ver y much advanced by virtue of aus-
terities and knowledge and who have com-
pletely situated themselves in pure existence, as 
well as great personalities like Manu, Lord 
Brahmā and Lord Śiva, cannot fully understand 
Your glories and potencies. Nonetheless they 
have offered their prayers according to their 
own capacities. In the same way, we, although 
much lower than these personalities, also offer 
our prayers according to our own capability  
(41).Dear Lord, You have no enemies or 
friends. Therefore You are equal to everyone. 
You cannot be contaminated by sinful activi-
ties, and Your transcendental form is always 
beyond the material creation. You are the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead because You re-
main everywhere within all existence. You are 
consequently known as Vāsudeva. We offer 
You our respectful obeisances  (42).  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

279 
 The great sage Maitreya continued : My 
dear Vidura, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is the protector of surrendered souls, 
being thus addressed by the Pracetās and wor-
shiped by them, replied, “ May whatever you 
have prayed for be fulfilled.” After saying this, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose 
prowess is never defeated, left. The Pracetās 
were unwilling to be separated from Him be-
cause they had not seen Him to their full satis-
faction  (43).Thereafter all the Pracetās 
emerged from the waters of the sea. They then 
saw that all the trees on land had grown very 
tall, as if to obstruct the path to the heavenly 
planets. These trees had covered the entire sur-
face of the world. At this time the Pra cetās be-
came very angry  (44).My dear King, at the time 
of devastation, Lord Śiva emits fire and air 
from his mouth out of anger. To make the sur-
face of the earth completely treeless, the Prace-
tās also emitted fire and air from their mouths  
(45).After seein g that all the trees on the sur-
face of the earth were being turned to ashes, 
Lord Brahmā immediately came to the sons of 
King Barhiṣmān and pacified them with words 
of logic (46).  The remaining trees, being very 
much afraid of the Pracetās, immediately del iv-
ered their daughter at the advice of Lord 
Brahmā  (47).Following the order of Lord 
Brahmā, all the Pracetās accepted the girl as 
their wife. From the womb of this girl, the son 
of Lord Brahmā named Dakṣa took birth. 
Dakṣa had to take birth from the womb o f 
Māriṣā due to his disobeying and disrespecting 
Lord Mahādeva [Śiva]. Consequently he had to 
give up his body twice  (48).His previous body 
had been destroyed, but he, the same Dakṣa, in-
spired by the supreme will, created all the de-
sired living entities in  the Cākṣuṣa manvantara  
(49).After being born, Dakṣa, by the superex-
cellence of his bodily luster, covered all others’ 
bodily opulence. Because he was very expert in 
performing fruitive activity, he was called by 
the name Dakṣa, meaning “the very expert.” 
Lord Brahmā therefore engaged Dakṣa in the 
work of generating living entities and maintain-
ing them. In due course of time, Dakṣa also en-
gaged other Prajāpatis [progenitors] in the pro-
cess of generation and maintenance  (50-51).  SB 4.31: Nārada Instructs th e Pracetās  
The great saint Maitreya continued : After 
that, the Pracetās lived at home for thousands 
of years and developed perfect knowledge in 
spiritual consciousness. At last they remem-
bered the blessings of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead and left ho me, putting their wife in 
charge of a perfect son  (1).The Pracetās went to 
the seashore in the west where the great liber-
ated sage Jājali was residing. After perfecting 
the spiritual knowledge by which one becomes 
equal toward all living entities, the Prac etās be-
came perfect in Kṛṣṇa consciousness  (2).After 
practicing the yogāsana for mystic yoga, the 
Pracetās managed to control their life air, mind, 
words and external vision. Thus by the 
prāṇāyāma process they were completely re-
lieved of material attachmen t. By remaining 
perpendicular, they could concentrate their 
minds on the uppermost Brahman. While they 
were practicing this prāṇāyāma, the great sage 
Nārada, who is worshiped both by demons and 
by demigods, came to see them  (3).As soon as 
the Pracetās saw that the great sage Nārada had 
appeared, they immediately got up even from 
their āsanas. As required, they immediately of-
fered obeisances and worshiped him, and when 
they saw that Nārada Muni was properly 
seated, they began to ask him questions  (4).  
All the Pracetās began to address  the great 
sage Nārada: O great sage, O brāhmaṇa, we 
hope you met with no disturbances while com-
ing here. It is due to our great fortune that we 
are now able to see you. By the traveling of the 
sun, people are relieved from the fear of the 
darkness of night  a fear brought about by 
thieves and rogues. Similarly, your traveling is 
like the sun’s, for you drive away all kinds of 
fear (5).O master, may we inform you that be-
cause of our being overly attached to family af-
fairs, we alm ost forgot the instructions we re-
ceived from Lord Śiva and Lord Viṣṇu  (6). 
Dear master, kindly enlighten us in transcen-
dental knowledge, which may act as a torch-
light by which we may cross the dark nescience 
of material existence  (7).  
The great sage Maitr eya continued : My 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

280 
 dear Vidura, being thus petitioned by the Prace-
tās, the supreme devotee Nārada, who is always 
absorbed in thoughts of the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, began to reply  (8).  
The great sage Nārada said : When a living 
entity is born to eng age in the devotional ser-
vice of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is the supreme controller, his birth, all his 
fruitive activities, his life span, his mind and his 
words are all factually perfect  (9).A civilized 
human being has three kinds of birth s. The first 
birth is by a pure father and mother, and this 
birth is called birth by semen. The next birth 
takes place when one is initiated by the  spiritual 
master, and this birth is called sāvitra. The third 
birth, called yājñika, takes place when one is 
given the opportunity to worship Lord Viṣṇu. 
Despite the opportunities for attaining such 
births, even if one gets the life span of a demi-
god, if one does not actually engage in the ser-
vice of the Lord, everything is useless. Simi-
larly, one’s activities may be mundane or spir-
itual, but they are useless if they are not meant 
for satisfying the Lord  (10).Without devotional 
service, what is the meaning  of severe austeri-
ties, the process of hearing, the power of 
speech, the power of mental speculation, ele-
vated intelligence, strength, and the power of 
the senses? (11) Transcendental practices that 
do not ultimately help one realize the Supreme 
Personalit y of Godhead are useless, be they 
mystic yoga practices, the analytical study of 
matter, severe austerity, the acceptance of 
sannyāsa, or the study of Vedic literature. All 
these may be very important aspects of spiritual 
advancement, but unless one unders tands the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, all 
these processes are useless  (12). Factually the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the original 
source of all self -realization. Consequently, the 
goal of all auspicious activities  karma, Jnana , 
yoga and b hakti  is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead  (13).As pouring water on the root of 
a tree energizes the trunk, branches, twigs and 
everything else, and as supplying food to the 
stomach enlivens the senses and limbs of the 
body, simply worshiping the Supreme  Person-
ality of Godhead through devotional service au-
tomatically satisfies the demigods, who are parts of that Supreme Personality  (14).During 
the rainy season, water is generated from the 
sun, and in due course of time, during the sum-
mer season, the very same water is again ab-
sorbed by the sun. Similarly, all living entities, 
moving and inert, are generated from the earth, 
and again, after some time, they all return to the 
earth as dust. Similarly, everything emanates 
from the Supreme Personality of Godhea d, and 
in due course of time everything enters into 
Him again  (15).Just as the sunshine is nondif-
ferent from the sun, the cosmic manifestation is 
also nondifferent from the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. The Supreme Personality is there-
fore all -pervasive within this material creation. 
When the senses are active, they appear to be 
part and parcel of the body, but when the body 
is asleep, their activities are unmanifest. Simi-
larly, the whole cosmic creation appears differ-
ent and yet nondifferent from the Sup reme Per-
son (16).My dear Kings, sometimes in the sky 
there are clouds, sometimes there is darkness, 
and sometimes there is illumination. The ap-
pearance of all these takes place consecutively. 
Similarly, in the Supreme Absolute, the modes 
of passion, darkne ss and goodness appear as 
consecutive energies. Sometimes they appear, 
and sometimes they disappear  (17).Because the 
Supreme Lord is the cause of all causes, He is 
the Supersoul of all individual living entities, 
and He exists as both the remote and immedi ate 
cause. Since He is aloof from the material em-
anations, He is free from their interactions and 
is Lord of material nature. You should therefore 
engage in His devotional service, thinking 
yourself qualitatively one with Him  (18).  
By showing mercy to all  living entities, be-
ing satisfied somehow or other, and restricting 
the senses from sense enjoyment, one can very 
quickly satisfy the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Janārdana  (19).Being completely 
cleansed of all material desires, the devotees 
are freed f rom all mental contamination. Thus 
they can always think of the Lord constantly 
and address Him very feelingly. The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, knowing Himself to be 
controlled by His devotees, does not leave them 
for a second, just as the sky overhead  never be-
comes invisible  (20).The Supreme Personality 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

281 
 of Godhead becomes very dear to those devo-
tees who have no material possessions but are 
fully happy in possessing the devotional ser-
vice of the Lord. Indeed, the Lord relishes the 
devotional activities of such devotees. Those 
who are puffed up with material education, 
wealth, aristocracy and fruitive activity are 
very proud of possessing material things, and 
they often deride the devotees. Even if such 
people offer the Lord worship, the Lord never 
accept s them  (21).Although the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is self -sufficient, He be-
comes dependent on His devotees. He does not 
care for the goddess of fortune, nor for the 
kings and demigods who are after the favors of 
the goddess of fortune. Where is that person 
who is actually grateful and will not worship 
the Personality of Godhead? (22) 
The great sage Maitreya continued : My 
dear King Vidura, Śrī Nārada Muni, the son of 
Lord Brahmā, thus described all these relation-
ships with the Supreme Personality of Go dhead 
to the Pracetās. Afterward, he returned to Brah-
maloka  (23).Hearing from Nārada’s mouth the 
glories of the Lord, which vanquish all the ill 
fortune of the world, the Pracetās also became 
attached to the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Meditating on Hi s lotus feet, they ad-
vanced to the ultimate destination  (24). My 
dear Vidura, I have told you everything you 
wanted to know about the conversation be-
tween Nārada and the Pracetās, the conversa-
tion describing the glories of the Lord. I have 
related this as far as possible  (25).  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued : O best of 
kings [King Parīkṣit], I have now finished tell-
ing about the descendants of the first son of 
Svāyambhuva Manu, Uttānapāda. I shall now 
try to relate the activities of the descendants of 
Priyavrat a, the second son of Svāyambhuva 
Manu. Please hear them attentively  (26).Alt-
hough Mahārāja Priyavrata received instruc-
tions from the great sage Nārada, he still en-
gaged in ruling the earth. After fully enjoying 
material possessions, he divided his property  
among his sons. He then attained a position by 
which he could return home, back to Godhead  
(27). My dear King, in this way, after hearing the 
transcendental messages of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead and His devotees from the 
great sage Maitreya, Vidu ra was overwhelmed 
with ecstasy. With tears in his eyes, he imme-
diately fell down at the lotus feet of his guru, 
his spiritual master. He then fixed the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead within the core of his 
heart  (28).  
Śrī Vidura said:  O great mystic, O greatest 
of all devotees, by your causeless mercy I have 
been shown the path of liberation from this 
world of darkness. By following this path, a 
person liberated from the material world can re-
turn home, back to Godhead  (29).  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued : Vidura 
thus offered obeisances unto the great sage 
Maitreya and, taking his permission, started for 
the city of Hastināpura to see his own kinsmen, 
although he had no material desires  (30).O 
King, those who hear these topi cs about kings 
who are completely surrendered to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead obtain without diffi-
culty a long life, wealth, good reputation, good 
fortune and, ultimately, the opportunity to re-
turn home, back to Godhead  (31).  
Canto  5: The Creative I mpetus  
SB 5.1: The Activities of Mahārāja Pri-
yavrata  
King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī:  O great sage, why did King Pri-
yavrata, who was a great, self -realized devotee 
of the Lord, remain in household life, which is 
the root cause of the bondage of karma [fruitive 
activities] and  which def eats the mission of hu-
man life?(1) Devotees are certainly liberated 
persons. Therefore, O greatest of the 
brāhmaṇas, they cannot possibly be absorbed in 
family affairs.(2) Elevated mahātmās who have 
taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead are fully satiated by the 
shade of those lotus feet. Their consciousness 
cannot possibly be come attached to family 
members.(3) The King continued: O great 
brāhmaṇa, this is my great doubt. How was it 
possible for a person like King P riyavrata, who 
was so attached to wife, children and home, to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

282 
 achieve the topmost infallible perfection in 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness? (4)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  What you 
have said is correct. The glories of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is praised i n elo-
quent, transcendental verses by such exalted 
personalities as Brahmā, are very pleasing to 
great devotees and liberated persons. One who 
is attached to the nectarean honey of the Lord’s 
lotus feet, and whose mind is always absorbed 
in His glories, may  sometimes be checked by 
some impediment, but he still never gives up 
the exalted position he has acquired. (5) 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, 
Prince Priyavrata was a great devotee because 
he sought the lotus feet of Nārada, his spiritual 
master,  and thus achieved the highest perfec-
tion in transcendental knowledge. With ad-
vanced knowledge, he always engaged in dis-
cussing spiritual subjects and did not divert his 
attention to anything else. The Prince’s father 
then asked him to take charge of rulin g the 
world. He tried to convince Priyavrata that this 
was his duty as indicated in the revealed scrip-
tures. Prince Priyavrata, however, was continu-
ously practicing bhakti -yoga by constantly re-
membering the Supreme Personality of God-
head, thus engaging all  his senses in the service 
of the Lord. Therefore, although the order of his 
father could not be rejected, the Prince did not 
welcome it. Thus he very conscientiously 
raised the question of whether he might be di-
verted from devotional service by accepting the 
responsibility of ruling over the world. (6)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The first 
created being and most powerful demigod in 
this universe is Lord Brahmā, who is always re-
sponsible for developing universal affairs. 
Born directly from the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, he dedicates his activities  to the wel-
fare of the entire universe, for he knows the 
purpose of the universal creation. This su-
premely powerful Lord Brahmā, accompanied 
by his associates and the personified Vedas, left 
his own abode in the highest planetary system 
and descended to th e place of Prince Pri-
yavrata’s meditation. (7) As Lord Brahmā de-
scended on his carrier, the great swan, all the residents of the planets named Siddhaloka, 
Gandharvaloka, Sādhyaloka and Cāraṇaloka, 
as well as great sages and demigods flying in 
their differen t airplanes, assembled within the 
canopy of the sky to receive Lord Brahmā and 
worship him. As he received respect and ado-
ration from the residents of the various planets, 
Lord Brahmā appeared just like the full moon 
surrounded by illuminating stars. Lord 
Brahmā’s great swan then arrived at the border 
of Gandhamādana Hill and approached Prince 
Priyavrata, who was sitting there. (8) Lord 
Brahmā, the father of Nārada Muni, is the su-
preme person within this universe. As soon as 
Nārada saw the great swan, he cou ld under-
stand that Lord Brahmā had arrived. Therefore 
he immediately stood up, along with 
Svāyambhuva Manu and his son Priyavrata, 
whom Nārada was instructing. Then they 
folded their hands and began to worship Lord 
Brahmā with great respect. (9) My dear Kin g 
Parīkṣit, because Lord Brahmā had finally de-
scended from Satyaloka to Bhūloka, Nārada 
Muni, Prince Priyavrata and Svāyambhuva 
Manu came forward to offer him objects of 
worship and to praise him in highly qualified 
language, according to Vedic etiquette. At that 
time, Lord Brahmā, the original person of this 
universe, felt compassion for Priyavrata and, 
looking upon him with a smiling  face, spoke to 
him as follows.(10)  
Lord Brahmā, the supreme person within 
this universe, said:  My dear Priyavrata, kindly 
hear attentively what I shall say to you. Do not 
be jealous of the Supreme Lord, who is beyond 
our experimental measurements. All of us, in-
cluding Lord Śiva, your father and the great 
sage Mahārṣi Nārada, must carry out the order 
of the Supreme. We  cannot d eviate from His 
order.(11) One cannot avoid the order of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, not by the 
strength of severe austerities, an exalted Vedic 
education, or the power of mystic yoga, physi-
cal prowess or intellectual activities. Nor can 
one use hi s power of religion, his material opu-
lence or any other means, either by himself or 
with the help of others, to defy the orders of the 
Supreme Lord. That is not possible for any liv-
ing being, from Brahmā down to the ant. (12) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

283 
 My dear Priyavrata, by the orde r of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, all living enti-
ties accept different types of bodies for birth 
and death, activity, lamentation, illusion, fear 
of future dangers, and happiness and dis-
tress. (13) My dear boy, all of us are bound by 
the Vedic injunc tions to the divisions of 
varṇāśrama according to our qualities and 
work. These divisions are difficult to avoid be-
cause they are scientifically arranged. We must 
therefore carry out our duties of varṇāśrama -
dharma, like bulls obliged to move according to 
the direction of a driver pulling on ropes knot-
ted to their noses. (14) My dear Priyavrata, ac-
cording to our association with different modes 
of material nature, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead gives us our specific bodies and the 
happiness and distress we achieve. One must 
therefore remain situated as he is and be con-
ducted by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
exactly as a blind man is led by a person who 
has eyes with which to see. (15)  
Even if one is l iberated, he nevertheless ac-
cepts the body he has received according to his 
past karma. Without misconceptions, however, 
he regards his enjoyment and suffering due to 
that karma the way an awakened person regards 
a dream he had while sleeping. He thus rema ins 
steadfast and never works to achieve another 
material body under the influence of the three 
modes of material nature. (16) Even if he goes 
from forest to forest, one who is not self -con-
trolled must always fear material bondage be-
cause he is living with six co -wivesthe mind 
and knowledge -acquiring senses. Even house-
holder life, however, cannot harm a self -satis-
fied, learned man who has conquered his 
senses. (17) One who is situated in household 
life and who systematically conquers his mind 
and five sense o rgans is like a king in his for-
tress who conquers his powerful enemies. After 
one has been trained in household life and his 
lusty desires have decreased, he ca n move any-
where without danger.(18) Lord Brahmā con-
tinued: My dear Priyavrata, seek shelter inside 
the opening in the lotus of the feet of the Lord, 
whose navel is also like a lotus. Thus conquer 
the six sense organs [the mind and knowledge -
acquiring senses]. Accept material enjoyment becaus e the Lord, extraordinarily, has ordered 
you to do this. You will thus always be liber-
ated from material association and be able to 
carry out the Lord’s orders i n your constitu-
tional position.(19)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  After 
thus being fully instr ucted by Lord Brahmā, 
who is the spiritual master of the three worlds, 
Priyavrata, his own position being inferior, of-
fered obeisances, accepted the order and car-
ried it out with great respect.(20) Lord Brahmā 
was then worshiped by Manu, who respectfully 
satisfied him as well as he could. Priyavrata and 
Nārada also looked upon Brahmā with no 
tinges of resentment. Having engaged Pri-
yavrata in accepting his father’s request, Lord 
Brahmā returned to his abode, Satyaloka, 
which is indescribable by the endeavor of mun-
dane mind or words. (21)  
Svāyambhuva Manu, with the assistance of 
Lord Brahmā, thus fulfilled his desires. With 
the permission of the great sage Nārada, he de-
livered to his son the governmental responsibil-
ity for maintaining and protecting all the pl an-
ets of the universe. He thus achieved relief from 
the most dangerous, poisonous ocean of mate-
rial desires. (22) Following the order of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Mahārāja Pri-
yavrata fully engaged in worldly affairs, yet he 
always thought of the l otus feet of the Lord, 
which are the cause of liberation from all mate-
rial attachment. Although Priyavrata Mahārāja 
was completely freed from all material contam-
ination, he ruled the material world just to 
honor the orders of his superiors. (23) Thereaf-
ter, Mahārāja Priyavrata married Barhiṣmatī, 
the daughter of the prajāpati named 
Viśvakarmā. In her he begot ten sons equal to 
him in beauty, character, magnanimity and 
other qualities. He also begot a daughter, the 
youngest of all, named Ūrjasvatī. (24) The te n 
sons of Mahārāja Priyavrata were named 
Āgnīdhra, Idhmajihva, Yajñabāhu, Mahāvīra, 
Hiraṇyaretā, Ghṛtapṛṣṭha, Savana, Medhātithi, 
Vītihotra and Kavi. These are al so names of 
Agni, the fire -god.(25) Three among these ten-
namely Kavi, Mahāvīra and Savanalived  in 
complete celibacy. Thus trained in brahmacārī 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

284 
 life from the beginning of childhood, they were 
very conversant with the highest perfection, 
known as the paramahaṁsa -āśrama. (26) Thus 
situated in the renounced order from the begin-
ning of their lives, all three of them completely 
controlled the activities of their senses and thus 
became great saints. They concentrated their 
minds always upon the lotus feet of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is the rest-
ing place of the totality of living entities and  
who is t herefore celebrated as Vāsudeva. Lord 
Vāsudeva is the only shelter of those who are 
actually afraid of material existence. By con-
stantly thinking of His lotus feet, these three 
sons of Mahārāja Priyavrata became advanced 
in pure devotional service. By the prowess of 
their devotional service, they could directly 
perceive the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is situated in everyone’s heart as the Su-
persoul, and realize that there was qualitatively 
no differe nce between themselves and 
Him.(27) In his other wife, Mahārāja Priyavrata 
begot three sons, named Uttama, Tāmasa and 
Raivata. All of them later took ch arge of man-
vantara millenniums.(28)  
After Kavi, Mahāvīra and Savana were 
completely trained in the paramahaṁsa stage of 
life, Mahārāja Priyavrata ruled t he universe for 
eleven arbudas of years. Whenever he was de-
termined to fix his arrow upon his bowstring 
with his two powerful arms, all opponents of 
the regulative principles of religious life would 
flee from his presence in fear of the unparal-
leled prowes s he displayed in ruling the uni-
verse. He greatly loved his wife Barhiṣmatī, 
and with the increase of days, their exchange of 
nuptial love also increased. By her feminine be-
havior as she dressed herself, walked, got up, 
smiled, laughed, and glanced about, Queen 
Barhiṣmatī increased his energy. Thus although 
he was a great soul, he appeared lost in the fem-
inine conduct of his wife. He behaved with her 
just like an ordinary man, but actually he was a 
great soul. (29) While so excellently ruling the 
universe, K ing Priyavrata once became dissat-
isfied with the circumambulation of the most 
powerful sun -god. Encircling Sumeru Hill on 
his chariot, the sun -god illuminates all the sur-
rounding planetary systems. However, when the sun is on the northern side of the hill,  the 
south receives less light, and when the sun is in 
the south, the north receives less. King Pri-
yavrata disliked this situation and therefore de-
cided to make daylight in the part of the uni-
verse where there was night. He followed the 
orbit of the sun -god on a brilliant chariot and 
thus fulfilled his desire. He could perform such 
wonderful activities because of the power he 
had achieved by worshiping the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. (30) When Priyavrata 
drove his chariot behind the sun, the rims of his 
chariot wheels created impressions that later 
became seven oceans, dividing the planetary 
system known as Bhū -maṇḍ ala into seven is-
lands.(31) The names of the islands are Jambū, 
Plakṣa, Śālmali, Kuśa, Krauñca, Śāka and 
Puṣkara. Each island is twice as larg e as the one 
preceding it, and each is surrounded by a liquid 
substance, beyond which is the next island. (32) 
The seven oceans respectively contain salt wa-
ter, sugarcane juice, liquor, clarified butter, 
milk, emulsified yogurt, and sweet drinking 
water. Al l the islands are completely sur-
rounded by these oceans, and each ocean is 
equal in breadth to the island it surrounds. 
Mahārāja Priyavrata, the husband  of Queen 
Barhiṣmatī, gave sovereignty over these islands 
to his respective sons, namely Āgnīdhra, 
Idhma jihva, Yajñabāhu, Hiraṇyaretā, 
Ghṛtapṛṣṭha, Medhātithi and Vītihotra. Thus 
they all became king s by the order of their fa-
ther.(33) King Priyavrata then gave his daugh-
ter, Ūrjasvatī, in marriage to Śukrācārya, who 
begot in her a daughter named Devayānī. (34) 
My dear King, a devotee who has taken shelter 
of the dust from the lotus feet of the Lord can 
transcend the influence of the six material 
wavesnamely hunger, thirst, lamentation, illu-
sion, old age and deathand he can conquer the 
mind and five senses. Howe ver, this is not very 
wonderful for a pure devotee of the Lord be-
cause even a person beyond the jurisdiction of 
the four castesin other words, an untouchableis 
immediately relieved of bondage to material 
existence if he utters the holy name of the Lord 
even once. (35) 
While enjoying his material opulences with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

285 
 full strength and influence, Mahārāja Pri-
yavrata once began to consider that although he 
had fully surrendered to the great saint Nārada 
and was actually on the path of Kṛṣṇa con-
sciousness, he had some how become again en-
tangled in material activities. Thus his mind 
now became restless, and he began to speak in 
a spirit of renunciation. (36) The King thus be-
gan criticizing himself: Alas, how condemned 
I have become because of my sense gratifica-
tion! I hav e now fallen into material enjoyment, 
which is exactly like a covered well. I have had 
enough! I am not going to enjoy any more. Just 
see how I have become like a dancing monkey 
in the hands of my wife. Because of this, I am 
condemned. (37) By the grace of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Mahārāja Priyavrata 
reawakened to his senses. He divided all his 
earthly possessions among his obedient sons. 
He gave up everything, including his wife, with 
whom he had enjoyed so much sense gratifica-
tion, and his great  and opulent kingdom, and he 
completely renounced all attachment. His 
heart, having been cleansed, became a place of 
pastimes for the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Thus he was able to return to the path of 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, spiritual life, and resume 
the position he had attained by the grace of the 
great saint Nā rada.(38)  
There are many famous verses regarding 
Mahārāja Priyavrata’s activities:  
missing(39) “To stop the quarreling among 
different peoples, Mahārāja Priyavrata marked 
boundaries at rivers an d at the edges of moun-
tains and forests so that no one would trespass 
upon another’s property.” (40) “As a great fol-
lower and devotee of the sage Nārada, 
Mahārāja Priyavrata considered hellish the op-
ulences he had achieved by dint of fruitive ac-
tivities and  mystic power, whether in the lower 
or heavenly planetar y systems or in human so-
ciety.”(41)  
SB 5.2: The Activities of Mahārāja 
Āgnīdhra  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  After 
his father, Mahārāja Priyavrata, departed to fol-
low the path of spiritual life by u ndergoing aus-
terities, King Āgnīdhra completely obeyed his order. Strictly observing the principles of reli-
gion, he gave full protection to the inhabitants 
of Jambūdvīpa as if t hey were his own begotten 
sons.(1) Desiring to get a perfect son and be-
come an inhabitant of Pitṛloka, Mahārāja 
Āgnīdhra once worshiped Lord Brahmā, the 
master of those in charge of material creation. 
He went to a valley of Mandara Hill, where the 
damsels of the heavenly planets come down to 
stroll. There he collected garden flowers and 
other necessary paraphernalia and then en-
gaged in severe auste rities and worship.(2) Un-
derstanding King Āgnīdhra’s desire, the first 
and most powerful created being of this uni-
verse, Lord Brahmā, selected the best of the 
dancing girls in his assembly, whose name was 
Pūrvac itti, and sent her to the King.(3) The Ap-
sarā sent by Lord Brahmā began strolling in a 
beautiful park near the place where the King 
was meditating and worshiping. The park was 
beautiful because of its dense green foliage and 
golden cre epers. There were pairs of varied 
birds such as peacocks, and in a lake there were 
ducks and swans, all vibrating very sweet 
sounds. Thus the park was magnificently beau-
tiful because of the foliage, the clear water, the 
lotus flowers and the sweet singing of various 
kinds of birds. (4) 
As Pūrvacitti passed by on the road in a very 
beautiful style and mood of her own, the pleas-
ing ornaments on her ankles tinkled with her 
every step. Although Prince Āgnīdhra was con-
trolling his senses, practicing yoga with half -
open eyes, he could see her with his lotuslike 
eyes, and when he heard the sweet tinkling of 
her bangles, he opened his eyes slightly more 
and coul d see that she was just nearby.(5) Like 
a honeybee, the Apsarā smelled the beautiful 
and attractive flowers. She could attract the 
minds and vision of both humans and demigods 
by her playful movements, her shyness and hu-
mility, her glances, the very pleasing sounds 
that poured from her mouth as she spoke, and 
the motion of her limbs. By all these qualities, 
she opened for Cupid, who bears a n arrow of 
flowers, a path of aural reception into the minds 
of men. When she spoke, nectar seemed to flow 
from her mouth. As she breathed, the bees, mad 
for the taste of her breath, tried to hover about 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

286 
 her beautiful lotuslike eyes. Disturbed by the 
bees,  she tried to move hastily, but as she raised 
her feet to walk quickly, her hair, the belt on her 
hips, and her breasts, which were like water 
jugs, also moved in a way that made her ex-
tremely beautiful and attractive. Indeed, she 
seemed to be making a pat h for the entrance of 
Cupid, who is most powerful. Therefore the 
prince, completely subdued by seeing her, 
spoke to her as follows. (6) The Prince mistak-
enly addressed the Apsarā: O best of saintly 
persons, who are you? Why are you on this hill, 
and what do you want to do? Are you one of the 
illusory potencies of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead? You seem to be carrying two 
bows without strings. What is the reason you 
carry these bows? Is it for some purpose of your 
own or for the sake of a friend? Perhaps you 
carry them to kill the mad animals in this for-
est.(7) Then Āgnīdhra observed the glancing 
eyes of Pūrvacitti and said: My dear fri end, you 
have two very powerful arrows, namely your 
glancing eyes. Those arrows have feathers like 
the petals of a lotus flower. Although they have 
no shafts, they are very beautiful, and they have 
very sharp, piercing points. They appear very 
peaceful, an d thus it seems that they will not be 
shot at anyone. You must be loitering in this 
forest to shoot those arrows at someone, but I 
cannot understand whom. My intelligence is 
dull, and I cannot combat you. Indeed, no one 
can equal you in prowess, and theref ore I pray 
that your prowe ss will be for my good for-
tune.(8) Seeing the bumblebees following 
Pūrvacitti, Mahārāja Āgnīdhra said: My dear 
Lord, the bumblebees surrounding your body 
are like disciples surrounding your worshipable 
self. They are incessantly c hanting the mantras 
of the Sāma Veda and the Upaniṣads, thus of-
fering prayers to you. Just as great sages resort 
to the branches of Vedic literatures, the bum-
blebees are enjoying the showers of flowers 
falling from your hair. (9) O brāhmaṇa, I can 
simply he ar the tinkling of your ankle bells. 
Within those bells, tittiri birds seem to be chirp-
ing among themselves. Although I do not see 
their forms, I can hear how they are chirping. 
When I look at your beautiful circular hips, I see they are the lovely color o f kadamba flow-
ers, and your waist is encircled by a belt of 
burning cinders. Indeed, you seem to have for-
gotten to dress yourself. (10) Āgnīdhra then 
praised Pūrvacitti’s raised breasts. He said: My 
dear brāhmaṇa your waist is very thin, yet with 
great diff iculty you are carefully carrying two 
horns, to which my eyes have become attracted. 
What is filling those two beautiful horns? You 
seem to have spread fragrant red powder upon 
them, powder that is like the rising morning 
sun. O most fortunate one, I beg t o inquire 
where you have gotten this fragrant powder that 
is perfuming my āśrama, my place of resi-
dence. (11) O best friend, will you kindly show 
me the place where you reside? I cannot imag-
ine how the residents of that place have gotten 
such wonderful bodi ly features as your raised 
breasts, which agitate the mind and eyes of a 
person like me who sees them. Judging by the 
sweet speech and kind smiles of those resi-
dents, I think that their mouths must contain 
nectar. (12)  
My dear friend, what do you eat to ma intain 
your body? Because you are chewing betel, a 
pleasing scent is emanating from your mouth. 
This proves that you always eat the rem nants of 
food offered to Viṣṇu. Indeed, you must also be 
an expansion of Lord Viṣṇu’s body. Your face 
is as beautiful as a pleasing lake. Your jeweled 
earrings resemble two brilliant sharks with un-
blinking eyes like those of Viṣṇu, and your own 
eyes resemb le two restless fish. Simultane-
ously, therefore, two sharks and two restless 
fish are swimming in the lake of your face. Be-
sides them, the white rows of your teeth seem 
like rows of very beautiful swans in the water, 
and your scattered hair resembles swarm s of 
bumblebees following the beauty of your 
face. (13) My mind is already restless, and by 
playing with a ball, moving it all about with 
your lotuslike palm, you are also agitating my 
eyes. Your curling black hair is now scattered, 
but you are not attentiv e to arranging it. Are 
you not going to arrange it? Like a man at-
tached to women, the most cunning wind is try-
ing to take off your lower garment. Are you not 
mindful of it? (14) O best among those perform-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

287 
 ing austerities, where did you get this wonder-
ful bea uty that dismantles the austerities per-
formed by others? Where have you learned this 
art? What austerity have you undergone to 
achieve this beauty, my dear friend? I desire 
that you join me to perform austerity and pen-
ance, for it may be that the creator o f the uni-
verse, Lord Brahmā, being pleased with me, 
has sent you to become my wife. (15) Lord 
Brahmā, who is worshiped by the brāhmaṇas, 
has very mercifully given you to me, and that is 
why I have met you. I do not want to give up 
your company, for my mind and eyes are fixed 
upon you and cannot be drawn away. O woman 
with beautiful raised breasts, I am your fol-
lower. You may take me wherever you like, and 
your friends may also follow me. (16)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Mahārāja 
Āgnīdhra, whose intelligence was like that of a 
demigod, knew the art of flattering women to 
win them to his side. He therefore pleased that 
celestial girl with his lu sty words and gained 
her favor(17) Attracted by the intelligence, 
learning, youth, beauty, behavior, opulence and 
magn animity of Āgnīdhra, the King of 
Jambūdvīpa and master of all heroes, Pūrvacitti 
lived with him for many thousands of years and 
luxuriously enjoyed both worldly and heavenly 
happiness.  (18) In the womb of Pūrvacitti, 
Mahārāja Āgnīdhra, the best of kings, b egot 
nine sons, named Nābhi, Kiṁpuruṣa, Hari-
varṣa, Ilāvṛta, Ramyaka, Hiraṇmaya, Kuru, 
Bhadrāśva and Ketumāla. (19)  
Pūrvacitti gave birth to these nine sons, one 
each year, but after they grew up she left them 
at home and again approached Lord Brahmā  to 
worship him.(20) Because of drinking the 
breast milk of their mother, the nine sons of 
Āgnīdhra naturally had strong, well -built bod-
ies. Their father gave them each a kingdom in 
a different part of Jambūdvīpa. The kingdoms 
were named according to the names of  the sons. 
Thus the sons of Āgnīdhra ruled the kingdoms 
they received from their father.(21) After 
Pūrvacitti’s departure, King Āgnīdhra, his lusty 
desires not at all satisfied, always thought of 
her. Therefo re, in accordance with the Vedic injunctions, the King, after his death, was pro-
moted to the same planet as his celestial wife. 
That planet, which is called Pitṛloka, is where 
the pitās, the fore fathers, live in great de-
light.(22) After the departure of th eir father, the 
nine brothers married the nine daughters of 
Meru named Merudevī, Pratirūpā, Ugra-
daṁṣṭrī, Latā, Ramyā, Śyāmā, Nārī, Bhadrā 
and Devavīti. (23)  
SB 5.3: Ṛṣabhadeva’s Appearance in the 
Womb of Merudevī, the Wife of King Nābhi  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī co ntinued to speak:  
Mahārāja Nābhi, the son of Āgnīdhra, wished 
to have sons, and therefore he attentively began 
to offer prayers and worship the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, the master 
and enjoyer of all sacrifices. Mahārāja Nābhi’s 
wife, Mer udevī, who had not given birth to any 
children at that time, also worshiped Lord 
Viṣṇu along with her husband .(1) In the perfor-
mance of a sacrifice, there are seven transcen-
dental means to obtain the mercy of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead: (1) by sacr ific-
ing valuable things or eatables, (2) by acting in 
terms of place, (3) by acting in terms of time, 
(4) by offering hymns, (5) by going through the 
priest, (6) by offering gifts to the priests and (7) 
by observing the regulative principles. How-
ever, one cannot always obt ain the Supreme 
Lord through this paraphernalia. Nonetheless, 
the Lord is affectionate to His devotee; there-
fore when Mahārāja Nābhi, who was a devotee, 
worshiped and offered prayers to the Lord with 
great faith and devotion and with a pure uncon-
taminated mind, superficially performing some 
yajña in the line of pravargya, the kind Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, due to His af-
fection for His devotees, appeared before King 
Nābhi in His unconquerable and captivating 
form with four hands. In this way, to fulfil l the 
desire of His devotee, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead manifested Himself in His beauti-
ful body before His devotee. This body pleases 
the mind and eyes of the devotees. (2) Lord 
Viṣṇu appeared before King Nābhi with four 
arms. He was very bright, a nd He appeared to 
be the best of all personalities. Around the 
lower portion of His body, He wore a yellow 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

288 
 silken garment. On His chest was the mark of 
Śrīvatsa, which always displays beauty. He car-
ried a conchshell, lotus flower, disc and club, 
and He wor e a garland of forest flowers and the 
Kaustubha gem. He was beautifully decorated 
with a helmet, earrings, bangles, belt, pearl 
necklace, armlets, ankle bells and other bodily 
ornaments bedecked with radiant jewels. See-
ing the Lord present before them, Kin g Nābhi 
and his priests and associates felt just like poor 
people who have suddenly attained great 
riches. They received the Lord and respectfully 
bent their heads and offered Him things in wor-
ship. (3)  
The priests began to offer prayers to the 
Lord, sayin g: O most worshipable one, we are 
simply Your servants. Although You are full in 
Yourself, please, out of Your causeless mercy, 
accept a little service from us, Your eternal 
servants. We are not actually aware of Your 
transcendental form, but we can simply  offer 
our respectful obeisances again and again, as 
instructed by the Vedic literatures and author-
ized ācāryas. Materialistic living entities are 
very much attracted to the modes of material 
nature, and therefore they are never perfect, but 
You are above the jurisdiction of all material 
conceptions. Your name, form and qualities are 
all transcendental and beyond the conception of 
experimental knowledge. Indeed, who can con-
ceive of You? In the material world we can per-
ceive only material names and qualities . We 
have no other power than to offer our respectful 
obeisances and prayers unto You, the transcen-
dental person. The chanting of Your auspicious 
transcendental qualities will wipe out the sins 
of all mankind. That is the most auspicious ac-
tivity for us, a nd we can thus partially under-
stand Your supernatural position. (4-5) O Su-
preme Lord, You are full in every respect. You 
are certainly very satisfied when Your devotees 
offer You prayers with faltering voices and in 
ecstasy bring You tulasī leaves, water, t wigs 
bearing new leaves, and newly grown grass. 
This surely makes You satisfied.(6)  
We have engaged in Your worship with 
many things and have offered sacrifices unto 
You, but we think that there is no need for so many arrangements to please Your Lord-
ship. (7) All of life’s goals and opulences are di-
rectly, self -sufficiently, unceasingly and unlim-
itedly increasing in You at every moment. In-
deed, You are unlimited enjoyment and blissful 
existence itself. As far as we are concerned, O 
Lord, we are always after material enjoyment. 
You do not need all these sacrificial arrange-
ments, but they are meant for us so that we may 
be benedicted by Your Lordship. All these sac-
rifices are performed for our fruitive results, 
and they are not actually needed by You. (8) O 
Lord  of lords, we are completely ignorant of the 
execution of dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa, 
the process of liberation, because we do not ac-
tually know the goal of life. You have appeared 
personally before us like a person soliciting 
worship, but actually You are present here just 
so we can see You. You have come out of Your 
abundant and causeless mercy in order to serve 
our purpose, our interest, and give us the bene-
fit of Your personal glory called apavarga, lib-
eration. You have come, although You are not 
properly worshi ped by us due to our igno-
rance.(9) O most worshipable of all, You are 
the best of all benefactors, and Your appear-
ance at saintly King Nābhi’s sacrificial arena is 
meant for our benediction. Because You have 
been seen by us, You have bestowed upon us 
the most valuable benediction. (10)  
Dear  Lord, all the great sages who are 
thoughtful and saintly persons incessantly re-
count Your spiritual qualities. These sages have 
already burned up all the unlimited dirty things 
and, by the fire of knowledge, strengthened 
their detachment from the material  world. Thus 
they have attained Your qualities and are self -
satisfied. Yet even for those who feel spiritual 
bliss in chanting Your attributes, Your personal 
presence is very rare. (11) Dear Lord, we may 
not be able to remember Your name, form and 
qualities  due to stumbling, hunger, falling 
down, yawning or being in a miserable diseased 
condition at the time of death when there is a 
high fever. We therefore pray unto You, O 
Lord, for You are very affectionate to Your 
devotees. Please help us remember You and  ut-
ter Your holy names, attributes and activities, 
which can dispel all the  reactions of our sinful 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

289 
 lives.(12)  
Dear Lord, here is the great King Nābhi, 
whose ultimate goal in life is to have a son like 
You. Your Lordship, his position is like that of 
a person approaching a very rich man and beg-
ging for a little grain. Mahārāja Nābhi is so de-
sirous of having a son t hat he is worshiping 
You for a son, although You can offer him any 
exalted position, including elevation to the 
heavenly planets or liberation back to God-
head. (13) Dear Lord, unless one worships the 
lotus feet of great devotees, one will be con-
quered by th e illusory energy, and his intelli-
gence will be bewildered. Indeed, who has not 
been carried away by the waves of material en-
joyment, which are like poison? Your illusory 
energy is unconquerable. No one can see the 
path of this material energy o r tell how it is 
working.(14) O Lord, You perform many won-
derful activities. Our only aim was to acquire a 
son by performing this great sacrifice; therefore 
our intelligence is not very sharp. We are not 
experienced in ascertaining life’s goal. By in-
viting You to thi s negligible sacrifice for some 
material motive, we have certainly committed 
a great offense at Your lotus feet. Therefore, O 
Lord of lords, please excuse our offense be-
cause of Your causeless mercy and equal 
mind. (15)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  The priests, 
who were even worshiped by King Nābhi, the 
Emperor of Bhārata -varṣa, offered prayers in 
prose [generally they were in poetry] and 
bowed down at the Lord’s lotus feet. The Lord 
of lords, the ruler of the demigods, was very 
pleased with them, and He began to speak as 
follows. (16)  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead re-
plied:  O great sages, I am certainly very 
pleased with your prayers. You are all truthful. 
You have prayed for the benediction of a son 
like Me for King Nāb hi, but this is very difficult 
to obtain. Since I am the Supreme Person with-
out a second and since no one is equal to Me, 
another personality like Me is not possible to 
find. In any case, because you are all qualified 
brāhmaṇas, your vibrations should not prove 
untrue. I consider the brāhmaṇas who are well qualified with brahminical qualities to be as 
good as My own mouth. (17) Since I cannot find 
anyone equal to Me, I shall personally expand 
Myself into a plenary portion and thus advent 
Myself in the womb o f Merudevī, the wife of 
Mahārāja Nābhi, the son of Āgnī dhra.(18)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  After say-
ing this, the Lord disappeared. The wife of 
King Nābhi, Queen Merudevī, was sitting by 
the side of her husband , and consequently she 
could hear everything  the Supreme Lord had 
spoken. (19) O Viṣṇudatta, Parīkṣit Mahārāja, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead was 
pleased by the great sages at that sacrifice. Con-
sequently the Lord decided to personally ex-
hibit the method of executing religious princi-
ples [as obs erved by brahmacārīs, sannyāsīs, 
vānaprasthas and gṛhasthas engaged in rituals] 
and also satisfy Mahārāja Nābhi’s desire. Con-
sequently He appeared as the son of Merudevī 
in His original spiritual form, which is abov e 
the modes of material nature.(20)  
SB 5.4: The Characteristics of 
Ṛṣabhadeva, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  As soon as the 
Lord was born as the son of Mahārāja Nābhi, 
He manifested symptoms of the Supreme Lord, 
such as marks on the bottoms of His feet [the 
flag, th underbolt, etc.]. This son was equal to 
everyone and very peaceful. He could control 
His senses and His mind, and, possessing all 
opulence, He did not hanker for material enjoy-
ment. Endowed with all these attributes, the son 
of Mahārāja Nābhi became more p owerful day 
after day. Due to this, the citizens, learned 
brāhmaṇas, demigods and ministers wanted 
Ṛṣabhadeva to be appointed ruler of the 
earth. (1) When the son of Mahārāja Nābhi be-
came visible, He evinced all good qualities de-
scribed by the great poetsna mely, a well -built 
body with all the symptoms of the Godhead, 
prowess, strength, beauty, name, fame, influ-
ence and enthusiasm. When the father, 
Mahārāja Nābhi, saw all these qualities, he 
thought his son to be the best of human beings 
or the supreme being.  Therefore he gave Him 
the name Ṛṣabha. (2)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

290 
 Indra, the King of heaven, who is very ma-
terially opulent, became envious of King 
Ṛṣabhadeva. Consequently he stopped pouring 
water on the planet known as Bhārata -varṣa. At 
that time the Supreme Lord, Ṛṣabhadeva,  the 
master of all mystic power, understood King 
Indra’s purpose and smiled a little. Then, by 
His own prowess, through yoga -māyā [His in-
ternal potency], He profusely poured water 
upon His own place, which was known as 
Ajanābha. (3) Due to getting a perfect  son ac-
cording to his desire, King Nābhi was always 
overwhelmed with transcendental bliss and was 
very affectionate to his son. It was with ecstasy 
and a faltering voice that he addressed Him, 
“My dear son, my darling.” This mentality was 
brought about by yoga -māyā, whereby he ac-
cepted the Supreme Lord, the supreme father, 
as his own son. Out of His supreme good will, 
the Lord became his son and dealt with every-
one as if He were an ordinary human being. 
Thus King Nābhi began to raise his transcen-
dental son with great affection, and he was 
overwhelmed with transcen dental bliss, joy and 
devotion.(4)  
King Nābhi understood that his son, 
Ṛṣabhadeva, was very popular among the citi-
zens and among government officers and min-
isters. Understanding the popularity of h is son, 
Mahārāja Nābhi enthroned Him as the emperor 
of the world to give protection to the general 
populace in terms of the Vedic religious sys-
tem. To do this, he entrusted Him into the hands 
of learned brāhmaṇas, who would guide Him in 
administrating the government. Then Mahārāja 
Nābhi and his wife, Merudevī, went to Bada-
rikāśrama in the Himālaya Mountains, where 
the King engaged Himself very expertly in aus-
terities and penances with great jubilation. In 
full samādhi he worshiped the Supreme Per-
sonality of  Godhead, Nara -Nārāyaṇa, who is 
Kṛṣṇa in His plenary expansion. By doing so, 
in course of time Mahārāja Nābhi was elevated 
to the spiritual world known as Vaikuṇṭha. (5)  
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, to glorify Mahārāja 
Nābhi the old sages composed two verses. One 
of them is this: “Who can attain the perfection of Mahārāja Nābhi? Who can attain his activi-
ties? Because of his devotional service, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead agreed to be-
come his son.” (6) The second prayer is this.] 
“Who is a better worshiper of  brāhmaṇas than 
Mahārāja Nābhi? Because he worshiped the 
qualified brāhmaṇas to their full satisfaction, 
the brāhmaṇas, by their brahminical prowess, 
showed Mahārāja Nābhi the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, in person.” (7)  
After Nābhi Mahārāja d eparted for Bada-
rikāśrama, the Supreme Lord, Ṛṣabhadeva, un-
derstood that His kingdom was His field of ac-
tivities. He therefore showed Himself as an ex-
ample and taught the duties of a householder by 
first accepting brahmacarya under the direction 
of spiritu al masters. He also went to live at the 
spiritual masters’ place, gurukula. After His ed-
ucation was finished, He gave gifts (guru -
dakṣiṇā) to His spiritual masters and then ac-
cepted the life of a householder. He took a wife 
named Jayantī and begot one hund red sons who 
were as powerful and qualified as He Himself. 
His wife Jayantī had been offered to Him by In-
dra, the King of heaven. Ṛṣabhadeva and 
Jayantī performed householder life in an exem-
plary way, carrying out ritualistic activities or-
dained by the śru ti and smṛti śāstra. (8) Of 
Ṛṣabhadeva’s one hundred sons, the eldest, 
named Bharata, was a great, exalted devotee 
qualified with the best attributes. In his honor, 
this planet has become known as Bhārata -
varṣa. (9) Following Bharata, there were ninety -
nine other sons. Among these were nine elderly 
sons, named Kuśāvarta, Ilāvarta, Brahmāvarta, 
Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena, Indraspṛk, Vidar-
bha and Kīkaṭ a.(10) In addition to these sons 
were Kavi, Havi, Antarikṣa, Prabuddha, Pip-
palāyana, Āvirhotra, Drumila, Camasa a nd 
Karabhājana. These were all very exalted, ad-
vanced devotees and authorized preachers of 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. These devotees were glo-
rified due to their strong devotion to Vāsudeva, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There-
fore they were very exalted. To s atisfy the mind 
perfectly, I [Śukadeva Gosvāmī] shall hereafter 
describe the characteristics of these nine devo-
tees when I discuss the conversation between 
Nārada and Vasudeva.(11 -12) In addition to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

291 
 these nineteen sons mentioned above, there 
were eighty -one younger ones, all born of 
Ṛṣabhadeva and Jayantī. According to the or-
der of their father, they became well -cultured, 
well-behaved, very pure in their activities and 
expert in Vedic knowledge and the perfor-
mance of Vedic rituals. Thus they all became 
perfectly qualified brāhmaṇas. (13)  
Being an incarnation of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva was 
fully independent because His form was spir-
itual, eternal and full of transcendental bliss. He 
eternally had nothing to do with the four prin-
ciples of material misery [birth, death, old age 
and disease]. Nor was He materially attached. 
He was always equipoised, and He saw every-
one on the same level. He was unhappy to see 
others unhappy, and He was the well -wisher of 
all living entities. Although H e was a perfect 
personality, the Supreme Lord and controller of 
all, He nonetheless acted as if He were an ordi-
nary conditioned soul. Therefore He strictly 
followed the principles of varṇāśrama -dharma 
and acted accordingly. In due course of time, 
the princ iples of varṇāśrama -dharma had be-
come neglected; therefore through His personal 
characteristics and behavior, He taught the ig-
norant public how to perform duties within the 
varṇāśrama -dharma. In this way He regulated 
the general populace in householder lif e, ena-
bling them to develop religion and economic 
well-being and to attain reputations, sons and 
daughters, material pleasure and finally eternal 
life. By His instructions, He showed how peo-
ple could remain householders and at the same 
time become perfect by following the princi-
ples of varṇāśrama -dharma. (14) Whatever ac-
tion is performed by a great man, common men 
follow.(15)  Although Lord Ṛṣabhadeva knew 
everything about confidential Vedic 
knowledge, which includes information about 
all types of occupationa l duties, He still main-
tained Himself as a kṣatriya and followed the 
instructions of the brāhmaṇas as they related to 
mind control, sense control, tolerance and so 
forth. Thus He ruled the people according to the 
system of varṇāśrama -dharma, which enjoins 
that the brāhmaṇas instruct the kṣatriyas and 
the kṣatriyas administer to the state through the vaiśyas and śū dras.(16) Lord Ṛṣabhadeva per-
formed all kinds of sacrifices one hundred 
times according to the instructions of the Vedic 
literatures. Thus He sati sfied Lord Viṣṇu in 
every respect. All the rituals were enriched by 
first-class ingredients. They were executed in 
holy places according to the proper time by 
priests who were all young and faithful. In this 
way Lord Viṣṇu was worshiped, and the 
prasāda wa s offered to all the demigods. Thus 
the functions and festivals were all success-
ful.(17) No one likes to possess anything that is 
like a will -o’-the-wisp or a flower in the sky, 
for everyone knows very well that such things 
do not exist. When Lord Ṛṣabhade va ruled this 
planet of Bhāratavarṣa, even common men did 
not want to ask for anything, at any time or by 
any means. No one ever asks for a will -o’-the-
wisp. In other words, everyone was completely 
satisfied, and therefore there was no chance of 
anyone’s a sking for anything. The people were 
absorbed in great affection for the King. Since 
this affection was always expanding, they were 
not inclined to ask for anything. (18) Once 
while touring the world, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, the 
Supreme Lord, reached a place known as 
Brahmāvarta. There was a great conference of 
learned brāhmaṇas at that place, and all the 
King’s sons attentively heard the instructions 
of the brāhmaṇas there. At that assembly, 
within the hearing of the citizens, Ṛṣabhadeva 
instructed His sons, althou gh they were already 
very well -behaved, devoted and qualified. He 
instructed them so that in the future they could 
rule the world very perfe ctly. Thus he spoke as 
follows.(19)  
SB 5.5: Lord Ṛṣabhadeva’s Teachings to 
His Sons  
Lord Ṛṣabhadeva told His sons:  My dear 
boys, of all the living entities who have ac-
cepted material bodies in this world, one who 
has been awarded this human form should not 
work hard day and night simply for sense grat-
ification, which is available even for dogs and 
hogs that eat stool. O ne should engage in pen-
ance and austerity to attain the divine position 
of devotional service. By such activity, one’s 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

292 
 heart is purified, and when one attains this po-
sition, he attains eternal, blissful life, which is 
transcendental to material happiness a nd which 
continues forever. (1) One can attain the path of 
liberation from material bondage only by ren-
dering service to highly advanced spiritual per-
sonalities. These personalities are impersonal-
ists and devotees. Whether one wants to merge 
into the Lord’s  existence or wants to associate 
with the Personality of Godhead, one should 
render service to the mahātmās. For those who 
are not interested in such activities, who asso-
ciate with people fond of women and sex, the 
path to hell is wide open. The mahātmās a re eq-
uipoised. They do not see any difference be-
tween one living entity and another. They are 
very peaceful and are fully engaged in devo-
tional service. They are devoid of anger, and 
they work for the benefit of everyone. They do 
not behave in any abominab le way. Such peo-
ple are known as mahātmā s.(2) Those who are 
interested in reviving Kṛṣṇa consciousness and 
increasing their love of Godhead do not like to 
do anything that is not related to Kṛṣṇa. They 
are not interested in mingling with people who 
are bus y maintaining their bodies, eating, 
sleeping, mating and defending. They are not 
attached to their homes, although they may be 
householders. Nor are they attached to wives, 
children, friends or wealth. At the same time, 
they are not indifferent to the exec ution of their 
duties. Such people are interested in collecting 
only enough money to keep the body and soul 
together. (3) When a person considers sense 
gratification the aim of life, he certainly be-
comes mad after materialistic living and en-
gages in all kin ds of sinful activity. He does not 
know that due to his past misdeeds he has al-
ready received a body which, although tempo-
rary, is the cause of his misery. Actually the liv-
ing entity should not have taken on a material 
body, but he has been awarded the mat erial 
body for sense gratification. Therefore I think 
it not befitting an intelligent man to involve 
himself again in the activities of sense gratifi-
cation by which he perpetually gets material 
bodies one after another.(4) As long as one 
does not inquire a bout the spiritual values of 
life, one is defeated and subjected to miseries arising from ignorance. Be it sinful or pious, 
karma has its resultant actions. If a person is 
engaged in any kind of karma, his mind is 
called karmātmaka, colored with fruitive a ctiv-
ity. As long as the mind is impure, conscious-
ness is unclear, and as long as one is absorbed 
in fruitive activity, he has to accept a material 
body. (5) When the living entity is covered by 
the mode of ignorance, he does not understand 
the individual li ving being and the supreme liv-
ing being, and his mind is subjugated by frui-
tive activity. Therefore, until one has love for 
Lord Vāsudeva, who is none other than Myself, 
he is certainly not delivered from having to ac-
cept a material body again and again. (6) Even 
though one may be very learned and wise, he is 
mad if he does not understand that the endeavor 
for sense gratification is a useless waste of 
time. Being forgetful of his own interest, he 
tries to be happy in the material world, center-
ing his interes ts around his home, which is 
based on sexual intercourse and which brings 
him all kinds of material miseries. In this way 
one is no better than a foolish animal. (7) The 
attraction between male and female is the basic 
principle of material existence. On the  basis of 
this misconception, which ties together the 
hearts of the male and female, one becomes at-
tracted to his body, home, property, children, 
relatives and wealth. In this way one increases 
life’s illusions and thinks in terms of “I and 
mine.” (8) When the strong knot in the heart of 
a person implicated in material life due to the 
results of past action is slackened, one turns 
away from his attachment to home, wife and 
children. In this way, one gives up the basic 
principle of illusion [I and mine] and b ecomes 
liberated. Thus one goes to the transcendental 
world. (9) O My sons, you should accept a 
highly elevated paramahaṁsa, a spiritually ad-
vanced spiritual master. In this way, you should 
place your faith and love in Me, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead . You should detest 
sense gratification and tolerate the duality of 
pleasure and pain, which are like the seasonal 
changes of summer and winter. Try to realize 
the miserable condition of living entities, who 
are miserable even in the higher planetary sys-
tems. Philosophically inquire about the truth. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

293 
 Then undergo all kinds of austerities and pen-
ances for the sake of devotional service. Give 
up the endeavor for sense enjoyment and en-
gage in the service of the Lord. Listen to dis-
cussions about the Supreme Pers onality of 
Godhead, and always associate with devotees. 
Chant about and glorify the Supreme Lord, and 
look upon everyone equally on the spiritual 
platform. Give up enmity and subdue anger and 
lamentation. Abandon identifying the self with 
the body and the home, and practice reading the 
revealed scriptures. Live in a secluded place 
and practice the process by which you can com-
pletely control your life air, mind and senses. 
Have full faith in the revealed scriptures, the 
Vedic literatures, and always observe celibacy. 
Perform your prescribed duties and avoid un-
necessary talks. Always thinking of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, acquire 
knowledge from the right source. Thus practic-
ing bhakti -yoga, you will patiently and enthu-
siastically be elevated in knowle dge and will be 
able to give up the false ego. (10-13) As I have 
advised you, My dear sons, you should act ac-
cordingly. Be very careful. By these means you 
will be freed from the ignorance of the desire 
for fruitive activity, and the knot of bondage in 
the heart will be completely severed. For fur-
ther advancement, you should also give up the 
means. That is, you should not become attached 
to the process of liberation itself.(14)  
If one is serious about going back home, 
back to Godhead, he must consider the me rcy 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the 
summum bonum and chief aim of life. If he is 
a father instructing his sons, a spiritual master 
instructing his disciples, or a king instructing 
his citizens, he must instruct them as I have ad-
vised. Without bei ng angry, he should continue 
giving instructions, even if his disciple, son or 
citizen is sometimes unable to follow his order. 
Ignorant people who engage in pious and impi-
ous activities should be engaged in devotional 
service by all means. They should alw ays avoid 
fruitive activity. If one puts into the bondage of 
karmic activity his disciple, son or citizen who 
is bereft of transcendental vision, how will one 
profit? It is like leading a blind man to a dark well and causing him to fall in. (15) Due to ig-
norance, the materialistic person does not know 
anything about his real self -interest, the auspi-
cious path in life. He is simply bound to mate-
rial enjoyment by lusty desires, and all his plans 
are made for this purpose. For temporary sense 
gratification, suc h a person creates a society of 
envy, and due to this mentality, he plunges into 
the ocean of suffering. Such a foolish person 
does not even know about this. (16) If some one 
is ignorant and addicted to the path of saṁsāra, 
how can one who is actually learned, merciful 
and advanced in spiritual knowledge engage 
him in fruitive activity and thus further entan-
gle him in material existence? If a blind man is 
walking down the w rong path, how can a gen-
tleman allow him to continue on his way to 
danger? How can he approve this method? No 
wise or kind man can allow this.(17) One who 
cannot deliver his dependents from the path of 
repeated birth and death should never become 
a spiritu al master, a father, a husband , a mother 
or a worshipable demigod.  (18)  
My transcend ental body [sac -cid-ānanda -
vigraha] looks exactly like a human form, but it 
is not a material human body. It is inconceiva-
ble. I am not forced by nature to accept a par-
ticular type of body; I take on a body by My 
own sweet will. My heart is also spiritual,  and 
I always think of the welfare of My devotees. 
Therefore within My heart can be found the 
process of devotional service, which is meant 
for the devotees. Far from My heart have I 
abandoned irreligion [adharma] and nondevo-
tional activities. They do not appeal to Me. Due 
to all these transcendental qualities, people 
generally pray to Me as Ṛṣabhadeva, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the best of all 
living entities. (19) My dear boys, you are all 
born of My heart, which is the seat of all spir-
itual qual ities. Therefore you should not be like 
materialistic and envious men. You should ac-
cept your eldest brother, Bharata, who is ex-
alted in devotional service. If you engage your-
selves in Bharata’s service, your service to him 
will include My service, and you  will r ule the 
citizens automatically.(20) Of the two energies 
manifest [spirit and dull matter], beings pos-
sessing living force [vegetables, grass, trees 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

294 
 and plants] are superior to dull matter [stone, 
earth, etc.]. Superior to nonmoving plants and 
vegeta bles are worms and snakes, which can 
move. Superior to worms and snakes are ani-
mals that have developed intelligence. Superior 
to animals are human beings, and superior to 
human beings are ghosts because they have no 
material bodies. Superior to ghosts are  the 
Gandharvas, and superior to them are the Sid-
dhas. Superior to the Siddhas are the Kinnaras, 
and superior to them are the asuras. Superior to 
the asuras are the demigods, and of the demi-
gods, Indra, the King of heaven, is supreme. 
Superior to Indra are  the direct sons of Lord 
Brahmā, sons like King Dakṣa, and supreme 
among Brahmā’s sons is Lord Śiva. Since Lord 
Śiva is the son of Lord Brahmā, Brahmā is con-
sidered superior, but Brahmā is also subordi-
nate to Me, the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Because  I am inclined to the brāhmaṇas, 
the brāhmaṇas are best of all. (21-22)  
O respectful brāhmaṇas, as far as I am con-
cerned, no one is equal or superior to the 
brāhmaṇas in this world. I do not find anyone 
comparable to them. When people know My 
motive, after  performing rituals according to 
the Vedic principles they offer food to Me with 
faith and love through the mouth of a 
brāhmaṇa. When food is thus offered unto Me, 
I eat it with full satisfaction. Indeed, I derive 
more pleasure from food offered in that wa y 
than from the food offered in the sacrificial 
fire.(23) The Vedas are My eternal transcen-
dental sound incarnation. Therefore the Vedas 
are śabda -brahma. In this world, the brāhmaṇas 
thoroughly study all the Vedas, and because 
they assimilate the Vedic co nclusions, they are 
also to be considered the Vedas personified. 
The brāhmaṇas are situated in the supreme 
transcendental mode of naturesattva -guṇa. Be-
cause of this, they are fixed in mind control 
[śama], sense control [dama], and truthfulness 
[satya]. The y describe the Vedas in their origi-
nal sense, and out of mercy [anugraha] they 
preach the purpose of the Vedas to all condi-
tioned souls. They practice penance [tapasya] 
and tolerance [titikṣā], and they realize the po-
sition of the living entity and the Sup reme Lord 
[anubhava]. These are the eight qualifications of the brāhmaṇas. Therefore among all living 
entities, no one is superior to the 
brāhmaṇ as.(24) I am fully opulent, almighty 
and superior to Lord Brahmā and Indra, the 
King of the heavenly planets. I  am also the be-
stower of all happiness obtained in the heav-
enly kingdom and by liberation. Nonetheless, 
the brāhmaṇas do not seek material comforts 
from Me. They are very pure and do not want 
to possess anything. They simply engage in My 
devotional service . What is the need of their 
asking for material benefits from anyone 
else? (25)  
My dear sons, you should not envy any liv-
ing entitybe he moving or nonmoving. Know-
ing that I am situated in them, you should of fer 
respect to all of them at every moment. In this 
way, you offer respect to Me. (26) The true ac-
tivity of the sense organsmind, sight, words and 
all the knowledge -gathering and working sens-
esis to engage fully in My service. Unless his 
senses are thus eng aged, a living entity cannot 
think of getting out of the great entanglement 
of material existence, which is exactly like 
Yamarāja’s stringent rope. (27)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus the great 
well-wisher of e veryone, the Supreme Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva, instructed His own sons. Alt-
hough they were perfectly educated and cul-
tured, He instructed them just to set an example 
of how a father should instruct his sons before 
retiring from family life. Sannyāsīs, who are no 
longer bound by fruitive activity and who have 
taken to devotional service after all their mate-
rial desires have been vanquished, also learn by 
these instructions. Lord Ṛṣabhadeva instructed 
His one hundred sons, of whom the eldest, Bha-
rata, was a very advan ced devotee and a fol-
lower of Vaiṣṇavas. In order to rule the whole 
world, the Lord enthroned His eldest son on the 
royal seat. Thereafter, although still at home, 
Lord Ṛṣabhadeva lived like a madman, naked 
and with disheveled hair. Then the Lord took 
the sacrificial fire within Himself, and He left 
Brahmāvarta to tour the whole world. (28) After 
accepting the feature of avadhūta, a great 
saintly person without material cares, Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva passed through human society like 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

295 
 a blind, deaf and dumb man, an i dle stone, a 
ghost or a madman. Although people called 
Him such names, He remained silent and did 
not speak to anyone. (29) Ṛṣabhadeva began to 
tour through cities, villages, mines, country-
sides, valleys, gardens, military camps, cow 
pens, the homes of cowh erd men, transient ho-
tels, hills, forests and hermitages. Wherever He 
traveled, all bad elements surrounded Him, just 
as flies surround the body of an elephant com-
ing from a forest. He was always being threat-
ened, beaten, urinated upon and spat upon. 
Somet imes people threw stones, stool and dust 
at Him, and sometimes people passed foul air 
before Him. Thus people called Him many bad 
names and gave Him a great deal of trouble, but 
He did not care about this, for He understood 
that the body is simply meant fo r such an end. 
He was situated on the spiritual platform, and, 
being in His spiritual glory, He did not care for 
all these material insults. In other words, He 
completely understood that matter and spirit are 
separate, and He had no bodily conception. 
Thus , without being angry at anyone, He 
walked through the whole world alone. (30) 
Lord Ṛṣabhadeva’s hands, feet and chest were 
very long. His shoulders, face and limbs were 
all very delicate and symmetrically propor-
tioned. His mouth was beautifully decorated 
with His natural smile, and He appeared all the 
more lovely with His reddish ey es spread wide 
like the petals of a newly grown lotus flower 
covered with dew in the early morning. The 
irises of His eyes were so pleasing that they re-
moved all the troubles of everyone who saw 
Him. His forehead, ears, neck, nose and all His 
other feature s were very beautiful. His gentle 
smile always made His face beautiful, so much 
so that He even attracted the hearts of married 
women. It was as though they had been pierced 
by arrows of Cupid. About His head was an 
abundance of curly, matted brown hair. H is hair 
was disheveled because His body was dirty and 
not taken care of. He appeared as if He were 
haunted by a ghost. (31)  
When Lord Ṛṣabhadeva saw that the general 
populace was very antagonistic to His execu-
tion of mystic yoga, He accepted the behavior of a python in order to counteract their opposi-
tion. Thus He stayed in one place and lay down. 
While lying down, He ate and drank, and He 
passed stool and urine and rolled in it. Indeed, 
He smeared His whole body with His own stool 
and urine so that opposin g elements might not 
come and disturb Him. (32) Because Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva remained in that condition, the 
public did not disturb Him, but no bad aroma 
emanated from His stool and urine. Quite the 
contrary, His stool and urine were so aromatic 
that they filled eighty miles of the country side 
with a pleasan t fragrance.(33) In this way Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva followed the behavior of cows, 
deer and crows. Sometimes He moved or 
walked, and sometimes He sat down in one 
place. Sometimes He lay down, behaving ex-
actly like cows, deer and crows. In that way, He 
ate, drank,  passed stool and urine and cheated 
the people in this way. (34) O King Parīkṣit, just 
to show all the yogīs the mystic process, Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva, the plenary expansion of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, performed wonderful activities. Actu-
ally He was the master of liberation a nd was 
fully absorbed in transcendental bliss, which 
increased a thousandfold. Lord Kṛṣṇa, 
Vāsudeva, the son of Vasudeva, is the original 
source of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva. There is no differ-
ence in Their constitution, and consequently 
Lord Ṛṣabhadeva awakened the  loving symp-
toms of crying, laughing and shivering. He was 
always absorbed in transcendental love. Due to 
this, all mystic powers automatically ap-
proached Him, such as the ability to travel in 
outer space at the speed of mind, to appear and 
disappear, to e nter the bodies of others, and to 
see things far, far away. Although He could do 
all this, He  did not exercise these powers.(35)  
SB 5.6: The Activities of Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva  
King Parīkṣit asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī:  
My dear Lord, for those who are completely 
pure in heart, knowledge is attained by the 
practice of bhakti -yoga, and attachment for fru-
itive activity is completely burned to ashes.  For 
such people, the powers of mystic yoga auto-
matically arise. They do not cause distress. 
Why, then, did Ṛṣabhadeva neglect them? (1)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

296 
 Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied:  My dear 
King, you have spoken correctly. However, af-
ter capturing animals, a cunning hu nter does 
not put faith in them, for they might run away. 
Similarly, those who are advanced in spiritual 
life do not put faith in the mind. Indeed, they 
always remain vigila nt and watch the mind’s 
action.(2)  
All the learned scholars have given their 
opinio n. The mind is by nature very restless, 
and one should not make friends with it. If we 
place full confidence in the mind, it  may cheat 
us at any moment. Even Lord Śiva became ag-
itated upon seeing the Mohinī form of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, and Saubhari Muni also fell down from 
the mature stage of yogic perfection. (3) An un-
chaste woman is very easily carried away by 
paramours, and it sometim es happens that her 
husband  is violently killed by her paramours. If 
the yogī gives his mind a chance and does not 
restrain it, his mind will give facility to enemies 
like lust, anger and greed, and they will doubt-
lessly kill the yogī. (4) The mind is the r oot 
cause of lust, anger, pride, greed, lamentation, 
illusion and fear. Combined, these constitute 
bondage to fruitive activity. What learned man 
would put faith in the mind? (5)  
Lord Ṛṣabhadeva was the head of all kings 
and emperors within this universe, but assum-
ing the dress and language of an avadhūta, He 
acted as if dull and materially bound. Conse-
quently no one could observe His divine opu-
lence. He adopted this behavior just to teach 
yogīs how to give up the body. Nonetheless, He 
maintained His origin al position as a plenary 
expansion of Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. Remain-
ing always in that state, He gave up His pas-
times as Lord Ṛṣabhadeva within the material 
world. If, following in the footsteps of Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva, one can give up his subtle body, 
there is n o chance that one will accept a mate-
rial body ag ain. (6) Actually Lord Ṛṣabhadeva 
had no material body, but due to yoga -māyā He 
considered His body material, and therefore, 
because He played like an ordinary human be-
ing, He gave up the mentality of identif ying 
with it. Following this principle, He began to 
wander all over the world. While traveling, He came to the province of Karṇāṭa in South India 
and passed through Koṅka, Veṅka and Kuṭaka. 
He had no plan to travel this way, but He ar-
rived near Kuṭakācala and entered a forest 
there. He placed stones within His mouth and 
began to wander through the forest, naked and 
with His hair disheveled like a madman. (7) 
While He was wandering about, a wild forest 
fire began. This fire was caused by the friction 
of bambo os, which were being blown by the 
wind. In that fire, the entire forest near 
Kuṭakācala and the body of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva 
were burnt to ashes. (8)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued speaking to 
Mahārāja Parīkṣit: My dear King, the King of 
Koṅka, Veṅka and Kuṭaka who se name was 
Arhat, heard of the activities of Ṛṣabhadeva 
and, imitating Ṛṣabhadeva’s principles, intro-
duced a new system of religion. Taking ad-
vantage of Kali -yuga, the age of sinful activity, 
King Arhat, being bewildered, gave up the Ve-
dic principles, whi ch are free from risk, and 
concocted a new system of religion opposed to 
the Vedas. That was the beginning of the Jain 
dharma. Many other so -called religions fol-
lowed this atheistic system. (9) People who are 
lowest among men and bewildered by the illu-
sory energy of the Supreme Lord will give up 
the original varṇāśrama -dharma and its rules 
and regulations. They will abandon bathing 
three times daily and worshiping the Lord. 
Abandoning cleanliness and neglecting the Su-
preme Lord, they will accept nonsensical prin-
ciples. Not regularly bathing or washing their 
mouths regularly, they will always remain un-
clean, and they will pluck out their hair. Fol-
lowing a concocted religion, they will flourish. 
During this Age of Kali, people are more in-
clined to irreligious s ystems. Consequently 
these people will naturally deride Vedic author-
ity, the followers of Vedic authority, the 
brāhmaṇas, the Supreme Personali ty of God-
head and the devotees.(10) Low-class people, 
due to their gross ignorance, introduce a system 
of religio n that deviates from the Vedic princi-
ples. Following their own mental concoctions, 
they automatically fall down into th e darkest 
regions of existence.(11)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

297 
 In this Age of Kali, people are overwhelmed 
by the modes of passion and ignorance. Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva in carnated Himself to deliver them 
from the clutches of māyā. (12) Learned schol-
ars chant about the transcendental qualities of 
Lord Ṛṣabhadeva in this way: “Oh, this earthly 
planet contains seven seas and many islands 
and lands, of which Bhārata -varṣa is con sidered 
the most pious. People of Bhārata -varṣa are ac-
customed to glorifying the activities of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead in His incarna-
tions as Lord Ṛṣabhadeva and others. All these 
activities are very auspicio us for the welfare of 
humanity.(13) “Oh, what shall I say of the dyn-
asty of Priyavrata, which is pure and very much 
celebrated. In that dynasty, the Supreme Per-
son, the original Personality of Godhead, de-
scended as an incarnation and executed reli-
gious principles that could free one from the re-
sults of fruitive activity. (14) “Who is that mys-
tic yogī who can follow the examples of Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva even with his mind? Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva rejected all kinds of yogic perfec-
tion, which other yogīs hanker to attain. Who is 
that yogī who can compare to Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva?”(15)  
Śukadeva Gosvā mī continued: Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva is the master of all Vedic 
knowledge, human beings, demigods, cows 
and brāhmaṇas. I have already explained His 
pure, transcendental activities, which will van-
quish the sinful activities of all living entities. 
This narration o f Lord Ṛṣabhadeva’s pastimes 
is the reservoir of all auspicious things. Who-
ever attentively hears or speaks of them, fol-
lowing in the footsteps of the ācāryas, will cer-
tainly attain unalloyed devotional service at the 
lotus feet of Lord Vāsudeva, the Supre me Per-
sonality of Godhead. (16) Devotees always 
bathe themselves in devotional service in order 
to be relieved from the various tribulations of 
material existence. By doing this, the devotees 
enjoy supreme bliss, and liberation personified 
comes to serve th em. Nonetheless, they do not 
accept that service, even if it is offered by the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself. For 
the devotees, liberation [mukti] is very unim-
portant because, having attained the Lord’s transcendental loving service, they have at-
tained everything desirable and have tr ans-
cended all material desires.(17)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear 
King, the Supreme Person, Mukunda, is actu-
ally the maintainer of all the members of the 
Pāṇḍava and Yadu dynasties. He is your spir-
itual master, w orshipable Deity, friend, and the 
director of your activities. To say nothing of 
this, He sometimes serves your family as a 
messenger or servant. This means He worked 
just as ordinary servants do. Those engaged in 
getting the Lord’s favor attain liberation  from 
the Lord very easily, but He does not very eas-
ily give the opportunity to render direct service 
unto Him. (18)  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva, was fully aware of His true iden-
tity; therefore He was self -sufficient, and He 
did not desire external gratification. There was 
no need for Him to aspire for success, since He 
was complete in Himself. Th ose who unneces-
sarily engage in bodily conceptions and create 
an atmosphere of materialism are always igno-
rant of their real self -interest. Out of His cause-
less mercy, Lord Ṛṣabhadeva taught the self’s 
real identity and the goal of life. We therefore 
offer  our respectful obeisances unto the Lord, 
who appeared as Lord Ṛṣabhadeva. (19)  
SB 5.7: The Activities of King Bharata  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued speaking to 
Mahārāja Parīkṣit: My dear King, Bharata 
Mahārāja was a topmost devotee. Following 
the orders of h is father, who had already de-
cided to install him on the throne, he began to 
rule the earth accordingly. When Bharata 
Mahārāja ruled the entire globe, he followed 
the orders of his father and married Pañcajanī, 
the daughter of Viśvarūpa. (1) Just as the fal se 
ego creates the subtle sense objects, Mahārāja 
Bharata created five sons in the womb of 
Pañcajanī, his wife. These sons were named 
Sumati, Rāṣṭrabhṛta, Sudarśana, Āvaraṇa and 
Dhūmraketu.(2) Formerly this planet was 
known as Ajanābha -varṣa, but since Mah ārāja 
Bharata’s reign it has become known as 
Bhārata -varṣa. (3)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

298 
 4Mahārāja Bharata was a very learned and 
experienced king on this earth. He perfectly 
ruled the citizens, being himself engaged in his 
own respe ctive duties. Mahārāja Bharata was 
as affectionate to the citizens as his father and 
grandfather had been. Keeping them engaged 
in their occupatio nal duties, he ruled the 
earth.(4) With great faith King Bharata per-
formed various kinds of sacrifice. He per-
formed the sacrifices known as agni -hotra, 
darśa, pūrṇamāsa, cāturmāsya, paśu -yajña 
[wherein a horse is sacrificed] and soma -yajña 
[wherein a kind of beverage is offered]. Some-
times these sacrifices were performed com-
pletely and sometimes partially. In any case, in 
all the sacrifices the regulations of cāturhotra 
were strictly followed. In this way Bharata 
Mahārāja worshiped the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. (5) After performing the prelimi-
naries of various sacrifices, Mahārāja Bharata 
offered the results i n the name of religion to the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva. In 
other words, he performed all the yajñas for the 
satisfaction of Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa. 
Mahārāja Bharata thought that since the demi-
gods were different parts of Vāsudeva’s body, 
He controls those who are explained in the Ve-
dic mantras. By thinking in this way, Mahārāja 
Bharata was freed from all material contamina-
tion, such as attachment, lust and greed. When 
the priests were about to offer the sacrificial in-
gredients into the fire, M ahārāja Bharata ex-
pertly understood how the offering made to dif-
ferent demigods was simply an offering to the 
different limbs of the Lord. For instance, Indra 
is the arm of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, and Sūrya [the sun] is His eye. Thus 
Mahārāja B harata considered that the oblations 
offered to different demigods were actually of-
fered unto the different limbs of Lord 
Vāsudeva. (6) In this way, being purified by rit-
ualistic sacrifices, the heart of Mahārāja Bha-
rata was completely uncontaminated. His d evo-
tional service unto Vāsudeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa, in-
creased day after day. Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of 
Vasudeva, is the original Personality of God-
head manifest as the Supersoul [Paramātmā] as 
well as the impersonal Brahman. Yogīs medi-
tate upon the localized Paramāt mā situated in the heart, jñānīs worship the impersonal Brah-
man as the Supreme Absolute Truth, and devo-
tees worship Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, whose transcendental body is 
described in the śāstras. His body is decorated 
with the Śrīvatsa , the Kaustubha jewel and a 
flower garland, and His hands hold a 
conchshell, disc, club and lotus flower. Devo-
tees like Nārada always think of Him within 
their hearts. (7)  
Destiny fixed the time for Mahārāja Bha-
rata’s enjoyment of material opulence at one 
thousand times ten thousand years. When that 
period was finished, he retired from family life 
and divided the wealth he had received from his 
forefathers among his sons. He left his paternal 
home, the reservoir of all opulence, and started 
for Pulahāśrama,  which is situated in Hardwar. 
The śālagrāma -śilās are obtainable there. (8) At 
Pulaha -āśrama, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Hari, out of His transcendental affec-
tion for His devotee, becomes visible to His 
devotee, satisfying His devotee’s desires. (9) In 
Pulaha -āśrama is the Gaṇḍakī River, which is 
the best of all rivers. The śālagrāma -śilā, the 
marble pebbles, purify all those places. On each 
and every marble pebble, up and down, circles 
like navels are visible. (10) In the gardens of Pu-
laha-āśrama, M ahārāja Bharata lived alone and 
collected a variety of flowers, twigs and tulasī 
leaves. He also collected the water of the 
Gaṇḍakī River, as well as various roots, fruits 
and bulbs. With these he offered food to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudev a, and, 
worshiping Him, he remained satisfied. In this 
way his heart was completely uncontaminated, 
and he did not have the least desire for material 
enjoyment. All material desires vanished. In 
this steady position, he felt full satisfaction and 
was situa ted in devotional service.(11)  
That most exalted devotee, Mahārāja Bha-
rata, in this way engaged constantly in the de-
votional service of the Lord. Naturally his love 
for Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, increased more and more 
and melted his heart. Consequently he gradu-
ally lost all attachment for regul ative duties. 
The hairs of his body stood on end, and all the 
ecstatic bodily symptoms were manifest. Tears 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

299 
 flowed from his eyes, so much so that he could 
not see anything. Thus he constantly meditated 
on the reddish lotus feet of the Lord. At that 
time, h is heart, which was like a lake, was filled 
with the water of ecstatic love. When his mind 
was immersed in that lake, he even forgot the 
regulative service to the Lord. (12) Mahārāja 
Bharata appeared very beautiful. He had a 
wealth of curly hair on his head, which was wet 
from bathing three times daily. He dressed in a 
deerskin. He worshiped Lord Nārāyaṇa, whose 
body was composed of golden effulgence and 
who resided within the  sun. Mahārāja Bharata 
worshiped Lord Nārāyaṇa by chanting the 
hymns given in the Ṛg Veda, and he recited the 
following verse as the sun rose. (13)  
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is sit-
uated in pure goodness. He illuminates the en-
tire universe and bes tows all benedictions upon 
His devotees. The Lord has created this uni-
verse from His own spiritual potency. Accord-
ing to His desire, the Lord entered this universe 
as the Supersoul, and by virtue of His different 
potencies He is maintaining all living enti ties 
desiring material enjoyment. Let me offer my 
respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who  is the 
giver of intelligence.”(14)  
SB 5.8: A Description of the Character of 
Bharata Mahārāja  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  My 
dear King, one day, after finishing his morning 
dutiesevacuating, urinating and bathing-
Mahārāja Bharata sat down on the bank of the 
river Gaṇḍakī for a few minutes an d began 
chanting his mantra, beginning with oṁkāra. (1) 
O King, while Bharata Mahārāja was sitting on 
the bank of that river, a doe, being very thirsty, 
came there to drink. (2) While the doe was 
drinking with great satisfaction, a lion, which 
was very close , roared very loudly. This was 
frightful to every living entity, and it was heard 
by the doe. (3) By nature the doe was always 
afraid of being killed by others, and it was al-
ways looking about suspiciously. When it 
heard the lion’s tumultuous roar, it becam e very 
agitated. Looking here and there with disturbed 
eyes, the doe, although it had not fully satisfied 
itself by drinking water, suddenly leaped across the river. (4) 
The doe was pregnant, and when it jumped 
out of fear, the baby deer fell from its womb 
into the flowing waters of the river.  Being sep-
arated from its flock and distressed by its mis-
carriage, the black doe, having crossed the 
river, was very much distressed. Indeed, it fell 
down in a cave and died immediately. (5)  
The great King Bharata, whil e sitting on the 
bank of the river, saw the small deer, bereft of 
its mother, floating down the river. Seeing this, 
he felt great compassion. Like a sincere friend, 
he lifted the infant deer from the waves, and, 
knowing it to be motherless, brought it to h is 
āśrama. (7)  
Gradually Mahārāja Bharata became very 
affectionate toward the deer. He began to raise 
it and maintain it by giving it grass. He was al-
ways careful to protect it from the attacks of ti-
gers and other animals. When it itched, he pet-
ted it, and  in this way he always tried to keep it 
in a comfortable condition. He sometimes 
kissed it out of love. Being attached to raising 
the deer, Mahārāja Bharata forgot the rules and 
regulations for the advancement of spiritual 
life, and he gradually forgot to worship the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. After a few 
days, he forgot everything about his spiritual 
advancement. (8) The great King Mahārāja 
Bharata began to think: Alas, this helpless 
young deer, by the force of time, an agent of the 
Supreme Personality  of Godhead, has now lost 
its relatives and friends and has taken shelter of 
me. It does not know anyone but me, as I have 
become its father, mother, brother and rela-
tives. This deer is thinking in this way, and it 
has full faith in me. It does not know an yone 
but me; therefore I should not be envious and 
think that for the deer my own welfare will be 
destroyed. I should certainly raise, protect, 
gratify and fondle it. When it has taken shelter 
with me, how can I neglect it? Even though the 
deer is disturbi ng my spiritual life, I realize that 
a helpless person who has taken shelter cannot 
be neglected. That would be a great fault. (9) 
Even though one is in the renounced order, one 
who is advanced certainly feels compassion for 
suffering living entities. One s hould certainly 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

300 
 neglect his own personal interests, although 
they may be very important, to protect one who 
has surrendered. (10)  
Due to attachment for the deer, Mahārāja 
Bharata lay down with it, walked about with it, 
bathed with it and even ate with it. Thus his 
heart became bound to the deer in affec-
tion.(11) When Mahārāja Bharata wanted to 
enter the forest to collect kuśa grass, flowers, 
wood, leaves, fruits, roots and water, he would 
fear that dogs, jackals, tigers and other fero-
cious animals might kill the deer. He would 
therefore always take the deer wit h him when 
entering the forest.(12) When entering the for-
est, the animal wo uld appear very attractive to 
Mahārāja Bharata due to its childish behavior. 
Mahārāja Bharata would even take the deer on 
his shoulders and carry it due to affection. His 
heart was so filled with great love for the deer 
that he would sometimes keep it on h is lap or, 
when sleeping, on his chest. In this way he felt 
great pleasure in fondling the animal. (13) 
When Mahārāja Bharata was actually worship-
ing the Lord or was engaged in some ritualistic 
ceremony, although his activities were unfin-
ished, he would sti ll, at intervals, get up and see 
where the deer was. In this way he would look 
for it, and when he could see that the deer was 
comfortably situated, his mind and heart would 
be very satisfied, and he would bestow his 
blessings upon the deer, saying, “My de ar calf, 
may you be happy in all respects.”(14)  
If Bharata Mahārāja sometimes could not 
see the deer, his mind would be very agitated. 
He would become like a miser, who, having ob-
tained some riches, had lost them and had then 
become very unhappy. When the deer was 
gone, he would be filled with anxiety a nd 
would lament due to separation. Thus he would 
become illusioned and speak as follows. (15)  
Bharata Mahārāja would think: Alas, the 
deer is now helpless. I am now very unfortu-
nate, and my mind is like a cunning hunter, for 
it is always filled with cheati ng propensities 
and cruelty. The deer has put its faith in me, just 
as a good man who has a natural interest in 
good behavior forgets the mi SBehavior of a cunning friend and puts his faith in him. Alt-
hough I have proved faithless, will this deer re-
turn and  place its faith in me? (16) Alas, is it 
possible that I shall again see this animal pro-
tected by the Lord and fearless of tigers and 
other animals? Shall I again see him wandering 
in the garden eating soft grass? (17) I do not 
know, but the deer might have been eaten by a 
wolf or a dog or by the boars that flock together 
or the tiger who travels alone. (18) Alas, when 
the sun rises, all auspicious things begin. Un-
fortunately, they have not begun for me. The 
sun-god is the Vedas personified, but I am be-
reft of  all Vedic principles. That sun -god is now 
setting, yet the poor animal who trusted in me 
since its mother died has not returned. (19) That 
deer is exactly like a prince. When will it re-
turn? When will it again display its personal ac-
tivities, which are so pleasing? When will it 
again pacify a wounded heart like mine? I cer-
tainly must have no pious assets, otherwise the 
deer would have returned by now. (20) Alas, the 
small deer, while playing with me and seeing 
me feigning meditation with closed eyes, 
would c ircumambulate me due to anger arising 
from love, and it would fearfully touch me with 
the points of its soft horns, which felt like drops 
of water. (21) When I placed all the sacrificial 
ingredients on the kuśa grass, the deer, when 
playing, would touch the grass with its teeth 
and thus pollute it. When I chastised the deer 
by pushing it away, it would immediately be-
come fearful and sit down motionless, ex actly 
like the son of a saintly person. Thus it would 
stop its play. (22)  
After speaking like a madman in this way, 
Mahārāja Bharata got up and went outside. See-
ing the footprints of the deer on the ground, he 
praised the footprints out of love, saying: O un-
fortunate Bharata, your austerities and pen-
ances are very insignificant compared to the 
penance and austerity undergone by this earth 
planet. Due to the earth’s severe penances, the 
footprints of this deer, which are small, beauti-
ful, most auspicious and  soft, are imprinted on 
the surface of this fortunate planet. This series 
of footprints show a person like me, who am 
bereaved due to loss of the deer, how the animal 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

301 
 has passed through the forest and how I can re-
gain my lost wealth. By these footprints, t his 
land has become a proper place for brāhmaṇas 
who desire heavenly planets or liberation to ex-
ecute sacrifices to the demigods. (23) Mahārāja 
Bharata continued to speak like a madman. 
Seeing above his head the dark marks on the 
rising moon, which resemble d a deer, he said: 
Can it be that the moon, who is so kind to an 
unhappy man, might also be kind upon my 
deer, knowing that it has strayed from home 
and has become motherless? This moon has 
given the deer shelter near itself just to protect 
it from the fea rful attacks of a lion. (24) After 
perceiving the moonshine, Mahārāja Bharata 
continued speaking like a crazy person. He 
said: The deer’s son was so submissive and 
dear to me that due to its separation I am feeling 
separation from my own son. Due to the burn-
ing fever of this separatio n, I am suffering as if 
inflamed by a forest fire. My heart, which is 
like the lily of the land, is now burning. Seeing 
me so distressed, the moon is certainly splash-
ing its shining nectar upon mejust as a friend 
throws water on another friend who has a hi gh 
fever. In this way, the moon is bringing me hap-
piness. (25)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear 
King, in this way Bharata Mahārāja was over-
whelmed by an uncontrollable desire which 
was manifest in the form of the deer. Due to the 
fruitive results of his past deeds, he fell down 
from mystic yoga, austerity and worsh ip of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If it were not 
due to his past fruitive activity, how could he 
have been attracted to the deer after giving up 
the association of his own son and family, con-
sidering them stumbling blocks on the path of 
spiritual l ife? How could he show such uncon-
trollable affection for a deer? This was defi-
nitely due to his past karma. The King was so 
engrossed in petting and maintaining the deer 
that he fell down from his spiritual activities. In 
due course of time, insurmountable  death, 
which is compared to a venomous snake that 
enters the hole created by a mouse, situated it-
self before him. (26) At the time of death, the 
King saw that the deer was sitting by his side, 
exactly like his own son, and was lamenting his death. Actually  the mind of the King was ab-
sorbed in the body of the deer, and consequent-
lylike those bereft of Kṛṣṇa consciousnesshe 
left the world, the deer, and his material body 
and acquired the body of a deer. However, there 
was one advantage. Although he lost his h uman 
body and received the body of a deer, he did not 
forget the incidents of his past life. (27) Alt-
hough in the body of a deer, Bharata Mahārāja, 
due to his rigid devotional service in his past 
life, could understand the cause of his birth in 
that body. C onsidering his past and present life, 
he constantly repented his activities, speaking 
in the following way. (28) In the body of a deer, 
Bharata Mahārāja began to lament: What mis-
fortune! I have fallen from the path of the self -
realized. I gave up my real so ns, wife and home 
to advance in spiritual life, and I took shelter in 
a solitary holy place in the forest. I became self -
controlled and self -realized, and I engaged con-
stantly in devotional servicehearing, thinking, 
chanting, worshiping and remembering the  Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva. I 
was successful in my attempt, so much so that 
my mind was always absorbed in devotional 
service. However, due to my personal foolish-
ness, my mind again became attachedthis time 
to a deer. Now I have obtained the  body of a 
deer and have fallen far from my devotional 
practices. (29) 
Although Bharata Mahārāja received the 
body of a deer, by constant repentance he be-
came completely detached from all material 
things. He did not disclose these things to any-
one, but he l eft his mother deer in a place 
known as Kālañjara Mountain, where he was 
born. He again went to the forest of Śālagrāma 
and to the āśrama of Pulastya and Pulaha. (30) 
Remaining in that āśrama, the great King Bha-
rata Mahārāja was now very careful not to fall  
victim to bad association. Without disclosing 
his past to anyone, he remained in that āśrama 
and ate dry leaves only. He was not exactly 
alone, for he had the association of the Super-
soul. In this way he waited for death in the body 
of a deer. Bathing in that holy place, he finally 
gave up that body. (31)  
SB 5.9: The Supreme Character of Jaḍa 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

302 
 Bharata  
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  My 
dear King, after giving up the body of a deer, 
Bharata Mahārāja took birth in a very pure 
brāhmaṇa family. There was a br āhmaṇa who 
belonged to the dynasty of Aṅgirā. He was fully 
qualified with brahminical qualifications. He 
could control his mind and senses, and he had 
studied the Vedic literatures and other subsidi-
ary literatures. He was expert in giving charity, 
and he w as always satisfied, tolerant, very gen-
tle, learned and nonenvious. He was self -real-
ized and engaged in the devotional service of 
the Lord. He remained always in a trance. He 
had nine equally qualified sons by his first wife, 
and by his second wife he bego t twinsa brother 
and a sister, of which the male child was said to 
be the topmost devotee and foremost of saintly 
kingsBharata Mahārāja. This, then, is the story 
of the birth he took after giving up the body of 
a deer. (1-2) Due to his being especially gift ed 
with the Lord’s mercy, Bharata Mahārāja could 
remember the incidents of his past life. Alt-
hough he received the body of a brāhmaṇa, he 
was still very much afraid of his relatives and 
friends who were not devotees. He was always 
very cautious of such ass ociation because he 
feared that he would again fall down. Conse-
quently he manifested himself before the public 
eye as a madmandull, blind and deafso that oth-
ers would not try to talk to him. In this way he 
saved himself from bad association. Within he 
was always thinking of the lotus feet of the 
Lord and chanting the Lord’s glories, which 
save one from the bondage of fruitive action. In 
this way he saved himself from the onslaught 
of nondevotee associates. (3)  
The brāhmaṇa father’s mind was always 
filled with affection for his son, Jaḍa Bharata 
[Bharata Mahārāja]. Therefore he was always 
attached to Jaḍa Bharata. Because Jaḍa Bharata 
was unfit to enter the gṛhastha -āśrama, he 
simply executed the purificatory pro cess up to 
the end of the brahmacarya -āśrama. Although 
Jaḍa Bharata was unwilling to accept his fa-
ther’s instructions, the brāhmaṇa nonetheless 
instructed him in how to keep clean and how to 
wash, thinking that the son should be taught by the father. (4) Jaḍa Bharata behaved before his 
father like a fool, despite his father’s ade-
quately instructing him in Vedic knowledge. 
He behaved in that way so that his father would 
know that he was unfit for instruction and 
would abandon the attempt to instruct him fur-
ther. He would behave in a completely opposite 
way. Although instructed to wash his hands af-
ter evacuating, he would wash them before. 
Nonetheless, his father wanted to give him Ve-
dic instructions during the spring and summer. 
He tried to teach him the Gāyat rī mantra along 
with oṁkāra and vyāhṛti, but after four months 
his father still was not successful in instructing 
him.(5)  
The brāhmaṇa father of Jaḍa Bharata con-
sidered his son his heart and soul, and therefore 
he was very much attached to him. He thought  
it wise to educate his son properly, and being 
absorbed in this unsuccessful endeavor, he tried 
to teach his son the rules and regulations of 
brahmacaryaincluding the execution of the Ve-
dic vows, cleanliness, study of the Vedas, the 
regulative methods, se rvice to the spiritual 
master and the method of offering a fire sacri-
fice. He tried his best to teach his son in this 
way, but all his endeavors failed. In his heart he 
hoped that his son would be a learned scholar, 
but all his attempts were unsuccessful. Like 
everyone, this brāhmaṇa was attached to his 
home, and he had forgotten that someday he 
would die. Death, however, was not forgetful. 
At the proper time, death appeared and took 
him away. (6) Thereafter, the brāhmaṇa’s 
younger wife, after entrusting her  twin chil-
drenthe boy and girlto the elder wife, departed 
for Patiloka, voluntarily dying with her hus-
band .(7)  
After the father died, the nine stepbrothers 
of Jaḍa Bharata, who considered Jaḍa Bharata 
dull and brainless, abandoned the father’s at-
tempt to give Jaḍa Bharata a complete educa-
tion. The stepbrothers of Jaḍa Bharata were 
learned in the three Vedasthe Ṛg Veda, Sāma 
Veda and Yajur Vedawhich very much encour-
age fruitive activity. The nine brothers were not 
at all spiritually enlightened in devotiona l ser-
vice to the Lord. Consequently they could not 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

303 
 understand the highly exalted position of Jaḍa 
Bharata. (8) Degraded men are actually no bet-
ter than animals. The only difference is that an-
imals have four legs and such men have only 
two. These two -legged,  animalistic men used to 
call Jaḍa Bharata mad, dull, deaf and dumb. 
They mistreated him, and Jaḍa Bharata be-
haved for them like a madman who was deaf, 
blind or dull. He did not protest or try to con-
vince them that he was not so. If others wanted 
him to do  something, he acted according to 
their desires. Whatever food he could acquire 
by begging or by wages, and whatever came of 
its own accordbe it a small quantity, palatable, 
stale or tastelesshe would accept and eat. He 
never ate anything for sense gratifi cation be-
cause he was already liberated from the bodily 
conception, which induces one to accept palat-
able or unpalatable food. He was full in the 
transcendental consciousness of devotional ser-
vice, and therefore he was unaffected by the du-
alities arising f rom the bodily conception. Ac-
tually his body was as strong as a bull’s, and his 
limbs were very muscular. He didn’t care for 
winter or summer, wind or rain, and he never 
covered his body at any time. He lay on the 
ground, and never smeared oil on his body or 
took a bath. Because his body was dirty, his 
spiritual effulgence and knowledge were cov-
ered, just as the splendor of a valuable gem is 
covered by dirt. He only wore a dirty loincloth 
and his sacred thread, which was blackish. Un-
derstanding that he was born in a brāhmaṇa 
family, people would call him a brahma -
bandhu and other names. Being thus insulted 
and neglected by materialistic people, he wan-
dered here and there. (9-10) Jaḍa Bharata used 
to work only for food. His stepbrothers took ad-
vantage of this and engaged him in agricultural 
field work in exchange for some food, but ac-
tually he did not know how to work very well 
in the field. He did not know where to spread 
dirt or where to make the ground level or une-
ven. His brothers used to give him broken ri ce, 
oil cakes, the chaff of rice, worm -eaten grains 
and burned grains that had stuck to the pot, but 
he gladly accepted all this as if it were nectar. 
He did not hold any grudges and ate all this 
very gladly. (11)  At this time, being desirous of obtaining a 
son, a leader of dacoits who came from a śūdra 
family wanted to worship the goddess Bhadra 
Kālī by offering her in sacrifice a dull man, who 
is considered no better than an animal. (12) The 
leader of the da coits captured a man -animal for 
sacrifice, but he escaped, and the leader ordered 
his followers to find him. They ran in different 
directions but could not find him. Wandering 
here and there in the middle of the night, cov-
ered by dense darkness, they came to a paddy 
field where they saw the exalted son of the 
Āṅgirā family [Jaḍa Bharata], who was sitting 
in an elevated place guarding the field against 
the attacks of deer and wild pigs. (13) The fol-
lowers and servants of the dacoit chief consid-
ered Jaḍa Bhara ta to possess qualities quite 
suitable for a man -animal, and they decided 
that he was a perfect choice for sacrifice. Their 
faces bright with happiness, they bound him 
with ropes and brought him to the temple of the 
goddess Kālī. (14)  
After this, all the t hieves, according to their 
imaginative ritual for killing animalistic men, 
bathed Jaḍa Bharata, dressed him in new 
clothes, decorated him with ornaments befit-
ting an animal, smeared his body with scented 
oils and decorated him with tilaka, sandalwood 
pulp and garlands. They fed him sumptuously 
and then brought him before the goddess Kālī, 
offering her incense, lamps, garlands, parched 
grain, newly grown twigs, sprouts, fruits and 
flowers. In this way they worshiped the deity 
before killing the man -animal, a nd they vi-
brated songs and prayers and played drums and 
bugles. Jaḍa Bharata was then made to sit down 
before the deity. (15) At this time, one of the 
thieves, acting as the chief priest, was ready to 
offer the blood of Jaḍa Bharata, whom they im-
agined to b e an animal -man, to the goddess 
Kālī to drink as a liquor. He therefore took up a 
very fearsome sword, which was very sharp 
and, consecrating it by the mantra of Bhadra 
Kālī, raised it to kill Jaḍa Bharata. (16)  
All the rogues and thieves who had made ar-
rangements for the worship of Goddess Kālī 
were low minded and bound to the modes of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

304 
 passion and ignorance. They were overpow-
ered by the desire to become very rich; there-
fore they had the audacity to disobey the in-
junctions of the Vedas, so much so that they  
were prepared to kill Jaḍa Bharata, a self -real-
ized soul born in a brāhmaṇa family. Due to 
their envy, these dacoits brought him before the 
goddess Kālī for sacrifice. Such people are al-
ways addicted to envious activities, and there-
fore they dared to try to kill Jaḍa Bharata. Jaḍa 
Bharata was the best friend of all living entities. 
He was no one’s enemy, and he was always ab-
sorbed in meditation on the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead. He was born of a good 
brāhmaṇa father, and killing him was forbid-
den, even  though he might have been an enemy 
or aggressive person. In any case, there was no 
reason to kill Jaḍa Bharata, and the goddess 
Kālī could not bear this. She could immediately 
understand that these sinful dacoits were about 
to kill a great devotee of the Lord. Suddenly the 
deity’s body burst asunder, and the goddess 
Kālī personally emerged from it in a body burn-
ing with an intense and intolerable efful-
gence. (17) Intolerant of the offenses commit-
ted, the infuriated Goddess Kālī flashed her 
eyes and displaye d her fierce, curved teeth. Her 
reddish eyes glowed, and she displayed her 
fearsome features. She assumed a frightening 
body, as if she were prepared to destroy the en-
tire creation. Leaping violently from the altar, 
she immediately decapitated all the rogu es and 
thieves with the very sword with which they 
had intended to kill Jaḍa Bharata. She then be-
gan to drink the hot blood that flowed from the 
necks of the beheaded rogues and thieves, as if 
this blood were liquor. Indeed, she drank this 
intoxicant with her associates, who were 
witches and female demons. Becoming intoxi-
cated with this blood, they all began to sing 
very loudly and dance as though prepared to an-
nihilate the entire universe. At the same time, 
they began to play with the heads of the rogues 
and thieves, tossing them about as if they were 
balls. (18) When an envious person commits an 
offense before a great personality, he is always 
punished in the way mentioned above. (19) 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī then said to Mahārāja 
Parīkṣit: O Viṣṇudatta, those who already know that the soul is separate from the body, who are 
liberated from the invincible knot in the heart, 
who are always engaged in welfare activities 
for all living entities and  who never contem-
plate harming anyone are always protected by 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who car-
ries His disc [the Sudarśana cakra] and acts as 
supreme time to kill the demons and protect His 
devotees. The devotees always take shelter at 
the lotus  feet of the Lord. Therefore at all times, 
even if threatened by decapitation, they remain 
unagitated. For them, this is not at all wonder-
ful.(20)  
SB 5.10: The Discussion Between Jaḍa 
Bharata and Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  My dear 
King,  after this, King Rahūgaṇa, ruler of the 
states known as Sindhu and Sauvīra, was going 
to Kapilāśrama. When the King’s chief palan-
quin carriers reached the banks of the river 
Ikṣumatī, they needed another carrier. There-
fore they began searching for someone , and by 
chance they came upon Jaḍa Bharata. They 
considered the fact that Jaḍa Bharata was very 
young and strong and had firm limbs. Like 
cows and asses, he was quite fit to carry loads. 
Thinking in this way, although the great soul 
Jaḍa Bharata was unfit  for such work, they 
nonetheless unhesitatingly for ced him to carry 
the palanquin.(1)  
The palanquin, however, was very errati-
cally carried by Jaḍa Bharata due to his sense 
of nonviolence. As he stepped forward, he 
checked before him every three feet to see  
whether he was about to step on ants. Conse-
quently he could not keep pace with the other 
carriers. Due to this, the palanquin was shaking, 
and King Rahūgaṇa immediately asked the car-
riers, “Why are you carrying this palanquin un-
evenly? Better carry it pro perly.” (2)  
When the palanquin carriers heard the 
threatening words of Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa, they 
became very afraid of his punishment and be-
gan to speak to him as follows. (3) O lord, 
please note that we are not at all negligent in 
discharging our duties. We have been faithfully 
carrying this palanquin according to your de-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

305 
 sire, but this man who has been recently en-
gaged to work with us cannot walk very 
swiftly. Therefore we are not able to carry the 
palanquin with him. (4)  
King Rahūgaṇa could understand the 
speeches given by the carriers, who were afraid 
of being punished. He could also understand 
that simply due to the fault of one person, the 
palanquin was not being carried properly. 
Knowing this perfectly well and hearing their 
appeal, he became a little ang ry, although he 
was very advanced in political science and was 
very experienced. His anger arose due to his in-
born nature as a king. Actually King 
Rahūgaṇa’s mind was covered by the mode of 
passion, and he therefore spoke as follows to 
Jaḍa Bharata, whose Brahman effulgence was 
not clearly visible, being covered like a fire 
covered by ashes. (5) King Rahūgaṇa told Jaḍa 
Bharata: How troublesome this is, my dear 
brother. You certainly appear very fatigued be-
cause you have carried this palanquin alone 
without a ssistance for a long time and for a long 
distance. Besides that, due to your old age you 
have become greatly troubled. My dear friend, 
I see that you are not very firm, nor very strong 
and stout. Aren’t your fellow carriers cooperat-
ing with you? (6) Thereaf ter, when the King 
saw that his palanquin was still being shaken by 
the carriers, he became very angry and said: 
You rascal, what are you doing? Are you dead 
despite the life within your body? Do you not 
know that I am your master? You are disregard-
ing me and are not carrying out my order. For 
this disobedience I shall now punish you just as 
Yamarāja, the superintendent of death, pun-
ishes sinful people. I shall give you proper 
treatment so that you will come to your senses 
and do the correct thing. (7)  
Thin king himself a king, King Rahūgaṇa 
was in the bodily conception and was influ-
enced by material nature’s modes of passion 
and ignorance. Due to madness, he chastised 
Jaḍa Bharata with uncalled -for and contradic-
tory words. Jaḍa Bharata was a topmost devo-
tee and the dear abode of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. Although considering him-
self very learned, the King did not know about the position of an advanced devotee situated in 
devotional service, nor did he know his charac-
teristics. Jaḍa Bharata was the r esidence of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead; he always 
carried the form of the Lord within his heart. 
He was the dear friend of all living beings, and 
he did not entertain any bodily conception. He 
therefore smiled and spoke the following 
words. (8)  
The great brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata said:  
My dear King and hero, whatever you have 
spoken sarcastically is certainly true. Actually 
these are not simply words of chastisement, for 
the body is the carrier. The load carried by the 
body does not belong to me, for I am the spirit 
soul. There is no contradiction in your state-
ments because I am different from the body. I 
am not the carrier of the palanquin; the body is 
the carrier. Certainly, as you have hinted, I have 
not labored carrying the palanquin, for I am de-
tached from the body. You have said that I am 
not stout and strong, and these words are befit-
ting a person who does not know the distinction 
between the body and the soul. The body may 
be fat or thin, but no learned man would say 
such things of the spirit soul . As far as the spirit 
soul is concerned, I am neither fat nor skinny; 
therefore you are correct when you say that I 
am not very stout. Also, if the object of this 
journey and the path leading there were mine, 
there would be many troubles for me, but be-
cause they relate not to me but to my body, 
there is no trouble at all. (9) Fatness, thinness, 
bodily and mental distress, thirst, hunger, fear, 
disagreement, desires for material happiness, 
old age, sleep, attachment for material posses-
sions, anger, lamentati on, illusion and identifi-
cation of the body with the self are all transfor-
mations of the material covering of the spirit 
soul. A person absorbed in the material bodily 
conception is affected by these things, but I am 
free from all bodily conceptions. Conse quently 
I am neither fat nor skinny nor anything else 
you have mentioned. (10) My dear King, you 
have unnecessarily accused me of being dead 
though alive. In this regard, I can only say that 
this is the case everywhere because everything 
material has its be ginning and end. As far as 
your thinking that you are the king and master 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

306 
 and are thus trying to order me, this is also in-
correct because these positions are temporary. 
Today you are a king and I am your servant, but 
tomorrow the position may be changed, a nd 
you may be my servant and I your master. 
These are temporary circumstances created by 
providence. (11) My dear King, if you still think 
that you are the King and that I am your serv-
ant, you should order me, and I should follow 
your order. I can then say that this differentia-
tion is temporary, and it expands only from us-
age or convention. I do not see any other cause. 
In that case, who is the master, and who is the 
servant? Everyone is being forced by the laws 
of material nature; therefore no one is master , 
and no one is servant. Nonetheless, if you think 
that you are the master and that I am the serv-
ant, I shall accept this. Please order me. What 
can I do for y ou?(12) My dear King, you have 
said, “You rascal, you dull, crazy fellow! I am 
going to chastise you, and then you will come 
to your senses.” In this regard, let me say that 
although I live like a dull, deaf and dumb man, 
I am actually a self -realized person. What will 
you gain by punishing me? If your calculation 
is true and I am a madman, then your punish-
ment will be like beating a dead horse. There 
will be no effect. When a madman is punished, 
he is not cured of his madness. (13)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O Mahārāja 
Parīkṣit, when King Rahūgaṇa chastised the ex-
alted devotee Jaḍa Bharata with harsh words, 
that peaceful, saintly person tolerated it all and 
replied properly. Nescience is due to the bodily 
conception, and Jaḍa Bharata was  not affected 
by this false conception. Out of his natural hu-
mility, he never considered himself a great dev-
otee, and he agreed to suffer the results of his 
past karma. Like an ordinary man, he thought 
that by carrying the palanquin he was destroy-
ing the r eactions of his past misdeeds. Thinking 
in this way, he began to carry the palanquin as 
before. (14) Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O 
best of the Pāṇḍu dynasty [Mahārāja Parīkṣit], 
the King of the Sindhu and Sauvīra states 
[Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa] had great faith in discus-
sions of the Absolute Truth. Being thus quali-
fied, he heard from Jaḍa Bharata that philo-
soph ical presentation which is approved by all scriptures on the mystic yoga process and 
which slackens the knot in the heart. His mate-
rial conception of himself as a king was thus 
destroyed. He immediately descended from his 
palanquin and fell flat on the gro und with his 
head at the lotus feet of Jaḍa Bharata in such a 
way that he might be excused for his insulting 
words against the great brāhmaṇa. He then 
prayed as follows. (15) King Rahūgaṇa said: O 
brāhmaṇa, you appear to be moving in this 
world very much co vered and unknown to oth-
ers. Who are you? Are you a learned brāhmaṇa 
and saintly person? I see that you are wearing a 
sacred thread. Are you one of those exalted, lib-
erated saints such as Dattātreya and other 
highly advanced, learned scholars? May I ask 
whose disciple you are? Where do you live? 
Why have you come to this place? Is your mis-
sion in coming here to do good for us? Please 
let me know who you are. (16) My dear sir, I am 
not at all afraid of the thunderbolt of King In-
dra, nor am I afraid of the ser pentine, piercing 
trident of Lord Śiva. I do not care about the 
punishment of Yamarāja, the superintendent of 
death, nor am I afraid of fire, scorching sun, 
moon, wind, nor the weapons of Kuvera. Yet I 
am afraid of offending a brāhmaṇa. I am very 
much afra id of this. (17) My dear sir, it appears 
that the influence of your great spiritual 
knowledge is hidden. Factually you are bereft 
of all material association and fully absorbed in 
the thought of the Supreme. Consequently you 
are unlimitedly advanced in spir itual 
knowledge. Please tell me why you are wander-
ing around like a dullard. O great saintly per-
son, you have spoken words approved by the 
yogic process, but it is not possible for us to un-
derstand what you have said. Therefore kindly 
explain it. (18) I con sider your good self the 
most exalted master of mystic power. You 
know the spiritual science perfectly well. You 
are the most exalted of all learned sages, and 
you have descended for the benefit of all human 
society. You have come to give spiritual 
knowled ge, and you are a direct representative 
of Kapiladeva, the incarnation of God and the 
plenary portion of knowledge. I am therefore 
asking you, O spiritual master, what is the most 
secure shelter in this world? (19) Is it not a fact 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

307 
 that your good self is th e direct representative 
of Kapiladeva, the incarnation of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead? To examine people 
and see who is actually a human being and who 
is not, you have presented yourself to be a deaf 
and dumb person. Are you not moving this way 
upon  the surface of the world? I am very at-
tached to family life and worldly activities, and 
I am blind to spiritual knowledge. Nonetheless, 
I am now present before you and am seeking 
enlightenment from you. How can I advance in 
spiritual life? (20)  
You have s aid, “I am not fatigued from la-
bor.” Although the soul is different from the 
body, there is fatigue because of bodily labor, 
and it appears to be the fatigue of the soul. 
When you are carrying the palanquin, there is 
certainly labor for the soul. This is m y conjec-
ture. You have also said that the external be-
havior exhibited between the master and the 
servant is not factual, but although in the phe-
nomenal world it is not factual, the products of 
the phenomenal world can actually affect 
things. That is visibl e and experienced. As 
such, even though material activities are imper-
manent, they cannot be said to be untrue. (21) 
King Rahūgaṇa continued: My dear sir, you 
have said that designations like bodily fatness 
and thinness are not characteristics of the soul. 
That is incorrect because designations like pain 
and pleasure are certainly felt by the soul. You 
may put a pot of milk and rice within fire, and 
the milk and rice are automatically heated one 
after the other. Similarly, due to bodily pains 
and pleasures, t he senses, mind and soul are af-
fected. The soul cannot be completely detached 
from this conditioning. (22) My dear sir, you 
have said that the relationship between the king 
and the subject or between the mas ter and the 
servant are not eternal, but although such rela-
tionships are temporary, when a person takes 
the position of a king his duty is to rule the cit-
izens and punish those who are disobedient to 
the laws. By punishing them, he teaches the cit-
izens to obey the laws of the state. Again, you 
have said that punishing a person who is deaf 
and dumb is like chewing the chewed or grind-
ing the pulp; that is to say, there is no benefit in it. However, if one is engaged in his own occu-
pational duty as ordered by the Supreme Lord, 
his sinful activities are certainly diminished. 
Therefore if one is engaged in his occupational 
duty by force, he benefits because he can van-
quish all his sinful activities in that way. (23) 
Whatever you have spoken appears to me to be 
contradictory. O best friend of the distressed, I 
have committed a great offense by insulting 
you. I was puffed up with false prestige due to 
possessing the body of a king. For this I have 
certainly become an offender. Therefore I pray 
that you kindly glance at me with your cause-
less mercy. If you do so, I can be relieved from 
sinful activities brought about by insulting 
you.(24) O my dear lord, you are the friend of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is 
the friend of all living entities. You are there-
fore equal to everyone, and you are free from 
the bodily conception. Although I have com-
mitted an offense by insulting you, I know that 
there is no loss or gain for you due to my insult. 
You are fixed in your determination, but I have 
committed an offense. Be cause o f this, even 
though I may be as strong as Lord Śiva, I shall 
be vanquished without delay due to my offense 
at the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava. (25)  
SB 5.11: Jaḍa Bharata Instructs King 
Rahūgaṇa  
The brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata said:  My 
dear King, although you are no t at all experi-
enced, you are trying to speak like a very expe-
rienced man. Consequently you cannot be con-
sidered an experienced person. An experienced 
person does not speak the way you are speaking 
about the relationship between a master and a 
servant or a bout material pains and pleasures. 
These are simply external activities. Any ad-
vanced, experienced man, considering the Ab-
solute Truth, does not talk in this way.(1) My 
dear King, talks of the relationship between the 
master and the servant, the king and t he subject 
and so forth are simply talks about material ac-
tivities. People interested in material activities 
which are expounded in the Vedas are intent on 
performing material sacrifices and placing faith 
in their material activities. For such people, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

308 
 spiritual advancement is definitely not mani-
fest.(2) A dream becomes automatically known 
to a person as false and immaterial, and simi-
larly one eventually realizes that material hap-
piness in this life or the next, on this planet or a 
higher planet, is insignif icant. When one real-
izes this, the Vedas, although an excellent 
source, are insufficient to bring about direct 
knowledge of the truth. (3) As long as the mind 
of the living entity is contaminated by the three 
modes of material nature (goodness, passion 
and ignorance), his mind is exactly like an in-
dependent, uncontrolled elephant. It simply ex-
pands its jurisdiction of pious and impious ac-
tivities by using the senses. The result is that 
the living entity remains in the material world 
to enjoy and suffer pleas ures and pains due to 
material activity. (4) Because the mind is ab-
sorbed in desires for pious and impious activi-
ties, it is naturally subjected to the transfor-
mations of lust and anger. In this way, it be-
comes attracted to material sense enjoyment. In 
other words, the mind is conducted by the 
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. 
There are eleven senses and five material ele-
ments, and out of these sixteen items, the mind 
is the chief. Therefore the mind brings about 
birth in different types of bodies am ong demi-
gods, human beings, animals and birds. When 
the mind is situated in a higher or lower posi-
tion, it accepts a higher or lower material 
body. (5) The materialistic mind covering the 
living entity’s soul carries it to different species 
of life. This is  called continued material exist-
ence. Due to the mind, the living entity suffers 
or enjoys material distress and happiness. Be-
ing thus illusioned, the mind further creates pi-
ous and impious activities and their karma, and 
thus the soul becomes conditioned. (6) The 
mind makes the living entity within this mate-
rial world wander through different species of 
life, and thus the living entity experiences mun-
dane affairs in different forms as a human be-
ing, demigod, fat person, skinny person and so 
forth. Learned s cholars say that bodily appear-
ance, bondage and liberation are caused by the 
mind. (7) When the living entity’s mind be-
comes absorbed in the sense gratification of the 
material world, it brings about his conditioned life and suffering within the material si tuation. 
However, when the mind becomes unattached 
to material enjoyment, it becomes the cause of 
liberation. When the flame in a lamp burns the 
wick improperly, the lamp is blackened, but 
when the lamp is filled with ghee and is burning 
properly, there is  bright illumination. Similarly, 
when the mind is absorbed in material sense 
gratification, it causes suffering, and when de-
tached from material sense gratification it 
brings about the original brightness of Kṛṣṇa 
consciousness. (8)  
There are five working senses and five 
knowledge -acquiring senses. There is also the 
false ego. In this way, there are eleven items for 
the mind’s functions. O hero, the objects of the 
senses [such as sound and touch], the organic 
activities [such as evacuation] and the differen t 
types of bodies, society, friendship and person-
ality are considered by learned scholars the 
fields of activity for the functions of the 
mind. (9) Sound, touch, form, taste and smell 
are the objects of the five knowledge -acquiring 
senses. Speech, touch, mo vement, evacuation 
and sexual intercourse are the objects of the 
working senses. Besides this, there is another 
conception by which one thinks, “This is my 
body, this is my society, this is my family, this 
is my nation,” and so forth. This eleventh func-
tion of the mind is called the false ego. Accord-
ing to some philosophers, this is the twelfth 
function, and its field of activity is the 
body. (10) The physical elements, nature, the 
original cause, culture, destiny and the time el-
ement are all material causes . Agitated by these 
material causes, the eleven functions transform 
into hundreds of functions and then into thou-
sands and then into millions. But all these trans-
formations do not take place automatically by 
mutual combination. Rather, they are under the 
direction of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. (11) The individual soul bereft of Kṛṣṇa 
consciousness has many ideas and activities 
created in the mind by the external energy. 
They have been existing from time immemo-
rial. Sometimes they are manifest in the wak-
ening state and in the dream state, but during 
deep sleep [unconsciousness] or trance, they 
disappear. A person who is liberated in this life 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

309 
 [jīvan -mukta] can see all these things viv-
idly.(12)  
There are two kinds of kṣetrajñathe living 
entity, as explained above, and the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead , who is explained as 
follows. He is the all -pervading cause of crea-
tion. He is full in Himself and is not dependent 
on others. He is perceived by hearing and direct 
perception. He is self -effulgent and does not 
experience birth, death, old age or disease.  He 
is the controller of all the demigods, beginning 
with Lord Brahmā. He is called Nārāyaṇa, and 
He is the shelter of living entities after the an-
nihilation of this material world. He is full of 
all opulences, and He is the resting place of 
everything mat erial. He is therefore known as 
Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of God-
head. By His own potency, He is present within 
the hearts of all living entities, just as the air or 
vital force is within the bodies of all beings, 
moving and nonmoving. In this way H e con-
trols the body. In His partial feature, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead enters all bodies 
and controls them. (13-14) My dear King 
Rahūgaṇa, as long as the conditioned soul ac-
cepts the material body and is not freed from 
the contamination of material  enjoyment, and 
as long as he does not conquer his six enemies 
and come to the platform of self -realization by 
awakening his spiritual knowledge, he has to 
wander among different places and different 
species of life in this material world. (15) The 
soul’s d esignation, the mind, is the cause of all 
tribulations in the material world. As long as 
this fact is unknown to the conditioned living 
entity, he has to accept the miserable condition 
of the material body and wander within this 
universe in different posit ions. Because the 
mind is affected by disease, lamentation, illu-
sion, attachment, greed and enmity, it creates 
bondage and a false sense of intimacy within 
this material world. (16) This uncontrolled 
mind is the greatest enemy of the living entity. 
If one n eglects it or gives it a chance, it will 
grow more and more powerful and will become 
victorious. Although it is not factual, it is very 
strong. It covers the constitutional position of 
the soul. O King, please try to conquer this 
mind by the weapon of serv ice to the lotus feet of the spiritual master and of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Do this with great 
care. (17)  
SB 5.12: Conversation Between 
Mahārāja Rahūgaṇa and Jaḍa Bharata  
King Rahūgaṇa said:  O most exalted per-
sonality, you are not different fr om the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. By the influ-
ence of your true self, all kinds of contradiction 
in the śāstras have been removed. In the dress 
of a friend of a brāhmaṇa, you are hiding your 
transcendental blissful position. I offer my re-
spectful obei sances unto you. (1) O best of the 
brāhmaṇas, my body is filled with dirty things, 
and my vision has been bitten by the serpent of 
pride. Due to my material conceptions, I am 
diseased. Your nectarean instructions are the 
proper medicine for one suffering fr om such a 
fever, and they are cooling waters for one 
scorched by the heat. (2) Whatever doubts I 
have about a particular subject matter I shall 
ask you about later. For the time being, these 
mysterious yoga instructions you have given 
me for self -realizatio n appear very difficult to 
understand. Please repeat them in a simple way 
so that I can understand them. My mind is very 
inquisitive, and I want to understand this 
clearly. (3) O master of yogic power, you said 
that fatigue resulting from moving the body 
here and there is appreciated by direct percep-
tion but actually there is no fatigue. It simply 
exists as a matter of formality. By such inquir-
ies and answers, no one can come to the con-
clusion of the Absolute Truth. Because of your 
presentation of this state ment, my mind is a lit-
tle disturbed. (4)  
The self -realized brāhmaṇa Jaḍa Bharata 
said:  Among the various material combina-
tions and permutations, there are various forms 
and earthly transformations. For some reason, 
these move on the surface of the earth and are 
called palanquin carriers. Those ma terial trans-
formations which do not move are gross mate-
rial objects like stones. In any case, the material 
body is made of earth and stone in the form of 
feet, ankles, calves, knees, thighs, torso, throat 
and head. Upon the shoulders is the wooden 
palanqui n, and within the palanquin is the so -
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

310 
 called King of Sauvīra. The body of the King is 
simply another transformation of earth, but 
within that body Your Lordship is situated and 
falsely thinking that you are the King of the 
state of Sauvīra. (5-6)  
It is a f act, however, that these innocent peo-
ple carrying your palanquin without payment 
are certainly suffering due to this injustice. 
Their condition is very lamentable because you 
have forcibly engaged them in carrying your 
palanquin. This proves that you are c ruel and 
unkind, yet due to false prestige you were 
thinking that you were protecting the citizens. 
This is ludicrous. You were such a fool that you 
could not have been adored as a great man in 
an assembly of persons advanced in 
knowledge. (7) All of us on the surface of the 
globe are living entities in different forms. 
Some of us are moving and some not moving. 
All of us come into existence, remain for some 
time and are annihilated when the body is again 
mingled with the earth. We are all simply dif-
ferent t ransformations of the earth. Different 
bodies and capacities are simply transfor-
mations of the earth that exist in name only, for 
everything grows out of the earth and when 
everything is annihilated it again mingles with 
the earth. In other words, we are b ut dust, and 
we shall but be dust. Everyone can consider this 
point. (8)  
One may say that varieties arise from the 
planet earth itself. However, although the uni-
verse may temporarily appear to be the truth, it 
ultimately has no real existence. The earth wa s 
originally created by a combination of atomic 
particles, but these particles are impermanent. 
Actually the atom is not the cause of the uni-
verse, although some philosophers think so. It 
is not a fact that the varieties found in this ma-
terial world simply  result from atomic juxtapo-
sition or combination. (9) Since this universe 
has no real ultimate existence, the things within 
itshortness, differences, grossness, skinniness, 
smallness, bigness, result, cause, living symp-
toms, and materialsare all imagined. T hey are 
all pots made of the same substance, earth, but 
they are named differently. The differences are characterized by the substance, nature, predis-
position, time and activity. You should know 
that all these are simply mechanical manifesta-
tions created b y material nature. (10) What, 
then, is the ultimate truth? The answer is that 
nondual knowledge is the ultimate truth. It is 
devoid of the contamination of material quali-
ties. It gives us liberation. It is the one without 
a second, all -pervading and beyond imagina-
tion. The first realization of that knowledge is 
Brahman. Then Paramātmā, the Supersoul, is 
realized by the yogīs who try to see Him with-
out grievance. This is the second stage of reali-
zation. Finally, full realization of the same su-
preme knowledge is realized in the Supreme 
Person. All learned scholars describe the Su-
preme Person as Vāsudeva, the cause of Brah-
man, Paramātmā and others. (11) My dear King 
Rahūgaṇa, unless one has the opportunity to 
smear his entire body with the dust of the lotus 
feet of great devotees, one cannot realize the 
Absolute Truth. One cannot realize the Abso-
lute Truth simply by observing celibacy [brah-
macarya], strictly following the rules and regu-
lations of householder life, leaving home as a 
vānaprastha, accepting sannyāsa,  or undergo-
ing severe penances in winter by keeping one-
self submerged in water or surrounding oneself 
in summer by fire and the scorching heat of the 
sun. There are many other processes to under-
stand the Absolute Truth, but the Absolute 
Truth is only revea led to one who has attained 
the mercy of a great devotee.(12) Who are the 
pure devotees mentioned here? In an assembly 
of pure devotees, there is no question of dis-
cussing material subjects like politics and soci-
ology. In an assembly of pure devotees, ther e is 
discussion only of the qualities, forms and pas-
times of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
He is praised and worshiped with full attention. 
In the association of pure devotees, by con-
stantly hearing such topics respectfully, even a 
person who wants t o merge into the existence 
of the Absolute Truth abandons this idea and 
gradually becomes attached to the service of 
Vāsudeva. (13)  
In a previous birth I was known as Mahārāja 
Bharata. I attained perfection by becoming 
completely detached from material act ivities 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

311 
 through direct experience, and through indirect 
experience I received understanding from the 
Vedas. I was fully engaged in the service of the 
Lord, but due to my misfortune, I became very 
affectionate to a small deer, so much so that I 
neglected my  spiritual duties. Due to my deep 
affection for the deer, in my next life I had to 
accept the body of a deer. (14) My dear heroic 
King, due to my past sincere service to the 
Lord, I could remember everything of my past 
life even while in the body of a deer.  Because I 
am aware of the falldown in my past life, I al-
ways keep myself separate from the association 
of ordinary men. Being afraid of their bad, ma-
terialistic association, I wander alone unnoticed 
by others. (15) Simply by associating with ex-
alted devote es, anyone can attain perfection of 
knowledge and with the sword of knowledge 
can cut to pieces the illusory associations 
within this material world. Through the associ-
ation of devotees, one can engage in the service 
of the Lord by hearing and chanting [śr avaṇaṁ 
kīrtanam]. Thus one can revive his dormant 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness and, sticking to the culti-
vation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, return home, 
back to Godhead, even in this life.  
SB 5.13: Further Talks Between King 
Rahūgaṇa and Jaḍa Bharata  
Jaḍa Bharata, who  had fully realized 
Brahman, continued:  My dear King 
Rahūgaṇa, the living entity wanders on the path 
of the material world, which is very difficult for 
him to traverse, and he accepts repeated birth 
and death. Being captivated by the material 
world under t he influence of the three modes of 
material nature (sattva -guṇa, rajo -guṇa and 
tamo -guṇa), the living entity can see only the 
three fruits of activities under the spell of ma-
terial nature. These fruits are auspicious, inaus-
picious and mixed. He thus become s attached 
to religion, economic development, sense grat-
ification and the monistic theory of liberation 
(merging with the Supreme). He works very 
hard day and night exactly like a merchant who 
enters a forest to acquire some articles to sell 
later for prof it. However, he cannot really 
achieve happin ess within this material world.(1)  King Rahūgaṇa, in this forest of ma-
terial existence there are six very powerful 
plunderers. When the conditioned soul enters 
the forest to acquire some material gain, the six 
plunderers misguide him. Thus the conditioned 
merchant does not know how to spend  his 
money, and it is taken away by these plunder-
ers. Like tigers, jackals and other ferocious an-
imals in a forest that are ready to take away a 
lamb from the custody of its protector, the wife 
and children enter the heart of the merchant and 
plunder him i n so many ways. (2) In this forest 
there are dense bowers composed of thickets of 
bushes, grass and creepers. In these bowers the 
conditioned soul is always disturbed by cruelly 
biting mosquitoes [envious people]. Sometimes 
he sees an imaginary palace in th e forest, and 
sometimes he is bewildered by seeing a fleeting 
fiend or ghost, which appears like a meteor in 
the sky. (3) My dear King, the merchant on the 
forest path of the material world, his intelli-
gence victimized by home, wealth, relatives 
and so fort h, runs from one place to another in 
search of success. Sometimes his eyes are cov-
ered by the dust of a whirlwindthat is to say, in 
his lust he is captivated by the beauty of his 
wife, especially during her menstrual period. 
Thus his eyes are blinded, and he cannot see 
where to go or what he is doing. (4) Wandering 
in the forest of the material world, the condi-
tioned soul sometimes hears an invisible 
cricket making harsh sounds, and his ears be-
come very much aggrieved. Sometimes his 
heart is pained by the so unds of owls, which are 
just like the harsh words of his enemies. Some-
times he takes shelter of a tree that has no fruits 
or flowers. He approaches such a tree due to his 
strong appetite, and thus he suffers. He would 
like to acquire water, but he is simpl y illusioned 
by a mirage, and he runs after it. (5) Sometimes 
the conditioned soul jumps into a shallow river, 
or being short of food grains, he goes to beg 
food from people who are not at all charitable. 
Sometimes he suffers from the burning heat of 
househ old life, which is like a forest fire, and 
sometimes he becomes sad to have his wealth, 
which is as dear as life, plundered by kings in 
the name of heavy income taxes. (6) Some-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

312 
 times, being defeated or plundered by a supe-
rior, powerful agent, a living entity  loses all his 
possessions. He then becomes very morose, 
and lamenting their loss, he sometimes be-
comes unconscious. Sometimes he imagines a 
great palatial city in which he desires to live 
happily with his family members and riches. He 
thinks himself fully  satisfied if this is possible, 
but such so -called happiness continues only for 
a moment. (7) Sometimes the merchant in the 
forest wants to climb the hills and mountains, 
but due to insufficient footwear, his feet are 
pricked by small stone fragments and by  thorns 
on the mountain. Being pricked by them, he be-
comes very aggrieved. Sometimes a person 
who is very attached to his family becomes 
overwhelmed with hunger, and due to his mis-
erable condition he becomes furious with his 
family members. (8) The conditio ned soul in the 
material forest is sometimes swallowed by a 
python or crushed. At such a time he is left ly-
ing in the forest like a dead person, devoid of 
consciousness and knowledge. Sometimes 
other poisonous snakes bite him. Being blind to 
his consciousn ess, he falls down into a dark 
well of hellish life with no hope of being res-
cued. (9) Sometimes, in order to have a little in-
significant sex enjoyment, one searches after 
debauched women. In this attempt, one is in-
sulted and chastised by the women’s kinsme n. 
This is like going to take honey from a beehive 
and being attacked by the bees. Sometimes, af-
ter spending lots of money, one may acquire 
another woman for some extra sense enjoy-
ment. Unfortunately, the object of sense enjoy-
ment, the woman, is taken away  or kidnapped 
by another debauchee. (10) Sometimes the liv-
ing entity is busy counteracting the natural dis-
turbances of freezing cold, scorching heat, 
strong wind, excessive rainfall and so forth. 
When he is unable to do so, he becomes very 
unhappy. Sometime s he is cheated in business 
transactions one after another. In this way, by 
cheating, living entities create enmity among 
themselves. (11) On the forest path of material 
existence, sometimes a person is without 
wealth and due to this does not have a proper 
home, bed or sitting place, nor proper family 
enjoyment. He therefore goes to beg money from others, but when his desires are not ful-
filled by begging, he wants to borrow or steal 
the property of others. Thus he is insulted in so-
ciety. (12)  
Due to monetary  transactions, relationships 
become very strained and end in enmity. Some-
times the husband  and wife walk on the path of 
material progress, and to maintain their rela-
tionship they work very hard. Sometimes due 
to scarcity of money or due to diseased condi-
tions, they are embarrassed and almost die. (13) 
My dear King, on the forest path of material 
life, first a person is bereft of his father and 
mother, and after their death he becomes at-
tached to his newly born children. In this way 
he wanders on the path of material progress and 
is eventually embarrassed. Nonetheless, no one 
knows how to get out of this, even up to the 
moment of death. (14) There were and are many 
political and social heroes who have conquered 
enemies of equal power, yet due to their igno-
rance  in believing that the land is theirs, they 
fight one another and lay down their lives in 
battle. They are not able to take up the spiritual 
path accepted by those in the renounced order. 
Although they are big heroes and political lead-
ers, they cannot take  to the path of spiritual re-
alization. (15)  
Sometimes the living entity in the forest of 
material existence takes shelter of creepers and 
desires to hear the chirping of the birds in those 
creepers. Being afraid of roaring lions in the 
forest, he makes fri ends with cranes, herons 
and vultures. (16) Being cheated by them, the 
living entity in the forest of the material world 
tries to give up the association of these so -
called yogīs, svāmīs and incarnations and come 
to the association of real devotees, but due  to 
misfortune he cannot follow the instructions of 
the spiritual master or advanced devotees; 
therefore he gives up their company and again 
returns to the association of monkeys who are 
simply interested in sense gratification and 
women. He derives satisf action by associating 
with sense gratifiers and enjoying sex and in-
toxication. In this way he spoils his life simply 
by indulging in sex and intoxication. Looking 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

313 
 into the faces of other sense gratifiers, he be-
comes forgetful and thus approaches death. (17) 
When the living entity becomes exactly like a 
monkey jumping from one branch to another, 
he remains in the tree of household life without 
any profit but sex. Thus he is kicked by his wife 
just like the he -ass. Unable to gain release, he 
remains helplessly  in that position. Sometimes 
he falls victim to an incurable disease, which is 
like falling into a mountain cave. He becomes 
afraid of death, which is like the elephant in the 
back of that cave, and he remains stranded, 
grasping at the twigs and branches o f a 
creeper. (18) O killer of enemies, Mahārāja 
Rahūgaṇa, if the conditioned soul somehow or 
other gets out of his dangerous position, he 
again returns to his home to enjoy sex life, for 
that is the way of attachment. Thus, under the 
spell of the Lord’s mat erial energy, he contin-
ues to loiter in the forest of material existence. 
He does not discover his real interest even at 
the point of death. (19) My dear King 
Rahūgaṇa, you are also a victim of the external 
energy, being situated on the path of attraction 
to material pleasure. So that you may become 
an equal friend to all living entities, I now ad-
vise you to give up your kingly position and the 
rod by which you punish criminals. Give up at-
traction to the sense objects and take up the 
sword of knowledge sharp ened by devotional 
service. Then you will be able to cut the hard 
knot of illusory energy and cross to the other 
side of the ocean of nescience. (20)  
King Rahūgaṇa said:  This birth as a human 
being is the best of all. Even birth among the 
demigods in the h eavenly planets is not as glo-
rious as birth as a human being on this earth. 
What is the use of the exalted position of a dem-
igod? In the heavenly planets, due to profuse 
material comforts, there is no possibility of as-
sociating with devotees. (21) It is not  at all won-
derful that simply by being covered by the dust 
of your lotus feet, one immediately attains the 
platform of pure devotional service to 
Adho kṣaja, which is not available even to great 
demigods like Brahmā. By associating with 
you just for a moment, I am now freed from all 
argument, false prestige and lack of discrimina-
tion, which are the roots of entanglement in the material world. Now I am fr ee from all these 
problems. (22) I offer my respectful obeisances 
unto the great personalities, whether they walk 
on the earth’s surface as children, young boys, 
avadhūtas or great brāhmaṇas. Even if they are 
hidden under different guises, I offer my re-
spects to all of them. By their mercy, may there 
be good fortune in the royal dynasties that are 
always offending them. (23)  
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  My 
dear King, O son of mother Uttarā, there were 
some waves of dissatisfaction in the mind of 
Jaḍa Bh arata due to his being insulted by King 
Rahūgaṇa, who made him carry his palanquin, 
but Jaḍa Bharata neglected this, and his heart 
again became calm and quiet like an ocean. Alt-
hough King Rahūgaṇa had insulted him, he was 
a great paramahaṁsa. Being a Vaiṣṇ ava, he 
was naturally very kindhearted, and he there-
fore told the King about the constitutional po-
sition of the soul. He then forgot the insult be-
cause King Rahūgaṇa pitifully begged pardon 
at his lotus feet. After this, he began to wander 
all over the ear th, just as before. (24) After re-
ceiving lessons from the great devotee Jaḍa 
Bharata, King Rahūgaṇa of the state of Sauvīra 
became completely aware of the constitutional 
position of the soul. He thus gave up the bodily 
conception completely. My dear King, w ho-
ever takes shelter of the servant of the servant 
of the Lord is certainly glorified because he can 
without difficulty give up the bodily concep-
tion.(25)  
King Parīkṣit then told Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī: My dear lord, O great devotee sage, 
you are omniscient. Yo u have very nicely de-
scribed the position of the conditioned soul, 
who is compared to a merchant in the forest. 
From these instructions intelligent men can un-
derstand that the senses of a person in the bod-
ily conception are like rogues and thieves in 
that forest, and one’s wife and children are like 
jackals and other ferocious animals. However, 
it is not very easy for the unintelligent to under-
stand the purport of this story because it is dif-
ficult to extricate the exact meaning from the 
allegory. I therefo re request Your Holin ess to 
give the direct meaning.(26)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

314 
 SB 5.14: The Material World as the 
Great Forest of Enjoyment  
When King Parīkṣit asked Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī about the direct meaning of the 
material forest, Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied 
as follows:  My dear Ki ng, a man belonging to 
the mercantile community [vaṇik] is always in-
terested in earning money. Sometimes he enters 
the forest to acquire some cheap commodities 
like wood and earth and sell them in the city at 
good prices. Similarly, the conditioned soul, 
being greedy, enters this material world for 
some material profit. Gradually he enters the 
deepest part of the forest, not really knowing 
how to get out. Having entered the material 
world, the pure soul becomes conditioned by 
the material atmosphere, which is created by 
the external energy under the control of Lord 
Viṣṇu. Thus the living entity comes under the 
control of the external energy, daivī māyā. Liv-
ing independently and bewildered in the forest, 
he does not attain the association of devotees 
who are always engaged in the service of the 
Lord. Once in the bodily conception, he gets 
different types of bodies one after the other un-
der the influence of material energy and im-
pelled by the modes of material nature [sattva -
guṇa, rajo -guṇa and tamo -guṇa]. In t his way 
the conditioned soul goes sometimes to the 
heavenly planets, sometimes to the earthly 
planets and sometimes to the lower planets and 
lower species. Thus he suffers continuously 
due to different types of bodies. These suffer-
ings and pains are someti mes mixed. Some-
times they are very severe, and sometimes they 
are not. These bodily conditions are acquired 
due to the conditioned soul’s mental specula-
tion. He uses his mind and five senses to ac-
quire knowledge, and these bring about the dif-
ferent bodies and different conditions. Using 
the senses under the control of the external en-
ergy, māyā, the living entity suffers the miser-
able conditions of material existence. He is ac-
tually searching for relief, but he is generally 
baffled, although sometimes he is relieved after 
great difficulty. Struggling for existence in this 
way, he cannot get the shelter of pure devotees, 
who are like bumblebees engaged in loving ser-
vice at the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu. (1) In the forest of material existence, the uncontrolled 
senses are like plunderers. The conditioned 
soul may earn some money for the advance-
ment of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but unfortunately 
the uncontrolled senses plunder his money 
through sense gratification. The senses are 
plunderers because they make one spend h is 
money unnecessarily for seeing, smelling, tast-
ing, touching, hearing, desiring and willing. In 
this way the conditioned soul is obliged to grat-
ify his senses, and thus all his money is spent. 
This money is actually acquired for the execu-
tion of religiou s principles, but it is taken away 
by the plundering senses. (2) My dear King, 
family members in this material world go under 
the names of wife and children, but actually 
they behave like tigers and jackals. A herdsman 
tries to protect his sheep to the best  of his abil-
ity, but the tigers and foxes take them away by 
force. Similarly, although a miserly man wants 
to guard his money very carefully, his family 
members take away all his assets forcibly, even 
though he is very vigilant. (3) Every year the 
plowman plows over his grain field, completely 
uprooting all weeds. Nonetheless, the seeds lie 
there and, not being completely burned, again 
come up with the plants sown in the field. Even 
after being plowed under, t he weeds come up 
densely. Similarly, the gṛhastha -āśrama [family 
life] is a field of fruitive activity. Unless the de-
sire to enjoy family life is completely burned 
out, it grows up again and again. Even though 
camphor may be removed from a pot, the pot 
nonetheless retains the aroma of camphor. As 
long as the seeds of desire are not destroyed, 
fruitive activities are not destroyed. (4)  
Sometimes the conditioned soul in house-
hold life, being attached to material wealth and 
possessions, is disturbed by gadflie s and mos-
quitoes, and sometimes locusts, birds of prey 
and rats give him trouble. Nonetheless, he still 
wanders down the path of material existence. 
Due to ignorance he becomes lusty and engages 
in fruitive activity. Because his mind is ab-
sorbed in these a ctivities, he sees the material 
world as permanent, although it is temporary 
like a phantasmagoria, a house in the sky. (5) 
Sometimes in this house in the sky [gandharva -
pura] the conditioned soul drinks, eats and has 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

315 
 sex. Being overly attached, he chases a fter the 
objects of the senses just as a deer chases a mi-
rage in the desert. (6) Sometimes the living en-
tity is interested in the yellow stool known as 
gold and runs after it. That gold is the source of 
material opulence and envy, and it can enable 
one to a fford illicit sex, gambling, meat -eating 
and intoxication. Those whose minds are over-
come by the mode of passion are attracted by 
the color of gold, just as a man suffering from 
cold in the forest runs after a phosphorescent 
light in a marshy land, conside ring it to be 
fire.(7) Sometimes the conditioned soul is ab-
sorbed in finding residential quarters or apart-
ments and getting a supply of water and riches 
to maintain his body. Absorbed in acquiring a 
variety of necessities, he forgets everything and 
perpetu ally runs around the forest of material 
existence. (8) Sometimes, as if blinded by the 
dust of a whirlwind, the conditioned soul sees 
the beauty of the opposite sex, which is called 
pramadā. Being thus bewildered, he is raised 
upon the lap of a woman, and a t that time his 
good senses are overcome by the force of pas-
sion. He thus becomes almost blind with lusty 
desire and disobeys the rules and regulations 
governing sex life. He does not know that his 
disobedience is witnessed by different demi-
gods, and he en joys illicit sex in the dead of 
night, not seeing the future punishment await-
ing him. (9) The conditioned soul sometimes 
personally appreciates the futility of sense en-
joyment in the material world, and he some-
times considers material enjoyment to be full o f 
miseries. However, due to his strong bodily 
conception, his memory is destroyed, and again 
and again he runs after material enjoyment, just 
as an animal runs after a mirage in the de-
sert.(10) Sometimes the conditioned soul is 
very aggrieved by the chasti sement of his ene-
mies and government servants, who use harsh 
words against him directly or indirectly. At that 
time his heart and ears become very saddened. 
Such chastisement may be compared to the 
sounds of owls and crickets. (11) Due to his pi-
ous activiti es in previous lives, the conditioned 
soul attains material facilities in this life, but 
when they are finished, he takes shelter of 
wealth and riches, which cannot help him in this life or the next. Because of this, he ap-
proaches the living dead who posse ss these 
things. Such people are compared to impure 
trees , creepers and poisonous wells.(12) Some-
times, to mitigate distresses in this forest of the 
material world, the conditioned soul receives 
cheap blessings from atheists. He then loses all 
intelligence  in their association. This is exactly 
like jumping in a shallow river. As a result one 
simply breaks his head. He is not able to miti-
gate his sufferings from the heat, and in both 
ways he suffers. The misguided conditioned 
soul also approaches so -called s ādhus and 
svāmīs who preach against the principles of the 
Vedas. He does not receive benefit from them, 
either in the present or in the future. (13) In this 
material world, when the conditioned soul can-
not arrange for his own maintenance, despite 
exploiting  others, he tries to exploit his own fa-
ther or son, taking away that relative’s posses-
sions, although they may be very insignificant. 
If he cannot acquire things from his father, son 
or other relatives, he is prepared to give them 
all kinds of trouble. (14) In this world, family 
life is exactly like a blazing fire in the forest. 
There is not the least happiness, and gradually 
one becomes more and more implicated in un-
happiness. In household life, there is nothing 
favorable for perpetual happiness. Being impl i-
cated in home life, the conditioned soul is 
burned by the fire of lamentation. Sometimes 
he condemns himself as being very unfortu-
nate, and sometimes he claims that he suffers 
because he performed no pious activities in his 
previous life. (15) Government m en are always 
like carnivorous demons called Rākṣasas [man -
eaters]. Sometimes these government men turn 
against the conditioned soul and take away all 
his accumulated wealth. Being bereft of his 
life’s reserved wealth, the conditioned soul 
loses all enthus iasm. Indeed, it is as though he 
loses his life. (16) Sometimes the conditioned 
soul imagines that his father or grandfather has 
again come in the form of his son or grandson. 
In this way he feels the happiness one some-
times feels in a dream, and the condit ioned soul 
sometimes takes pleasure in such mental con-
coctions. (17) In household life one is ordered 
to execute many yajñas and fruitive activities, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

316 
 especially the vivāha -yajña [the marriage cere-
mony for sons and daughters] and the sacred 
thread ceremony. These are all the duties of a 
gṛhastha, and they are very extensive and trou-
blesome to execute. They are compared to a big 
hill over which one must cross when one is at-
tached to material activities. A person desiring 
to cross over these ritualistic ceremonies cer-
tainly feels pains like the piercing of thorns and 
pebbles en dured by one attempting to climb a 
hill. Thus the conditioned soul suffers unlimit-
edly. (18) Sometimes, due to bodily hunger and 
thirst, the conditioned soul becomes so dis-
turbed that he loses his patience and becomes 
angry with his own beloved sons, daught ers and 
wife. Thus, being unkind to them, he suffers all 
the more. (19) Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued 
speaking to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: My dear King, 
sleep is exactly like a python. Those who wan-
der in the forest of material life are always de-
voured by the python  of sleep. Being bitten by 
this python, they always remain in the darkness 
of ignorance. They are like dead bodies thrown 
in a distant forest. Thus the conditioned souls 
cannot understand what is going on in life. (20)  
In the forest of the material world, the con-
ditioned soul is sometimes bitten by envious 
enemies, which are compared to serpents and 
other creatures. Through the tricks of the en-
emy, the conditioned soul falls from his pres-
tigious position. Being anxious, he cannot even 
sleep properly. He thu s becomes more and 
more unhappy, and he gradually loses his intel-
ligence and consciousness. In that state he be-
comes almost perpetually like a blind man who 
has fallen into a dark well of ignorance. (21) 
The conditioned soul is sometimes attracted to 
the li ttle happiness derived from sense gratifi-
cation. Thus he has illicit sex or steals another’s 
property. At such a time he may be arrested by 
the government or chastised by the woman’s 
husband  or protector. Thus simply for a little 
material satisfaction, he falls into a hellish con-
dition and is put into jail for rape, kidnapping, 
theft and so forth. (22) Learned scholars and 
transcendentalists therefore condemn the mate-
rialistic path of fruitive activity because it is the 
original source and breeding ground of  material 
miseries, both in this life and in the next. (23) Stealing or cheating another person out of his 
money, the conditioned soul somehow or other 
keeps it in his possession and escapes punish-
ment. Then another man, named Devadatta, 
cheats him and take s the money away. Simi-
larly, another man, named Viṣṇumitra, steals 
the money from Devadatta and takes it away. 
In any case, the money does not stay in one 
place. It passes from one hand to another. Ulti-
mately no one can enjoy the money, and it re-
mains the property of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. (24) Being unable to protect him-
self from the threefold miseries of material ex-
istence, the conditioned soul becomes very mo-
rose and lives a life of lamentation. These 
threefold miseries are miseries suffered by 
mental calamity at the hands of the demigods 
[such as freezing wind and scorching heat], 
miseries offered by other living entities, and 
miseries arising from the mind and body them-
selves. (25) As far as transactions with money 
are concerned, if one perso n cheats another by 
a farthing or less, they become enemies. (26)  
In this materialistic life, there are many dif-
ficulties, as I have just mentioned, and all of 
these are insurmountable. In addition, there are 
difficulties arising from so -called happiness, 
distress, attachment, hate, fear, false prestige, 
illusion, madness, lamentation, bewilderment, 
greed, envy, enmity, insult, hunger, thirst, trib-
ulation, disease, birth, old age and death. All 
these combine together to give the materialistic 
conditioned so ul nothing but misery. (27) 
Sometimes the conditioned soul is attracted by 
illusion personified (his wife or girlfriend) and 
becomes eager to be embraced by a woman. 
Thus he loses his intelligence as well as 
knowledge of life’s goal. At that time, no 
longer  attempting spiritual cultivation, he be-
comes overly attached to his wife or girlfriend 
and tries to provide her with a suitable apart-
ment. Again, he becomes very busy under the 
shelter of that home and is captivated by the 
talks, glances and activities of  his wife and chil-
dren. In this way he loses his Kṛṣṇa conscious-
ness and throws himself in the dense darkness 
of material existence. (28) 
The personal weapon used by Lord Kṛṣṇa, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

317 
 the disc, is called hari -cakra, the disc of Hari. 
This cakra is the wheel of ti me. It expands from 
the beginning of the atoms up to the time of 
Brahmā’s death, and it controls all activities. It 
is always revolving and spending the lives of 
the living entities, from Lord Brahmā down to 
an insignificant blade of grass. Thus one 
change s from infancy, to childhood, to youth 
and maturity, and thus one approaches the end 
of life. It is impossible to check this wheel of 
time. This wheel is very exacting because it is 
the personal weapon of the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead. Sometimes the c onditioned 
soul, fearing the approach of death, wants to 
worship someone who can save him from im-
minent danger. Yet he does not care for the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, whose weapon 
is the indefatigable time factor. The condi-
tioned soul instead takes s helter of a man -made 
god described in unauthorized scriptures. Such 
gods are like buzzards, vultures, herons and 
crows. Vedic scriptures do not refer to them. 
Imminent death is like the attack of a lion, and 
neither vultures, buzzards, crows nor herons 
can save one from such an attack. One who 
takes shelter of unauthorized man -made gods 
cannot be saved from the clutches of death. (29) 
The pseudo svāmīs, yogīs and incarnations who 
do not believe in the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead are known as pāṣaṇḍīs. They them-
selves are fallen and cheated because they do 
not know the real path of spiritual advance-
ment, and whoever goes to them is ce rtainly 
cheated in his turn. When one is thus cheated, 
he sometimes takes shelter of the real followers 
of Vedic principles [brāhmaṇas or those in 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness], who teach everyone 
how to worship the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead according to the V edic rituals. How-
ever, being unable to stick to these principles, 
these rascals again fall down and take shelter 
among śūdras who are very expert in making 
arrangements for sex indulgence. Sex is very 
prominent among animals like monkeys, and 
such people w ho are enlivened by sex may be 
called descendants of monkeys. (30) In this way 
the descendants of the monkeys intermingle 
with each other, and they are generally known 
as śūdras. Without hesitating, they live and move freely, not knowing the goal of life. T hey 
are captivated simply by seeing the faces of one 
another, which remind them of sense gratifica-
tion. They are always engaged in material ac-
tivities, known as grāmya -karma, and they 
work hard for material benefit. Thus they forget 
completely that one day  their small life spans 
will be finished and they will be degraded in the 
evolutionary cycle. (31) Just as a monkey jumps 
from one tree to another, the conditioned soul 
jumps from one body to another. As the mon-
key is ultimately captured by the hunter and i s 
unable to get out of captivity, the conditioned 
soul, being captivated by momentary sex pleas-
ure, becomes attached to different types of bod-
ies and is encaged in family life. Family life af-
fords the conditioned soul a festival of momen-
tary sex pleasure, and thus he is completely un-
able to get out of the material clutches. (32) 
In this material world, when the conditioned 
soul f orgets his relationship with the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead and does not care for 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he simply engages in dif-
ferent types of mischievous and sinful activi-
ties. He is then subjected to the threefold mis-
eries, and, out of fear of the el ephant of death, 
he falls into the darkness found in a mountain 
cave. (33) The conditioned soul suffers many 
miserable bodily conditions, such as being af-
fected by severe cold and strong winds. He also 
suffers due to the activities of other living be-
ings an d due to natural disturbances. When he 
is unable to counteract them and has to remain 
in a miserable condition, he naturally becomes 
very morose because he wants to enjoy material 
facilities. (34) Sometimes conditioned souls ex-
change money, but in due cours e of time, en-
mity arises because of cheating. Although there 
may be a tiny profit, the conditioned souls 
cease to be friends and become enemies. (35) 
Sometimes, having no money, the conditioned 
soul does not get sufficient accommodations. 
Sometimes he doesn ’t even have a place to sit, 
nor does he have the other necessities. In other 
words, he falls into scarcity, and at that time, 
when he is unable to secure the necessities by 
fair means, he decides to seize the property of 
others unfairly. When he cannot ge t the things 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

318 
 he wants, he simply receives insults from oth-
ers and thus becomes very morose. (36) Alt-
hough people may be enemies, in order to ful-
fill their desires again and again, they some-
times get married. Unfortunately, these mar-
riages do not last very l ong, and the people in-
volved are separated again by divorce or other 
means. (37) The path of this material world is 
full of material miseries, and various troubles 
disturb the conditioned souls. Sometimes he 
loses, and sometimes he gains. In either case, 
the path is full of danger. Sometimes the condi-
tioned soul is separated from his father by death 
or other circumstances. Leaving him aside he 
gradually becomes attached to others, such as 
his children. In this way, the conditioned soul 
is sometimes illusione d and afraid. Sometimes 
he cries loudly out of fear. Sometimes he is 
happy maintaining his family, and sometimes 
he is overjoyed and sings melodiously. In this 
way he becomes entangled and forgets his sep-
aration from the Supreme Personality of God-
head sinc e time immemorial. Thus he traverses 
the dangerous path of material existence, and 
on this path he is not at all happy. Those who 
are self -realized simply take shelter of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead in order to get 
out of this dangerous material exi stence. With-
out accepting the devotional path, one cannot 
get out of the clutches of material existence. 
The conclusion is that no one can be happy in 
material life. One must take to Kṛṣṇa con-
sciousness. (38) Saintly persons, who are 
friends to all living entities, have a peaceful 
consciousness. They have controlled their 
senses and minds, and they easily attain the 
path of liberation,  the path back to Godhead. 
Being unfortunate and attached to the miserable 
material conditions, a materialistic person can-
not associate with them. (39) There were many 
great saintly kings who were very expert in per-
forming sacrificial rituals and very compe tent 
in conquering other kingdoms, yet despite their 
power they could not attain the loving service 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is 
because those great kings could not even con-
quer the false consciousness of “I am this body, 
and this is my p roperty.” Thus they simply cre-
ated enmity with rival kings, fought with them and died without having discharged life’s real 
mission.(40) When the conditioned soul ac-
cepts the shelter of the creeper of fruitive activ-
ity, he may be elevated by his pious acti vities 
to higher planetary systems and thus gain liber-
ation from hellish conditions, but unfortunately 
he cannot remain there. After reaping the re-
sults of his pious activities, he has to return to 
the lower planetary systems. In this way he per-
petually go es up and comes down. (41) Having 
summarized the teachings of Jaḍa Bharata, 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King 
Parīkṣit, the path indicated by Jaḍa Bharata is 
like the path followed by Garuḍa, the carrier of 
the Lord, and ordinary kings are just like flies . 
Flies cannot follow the path of Garuḍa, and to 
date none of the great kings and victorious lead-
ers could follow this path of devotional service, 
not even mentally. (42) While in the prime of 
life, the great Mahārāja Bharata gave up every-
thing because he w as fond of serving the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Uttamaśloka. 
He gave up his beautiful wife, nice children, 
great friends and an enormous empire. Alt-
hough these things were very difficult to give 
up, Mahārāja Bharata was so exalted that he 
gave them up just as one gives up stool after 
evacuating. Such was the greatness of His Maj-
esty.(43) Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My 
dear King, the activities of Bharata Mahārāja 
are wonderful. He gave up everything difficult 
for others to give up. He gave up his kin gdom, 
his wife and his family. His opulence was so 
great that even the demigods envied it, yet he 
gave it up. It was quite befitting a great person-
ality like him to be a great devotee. He could 
renounce everything because he was so at-
tracted to the beauty,  opulence, reputation, 
knowledge, strength and renunciation of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa 
is so attractive that one can give up all desirable 
things for His sake. Indeed, even liberation is 
considered insignificant for those whose min ds 
are attracted to the loving service of the 
Lord. (44) Even though in the body of a deer, 
Mahārāja Bharata did not forget the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead; therefore when he was 
giving up the body of a deer, he loudly uttered 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

319 
 the following prayer: “The Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead is sacrifice personified. He 
gives the results of ritualistic activity. He is the 
protector of religious systems, the personifica-
tion of mystic yoga, the source of all 
knowledge, the controller of the entire creation, 
and the  Supersoul in every living entity. He is 
beautiful and attractive. I am quitting this body 
offering obeisances unto Him and hoping that I 
may perpetually engage in His transcendental 
loving service.” Uttering this, Mahārāja Bha-
rata left his body. (45) 
Devot ees interested in hearing and chanting 
[śravaṇaṁ kīrtanam] regularly discuss the pure 
characteristics of Bharata Mahārāja and praise 
his activities. If one submissively hears and 
chants about the all -auspicious Mahārāja Bha-
rata, one’s life span and materia l opulences cer-
tainly increase. One can become very famous 
and easily attain promotion to the heavenly 
planets, or attain liberation by merging into the 
existence of the Lord. Whatever one desires can 
be attained simply by hearing, chanting and 
glorifying the activities of Mahārāja Bharata. In 
this way, one can fulfill all his material and 
spiritual desires. One does not have to ask any-
one else for these things, for simply by studying 
the life of Mahārāja Bharata, one can attain all 
desirable things. (46)  
SB 5.15: The Glories of the Descendants 
of King Priyavrata  
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  The 
son of Mahārāja Bharata known as Sumati fol-
lowed the path of Ṛṣabhadeva, but in the Age 
of Kali some unscrupulous people will imagine 
him to be Lord Buddha hims elf. These people, 
who will actually be atheistic and of bad char-
acter, will interpret the Vedic principles in an 
imaginary, infamous way to support their activ-
ities. Thus these sinful people will accept Su-
mati as Lord Buddhadeva and propagate the 
theory t hat everyone should follow the princi-
ples of Sumati. In this way they will be carried 
away by mental concoction. (1) From Sumati, a 
son named Devatājit was born by the womb of 
his wife named Vṛddhasenā. (2) Thereafter, in 
the womb of Āsurī, the wife of Devatājit, a son 
named Devadyumna was begotten. Devadyumna begot in the womb of his wife, 
Dhenumatī, a son named Parameṣṭ hī. 
Parameṣṭhī begot a son named Pratīha in the 
womb of his wife, Suvarcalā. (3) King Pratīha 
personally propagated the principles of self -re-
alization. In this way, not only was he purified, 
but he became a great devotee of the Supreme 
Person, Lord Viṣṇ u, a nd directly realized 
Him.(4) In the womb of his wife Suvarcalā, 
Pratīha begot three sons, named Pratihartā, 
Prastotā and Udgātā. These three sons were 
very expert in performing Vedic rituals. Prati-
hartā begot two sons, named Aja and Bhūmā, 
in the womb of h is wife, named Stutī. (5) In the 
womb of his wife, Ṛṣikulyā, King Bhūmā begot 
a son named Udgītha. From Udgītha’s wife, 
Devakulyā, a son named Prastāva was born, 
and Prastāva begot a son named Vibhu through 
his wife, Niyutsā. In the womb of his wife, Ratī, 
Vibhu begot a son named Pṛthuṣeṇa. Pṛthuṣeṇa 
begot a son named Nakta in the womb of his 
wife, named Ākūti. Nakta’s wife was Druti, and 
from her womb the great King Gaya was born. 
Gaya was very famous and pious; he was the 
best of saintly kings. Lord Viṣṇu and His ex-
pansions, who are meant to protect the uni-
verse, are always situated in the transcendental 
mode of goodness, known as viśuddha -sattva. 
Being the direct expansion of Lord Viṣṇu, King 
Gaya was also situated in the viśuddha -sattva. 
Because of this, Mahārāja Gaya was fully 
equipped with transcendental knowledge. 
Therefore he was called Mahāpuruṣa. (6) King 
Gaya gave full protection and security to the 
citizens so that their personal property would 
not be disturbed by undesirable elements. He 
also saw t hat there was sufficient food to feed 
all the citizens. [This is called poṣaṇa.] He 
would sometimes distribute gifts to the citizens 
to satisfy them. [This is called prīṇana.] He 
would sometimes call meetings and satisfy the 
citizens with sweet words. [Thi s is called 
upalālana.] He would also give them good in-
structions on how to become first -class citi-
zens. [This is called anuśāsana.] Such were the 
characteristics of King Gaya’s royal order. Be-
sides all this, King Gaya was a householder 
who strictly observ ed the rules and regulations 
of household life. He performed sacrifices and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

320 
 was an unalloyed pure devotee of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. He was called 
Mahāpuruṣa because as a king he gave the citi-
zens all facilities, and as a householder he exe-
cuted all his duties so that at the end he became 
a strict devotee of the Supreme Lord. As a dev-
otee, he was always ready to give respect to 
other devotees and to engage in the devotional 
service of the Lord. This is the bhakti -yoga pro-
cess. Due to all these t ranscendental activities, 
King Gaya was always free from the bodily 
conception. He was full in Brahman realization, 
and consequently he was always jubilant. He 
did not experience material lamentation. Alt-
hough he was perfect in all respects, he was not 
proud, nor was he anxious to rule the king-
dom. (7) 
My dear King Parīkṣit, those who are 
learned scholars in the histories of the Purāṇas 
eulogize and glorify King Gaya with the fol-
lowing verses. (8) The great King Gaya used to 
perform all kinds of Vedic rituals . He was 
highly intelligent and expert in studying all the 
Vedic literatures. He maintained the religious 
principles and possessed all kinds of opulence. 
He was a leader among gentlemen and a servant 
of the devotees. He was a totally qualified ple-
nary expa nsion of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. Therefore who could equal him in the 
performance of gigantic ritualistic ceremo-
nies? (9) All the chaste and honest daughters of 
Mahārāja Dakṣa, such as Śraddhā, Maitrī and 
Dayā, whose blessings were always effective, 
bathed Mahārāja Gaya with sanctified water. 
Indeed, they were very satisfied with Mahārāja 
Gaya. The planet earth personified ca me as a 
cow, and, as though she saw her calf, she deliv-
ered milk profusely when she saw all the good 
qualities of Mahārāja Gaya. In other words, 
Mahārāja Gaya was able to derive all benefits 
from the earth and thus satisfy the desires of his 
citizens. Howe ver, he personally had no de-
sire.(10) Although King Gaya had no personal 
desire for sense gratification, all his desires 
were fulfilled by virtue of his performance of 
Vedic rituals. All the kings with whom 
Mahārāja Gaya had to fight were forced to fight 
on religious principles. They were very satis-
fied with his fighting, and they would present all kinds of gifts to him. Similarly, all the 
brāhmaṇas in his kingdom were very satisfied 
with King Gaya’s munificent charities. Conse-
quently the brāhmaṇas contribu ted a sixth of 
their pious activities for King Gaya’s benefit in 
the next life. (11) In Mahārāja Gaya’s sacrifices, 
there was a great supply of the intoxicant 
known as soma. King Indra used to come and 
become intoxicated by drinking large quantities 
of soma -rasa. Also, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu [the yajña -puruṣa] also 
came and personally accepted all the sacrifices 
offered unto Him with pure and firm devotion 
in the sacrificial arena. (12) When the Supreme 
Lord is pleased by a person’s ac tions, automat-
ically all the demigods, human beings, animals, 
birds, bees, creepers, trees, grass and all other 
living entities, beginning with Lord Brahmā, 
are pleased. The Supreme Personality of God-
head is the Supersoul of everyone, and He is by 
nature f ully pleased. Nonetheless, He came to 
the arena of Mahārāja Gaya and said, “I am 
fully pleased.”(13)  
In the womb of Gayantī, Mahārāja Gaya be-
got three sons, named Citraratha, Sugati and 
Avarodhana. In the womb of his wife Ūrṇā, 
Citraratha begot a son named  Samrāṭ. The wife 
of Samrāṭ was Utkalā, and in her womb Samrāṭ 
begot a son named Marīci. In the womb of his 
wife Bindumatī, Marīci begot a son named 
Bindu. In the womb of his wife Saraghā, Bindu 
begot a son named Madhu. In the womb of his 
wife named Sumanā , Madhu begot a son named 
Vīravrata. In the womb of his wife Bhojā, 
Vīravrata begot two sons named Manthu and 
Pramanthu. In the womb of his wife Satyā, 
Manthu begot a son named Bhauvana, and in 
the womb of his wife Dūṣaṇā, Bhauvana begot 
a son named Tvaṣṭā . In the womb of his wife 
Virocanā, Tvaṣṭā begot a son named Viraja. 
The wife of Viraja was Viṣūcī, and in her womb 
Viraja begot one hundred sons and one daugh-
ter. Of all these sons, the son named Śatajit was 
predominant. (14-15) There is a famous verse 
about King Viraja. “Because of his high quali-
ties and wide fame, King Viraja became the 
jewel of the dynasty of King Priyavrata, just as 
Lord Viṣṇu, by His transcendental potency, 
decorates and blesses the dem igods.” (16)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

321 
 SB 5.16: A Description of Jambūdvīpa  
King Parīkṣit said to Śukadeva Gosvāmī:  
O brāhmaṇa, you have already informed me 
that the radius of Bhū -maṇḍala extends as far 
as the sun spreads its light and heat and as far 
as the moon and all the stars can be seen. (1) My 
dear Lord, the rolling wheels of Mahārāja Pri-
yavrata’s chariot created seven ditches, in 
which the seven oceans came into existence. 
Because of these seven oceans, Bhū -maṇḍala is 
divided into seven islands. You have given a 
very general description of their measurement, 
names and characteristics. Now I wish to know 
of them in detail. Kindly fulfill my desire. (2) 
When the mind is fixed upon the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead in His external feature 
made of the material modes of naturethe g ross 
universal formit is brought to the platform of 
pure goodness. In that transcendental position, 
one can understand the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Vāsudeva, who in His subtler form is 
self-effulgent and beyond the modes of nature. 
O my lord, please  describe vividly how that 
form, which covers the entire universe, is per-
ceived. (3)  
The great ṛṣi Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  My 
dear King, there is no limit to the expansion of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s material 
energy. This material world is a tra nsformation 
of the material qualities [sattva -guṇa, rajo -guṇa 
and tamo -guṇa], yet no one could possibly ex-
plain it perfectly, even in a lifetime as long as 
that of Brahmā. No one in the material world is 
perfect, and an imperfect person could not de-
scribe this material universe accurately, even 
after continued speculation. O King, I shall 
nevertheless try to explain to you the principal 
regions, such as Bhūloka, with their names, 
forms, measurements and various symp-
toms. (4) The planetary system known as Bhū -
maṇḍala resembles a lotus flower, and its seven 
islands resemble the whorl of that flower. The 
length and breadth of the island known as 
Jambūdvīpa, which is situated in the middle of 
the whorl, are one million yojanas [eight mil-
lion miles]. Jambūdvīpa is  round like the leaf 
of a lotus flower. (5) In Jambūdvīpa there are 
nine divisions of land, each with a length of 9,000 yojanas [72,000 miles]. There are eight 
mountains that mark the boundaries of these di-
visions and separate them nicely. (6) Amidst 
these d ivisions, or varṣas, is the varṣa named 
Ilāvṛta, which is situated in the middle of the 
whorl of the lotus. Within Ilāvṛta -varṣa is Su-
meru Mountain, which is made of gold. Sumeru 
Mountain is like the pericarp of the lotuslike 
Bhū-maṇḍala planetary system. The moun-
tain’s height is the same as the width of 
Jambūdvīpaor, in other words, 100,000 yojanas 
[800,000 miles]. Of that, 16,000 yojanas 
[128,000 miles] are within the earth, and there-
fore the mountain’s height above the earth is 
84,000 yojanas [672,000 mi les]. The moun-
tain’s width is 32,000 yojanas [256,000 miles] 
at its summit and 16,000 yojanas at its base. (7) 
Just north of Ilāvṛta -varṣaand going further 
northward, one after anotherare three moun-
tains named Nīla, Śveta and Śṛṅgavān. These 
mark the border s of the three varṣas named Ra-
myaka, Hiraṇmaya and Kuru and separate them 
from one another. The width of these moun-
tains is 2,000 yojanas [16,000 miles]. Length-
wise, they extend east and west to the beaches 
of the ocean of salt water. Going from south to 
north, the length of each mountain is one tenth 
that of the previous mountain, but the height of 
them all is the same. (8)  
Similarly, south of Ilāvṛta -varṣa and extend-
ing from east to west are three great mountains 
named (from north to south) Niṣadha, He-
makūṭa and Himālaya. Each of them is 10,000 
yojanas [80,000 miles] high. They mark the 
boundaries of the three varṣas named Hari -
varṣa, Kimpuruṣa -varṣa and Bhārata -varṣa [In-
dia].(9) In the same way, west and east of 
Ilāvṛta -varṣa are two great mountains named  
Mālyavān and Gandhamādana respectively. 
These two mountains, which are 2,000 yojanas 
[16,000 miles] high, extend as far as Nīla 
Mountain in the north and Niṣadha in the south. 
They indicate the borders of Ilāvṛta -varṣa and 
also the varṣas known as Ketumāl a and 
Bhadrāśva. (10) On the four sides of the great 
mountain known as Sumeru are four moun-
tainsMandara, Merumandara, Supārśva and 
Kumudawhich are like its belts. The length and 
height of these mountains are calculated to be 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

322 
 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles]. (11) Standing 
like flagstaffs on the summits of these four 
mountains are a mango tree, a rose apple tree, a 
kadamba tree and a banyan tree. Those trees are 
calculated to have a width of 100 yojanas [800 
miles] and a height of 1,100 yojanas [8,800 
miles]. The ir branches also spread to a radius 
of 1,100 yojanas. (12) O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best 
of the Bharata dynasty, between these four 
mountains are four huge lakes. The water of the 
first tastes just like milk; the water of the sec-
ond, like honey; and that of the third, like sug-
arcane juice. The fourth lake is filled wi th pure 
water. The celestial beings such as the Siddhas, 
Cāraṇas and Gandharvas, who are also known 
as demigods, enjoy the facilities of those four 
lakes. Consequently they have the natural per-
fections of mystic yoga, such as the power to 
become smaller th an the smallest or greater 
than the greatest. There are also four celestial 
gardens named Nandana, Caitraratha, 
Vaibhrājaka and Sarvatobhadra. (13-14) The 
best of the demigods, along with their wives, 
who are like ornaments of heavenly beauty, 
meet together  and enjoy within those gardens, 
while their glories are sung by lesser demigods 
known as Gandharvas. (15)  
On the lower slopes of Mandara Mountain is 
a mango tree named Devacūta. It is 1,100 yoja-
nas high. Mangoes as big as mountain peaks 
and as sweet as ne ctar fall from the top of this 
tree for the enjoyment of the denizens of 
heaven. (16) When all those solid fruits fall 
from such a height, they break, and the sweet, 
fragrant juice within them flows out and be-
comes increasingly more fragrant as it mixes 
with other scents. That juice cascades from the 
mountain in waterfalls and becomes a river 
called Aruṇodā, which flows pleasantly 
through the eastern side of Ilāvṛta. (17) The pi-
ous wives of the Yakṣas act as personal maid-
servants to assist Bhavānī, the wife o f Lord 
Śiva. Because they drink the water of the river 
Aruṇodā, their bodies become fragrant, and as 
the air carries away that fragrance, it perfumes 
the entire atmosphere for eighty miles 
around. (18) Similarly, the fruits of the jambū 
tree, which are full  of pulp and have very small 
seeds, fall from a great height and break to pieces. Those fruits are the size of elephants, 
and the juice gliding from them becomes a river 
named Jambū -nadī. This river falls a distance 
of 10,000 yojanas, from the summit of Me-
rumandara to the southern side of Ilāvṛta, and 
floods the entire land of Ilāvṛta with juice. (19) 
The mud on both banks of the river Jambū -
nadī, being moistened by the flowing juice and 
then dried by the air and the sunshine, produces 
huge quantities of gol d called Jāmbū -nada. The 
denizens of heaven use this gold for various 
kinds of ornaments. Therefore all the inhabit-
ants of the heavenly planets and their youthful 
wives are fully decorated with golden helmets, 
bangles and belts, and thus they enjoy life. (20-
21) On the side of Supārśva Mountain stands a 
big tree called Mahākadamba, which is very 
celebrated. From the hollows of this tree flow 
five rivers of honey, each about five vyāmas 
wide. This flowing honey falls incessantly from 
the top of Supārśva Mount ain and flows all 
around Ilāvṛta -varṣa, beginning from the west-
ern side. Thus the whole land is saturated with 
the pleasing fragrance.  (22) The air carrying the 
scent from the mouths of those who drink that 
honey perfumes the land for a hundred yojanas 
around.(23)  
Similarly, on Kumuda Mountain there is a 
great banyan tree, which is called Śatavalśa be-
cause it has a hundred main branches. From 
those branches come many roots, from which 
many rivers are flowing. These rivers flow 
down from the top of the moun tain to the north-
ern side of Ilāvṛta -varṣa for the benefit of those 
who live there. Because of these flowing rivers, 
all the people have ample supplies of milk, yo-
gurt, honey, clarified butter [ghee], molasses, 
food grains, clothes, bedding, sitting places  and 
ornaments. All the objects they desire are suf-
ficiently supplied for their prosperity, and 
therefore they are very happy. (24) The resi-
dents of the material world who enjoy the prod-
ucts of these flowing rivers have no wrinkles on 
their bodies and no gr ey hair. They never feel 
fatigue, and perspiration does not give their 
bodies a bad odor. They are not afflicted by old 
age, disease or untimely death, they do not suf-
fer from chilly cold or scorching heat, nor do 
their bodies lose their luster. They all l ive very 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

323 
 happily, without anxieties, until death. (25)  
There are other mountains beautifully ar-
ranged around the foot of Mount Meru like the 
filaments around the whorl of a lotus flower. 
Their names are Kuraṅga, Kurara, Kusumbha, 
Vaikaṅka, Trikūṭa, Śiśira,  Pataṅga, Rucaka, 
Niṣadha, Sinīvāsa, Kapila, Śaṅkha, Vaidūrya, 
Jārudhi, Haṁsa, Ṛṣabha, Nāga, Kālañjara and 
Nārada. (26) On the eastern side of Sumeru 
Mountain are two mountains named Jaṭhara 
and Devakūṭa, which extend to the north and 
south for 18,000 yojan as [144,000 miles]. Sim-
ilarly, on the western side of Sumeru are two 
mountains named Pavana and Pāriyātra, which 
also extend north and south for the same dis-
tance. On the southern side of Sumeru are two 
mountains named Kailāsa and Karavīra, which 
extend ea st and west for 18,000 yojanas, and on 
the northern side of Sumeru, extending for the 
same distance east and west, are two mountains 
named Triśṛṅga and Makara. The width and 
height of all these mountains is 2,000 yojanas 
[16,000 miles]. Sumeru, a mountain of solid 
gold shining as brilliantly as fire, is surrounded 
by these eight mountains. (27) In the middle of 
the summit of Meru is the township of Lord 
Brahmā. Each of its four sides is calculated to 
extend for ten million yojanas [eighty million 
miles]. It is made entirely of gold, and therefore 
learned scholars and sages call it 
Śātakaumbhī. (28) Surrounding Brahmapurī in 
all directions are the residences of the eight 
principal governors of the planetary systems, 
beginning with King Indra. These abodes are 
similar to Brahmapurī but are one fourth the 
size.(29)  
SB 5.17: The Descent of the River Gan-
ges 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  My dear King, 
Lord Viṣṇu, the enjoyer of all sacrifices, ap-
peared as Vāmanadeva in the sacrificial arena 
of Bali Mahārāja. Then He extend ed His left 
foot to the end of the universe and pierced a 
hole in its covering with the nail of His big toe. 
Through the hole, the pure water of the Causal 
Ocean entered this universe as the Ganges 
River. Having washed the lotus feet of the 
Lord, which are  covered with reddish powder, the water of the Ganges acquired a very beauti-
ful pink color. Every living being can immedi-
ately purify his mind of material contamination 
by touching the transcendental water of the 
Ganges, yet its waters remain ever pure. Be-
cause the Ganges directly touches the lotus feet 
of the Lord before descending within this uni-
verse, she is known as Viṣṇupadī. Later she re-
ceived other names like Jāhnavī and 
Bhāgīrathī. After one thousand millenniums, 
the water of the Ganges descended to  Dhruva-
loka, the topmost planet in this universe. There-
fore all learned sages and scholars proclaim 
Dhruvaloka to be Viṣṇupada [“situated on Lord 
Viṣṇu’s lotus feet”]. (1) Dhruva Mahārāja, the 
famous son of Mahārāja Uttānapāda, is known 
as the most exalted devotee of the Supreme 
Lord because of his firm determination in exe-
cuting devotional service. Knowing that the sa-
cred Ganges water washes the lotus feet of Lord 
Viṣṇu, Dhruva Mahārāja, situated on his own 
planet, to this very day accepts that water on his  
head with great devotion. Because he con-
stantly thinks of Kṛṣṇa very devoutly within the 
core of his heart, he is overcome with ecstatic 
anxiety. Tears flow from his half -open eyes, 
and eruptions appear on his entire body. (2) The 
seven great sages [Marīci , Vasiṣṭha, Atri and so 
on] reside on planets beneath Dhruvaloka. Well 
aware of the influence of the water of the Gan-
ges, to this day they keep Ganges water on the 
tufts of hair on their heads. They have con-
cluded that this is the ultimate wealth, the per-
fection of all austerities, and the best means of 
prosecuting transcendental life. Having ob-
tained uninterrupted devotional service to the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, they neglect 
all other beneficial processes like religion, eco-
nomic development, sense  gratification and 
even merging into the Supreme. Just as jñānīs 
think that merging into the existence of the 
Lord is the highest truth, these seven exalted 
personalities accept devotional service as the 
perfection of life. (3) After purifying the seven 
planets near Dhruvaloka [the polestar], the 
Ganges water is carried through the spaceways 
of the demigods in billions of celestial air-
planes. Then it inundates the moon [Can-
draloka] and finally reaches Lord Brahmā’s 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

324 
 abode atop Mount Meru. (4)  
On top of Mount Meru, the Ganges divides 
into four branches, each of which gushes in a 
different direction [east, west, north and south]. 
These branches, known by the names Sītā, Ala-
kanandā, Cakṣu and Bhadrā, flow down to the 
ocean. (5) The branch of the Ganges known as 
the Sītā flows through Brahmapurī atop Mount 
Meru, and from there it runs down to the nearby 
peaks of the Kesarācala Mountains, which 
stand almost as high as Mount Meru itself. 
These mountains are like a bunch of filaments 
around Mount Meru. From the Kesarāc ala 
Mountains, the Ganges falls to the peak of 
Gandhamādana Mountain and then flows into 
the land of Bhadrāśva -varṣa. Finally it reaches 
the ocean of salt water in the west. (6) The 
branch of the Ganges known as Cakṣu falls 
onto the summit of Mālyavān Mount ain and 
from there cascades onto the land of Ketumāla -
varṣa. The Ganges flows incessantly through 
Ketumāla -varṣa and in this way also reaches 
the ocean of salt water in the west. (7) The 
branch of the Ganges known as Bhadrā flows 
from the northern side of M ount Meru. Its wa-
ters fall onto the peaks of Kumuda Mountain, 
Mount Nīla, Śveta Mountain and Śṛṅgavān 
Mountain in succession. Then it runs down into 
the province of Kuru and, after crossing 
through that land, flows into the saltwater 
ocean in the north. (8) Similarly, the branch of 
the Ganges known as Alakanandā flows from 
the southern side of Brahmapurī [Brahma -
sadana]. Passing over the tops of mountains in 
various lands, it falls down with fierce force 
upon the peaks of the mountains Hemakūṭa and 
Himakūṭa.  After inundating the tops of those 
mountains, the Ganges falls down onto the tract 
of land known as Bhārata -varṣa, which she also 
inundates. Then the Ganges flows into the 
ocean of salt water in the south. Persons who 
come to bathe in this river are fortu nate. It is 
not very difficult for them to achieve with every 
step the results of performing great sacrifices 
like the Rājasūya and Aśvamedha yajñas. (9) 
Many other rivers, both big and small, flow 
from the top of Mount Meru. These rivers are 
like daughters  of the mountain, and they flow 
to the various tracts of land in hundreds of branches. (10)  
Among the nine varṣas, the tract of land 
known as Bhārata -varṣa is understood to be the 
field of fruitive activities. Learned scholars and 
saintly persons declare t he other eight varṣas to 
be meant for very highly elevated pious per-
sons. After returning from the heavenly plan-
ets, they enjoy the remaining results of their pi-
ous activities in these eight earthly varṣas. (11) 
In these eight varṣas, or tracts of land, hum an 
beings live ten thousand years according to 
earthly calculations. All the inhabitants are al-
most like demigods. They have the bodily 
strength of ten thousand elephants. Indeed, 
their bodies are as sturdy as thunderbolts. The 
youthful duration of their l ives is very pleasing, 
and both men and women enjoy sexual union 
with great pleasure for a long time. After years 
of sensual pleasurewhen a balance of one year 
of life remainsthe wife conceives a child. Thus 
the standard of pleasure for the residents of 
these heavenly regions is exactly like that of the 
human beings who lived during Tretā -
yuga. (12) In each of those tracts of land, there 
are many gardens filled with flowers and fruits 
according to the season, and there are beauti-
fully decorated hermitages as  well. Between 
the great mountains demarcating the borders of 
those lands lie enormous lakes of clear water 
filled with newly grown lotus flowers. Aquatic 
birds such as swans, ducks, water chickens, and 
cranes become greatly excited by the fragrance 
of lot us flowers, and the charming sound of 
bumblebees fills the air. The inhabitants of 
those lands are important leaders among the 
demigods. Always attended by their respective 
servants, they enjoy life in gardens alongside 
the lakes. In this pleasing situatio n, the wives 
of the demigods smile playfully at their hus-
band s and look upon them with lusty desires. 
All the demigods and their wives are constantly 
supplied with sandalwood pulp and flower gar-
lands by their servants. In this way, all the res-
idents of the  eight heavenly varṣas enjoy, at-
tracted by the activities of the opposite sex. (13)  
To show mercy to His devotees in each of 
these nine tracts of land, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead known as Nārāyaṇa expands 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

325 
 Himself in His quadruple principles of 
Vāsu deva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and 
Aniruddha. In this way He remains near His 
devotees to accept their service. (14) Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī said: In the tract of land known as 
Ilāvṛta -varṣa, the only male person is Lord 
Śiva, the most powerful demigod. Goddess 
Durgā , the wife of Lord Śiva, does not like any 
man to enter that land. If any foolish man dares 
to do so, she immediately turns him into a 
woman. I shall explain this later [in the Ninth 
Canto  of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam]. (15) In Ilāvṛta -
varṣa, Lord Śiva is always en circled by ten bil-
lion maidservants of Goddess Durgā, who min-
ister to him. The quadruple expansion of the 
Supreme Lord is composed of Vāsudeva, Pra-
dyumna, Aniruddha and Saṅkarṣaṇa. 
Saṅkarṣaṇa, the fourth expansion, is certainly 
transcendental, but because His activities of de-
struction in the material world are in the mode 
of ignorance, He is known as tāmasī, the Lord’s 
form in the mode of ignorance. Lord Śiva 
knows that Saṅkarṣaṇa is the original cause of 
his own existence, and thus he always medi-
tates upon  Him in trance by chanting the fol-
lowing mantra. (16) 
The most powerful Lord Śiva says: O Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You in Your expan-
sion as Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. You are the reservoir 
of all transcendental qualities. Although You 
are unlimited, You remain unmanifest to the 
nondevotees. (17) O my Lord, You are the only 
worshipable person, for You are the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all op-
ulences. Your secure lotus feet are the only 
source of protecti on for all Your devotees, 
whom You satisfy by manifesting Yourself in 
various forms. O my Lord, You deliver Your 
devotees from the clutches of material exist-
ence. Nondevotees, however, remain entangled 
in material existence by Your will. Kindly ac-
cept me a s Your eternal servant. (18) We cannot 
control the force of our anger. Therefore when 
we look at material things, we cannot avoid 
feeling attraction or repulsion for them. But the 
Supreme Lord is never affected in this way. 
Although He glances over the mate rial world for the purpose of creating, maintaining and de-
stroying it, He is not affected, even to the 
slightest degree. Therefore, one who desires to 
conquer the force of the senses must take shel-
ter of the lotus feet of the Lord. Then he will be 
victorio us.(19) For persons with impure vision, 
the Supreme Lord’s eyes appear like those of 
someone who indiscriminately drinks intoxi-
cating beverages. Thus bewildered, such unin-
telligent persons become angry at the Supreme 
Lord, and due to their angry mood the L ord 
Himself appears angry and very fearful. How-
ever, this is an illusion. When the wives of the 
serpent demon were agitated by the touch of the 
Lord’s lotus feet, due to shyness they could 
proceed no further in their worship of Him. Yet 
the Lord remained u nagitated by their touch, 
for He is equipoised in all circumstances. 
Therefore who will not worship the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead? (20) Lord Śiva contin-
ued: All the great sages accept the Lord as the 
source of creation, maintenance and destruc-
tion, alt hough He actually has nothing to do 
with these activities. Therefore the Lord is 
called unlimited. Although the Lord in His in-
carnation as Śeṣa holds all the universes on His 
hoods, each universe feels no heavier than a 
mustard seed to Him. Therefore, what  person 
desiring perfection will not worship the 
Lord? (21) From that Supreme Personality of 
Godhead appears Lord Brahmā, whose body is 
made from the total material energy, the reser-
voir of intelligence predominated by the pas-
sionate mode of material nature . From Lord 
Brahmā, I myself am born as a representation 
of false ego known as Rudra. By my own power 
I create all the other demigods, the five ele-
ments and the senses. Therefore, I worship the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is 
greater than any of us and under whose control 
are situated all the demigods, material elements 
and senses, and even Lord Brahmā and I my-
self, like birds bound by a rope. Only by the 
Lord’s grace can we create, maintain and anni-
hilate the material world. Therefore I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Be-
ing.(22-23) The illusory energy of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead binds all of us condi-
tioned souls to this material world. Therefore, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

326 
 without being favored by Him, persons like us 
cannot understand how to get out of that illu-
sory energy. Let me offer my respectful obei-
sances unto the Lord, who is the cause of crea-
tion and annihilation. (24)  
SB 5.18: T he Prayers Offered to the 
Lord by the Residents of Jambūdvīpa  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Bhadraśravā, 
the son of Dharmarāja, rules the tract of land 
known as Bhadrāśva -varṣa. Just as Lord Śiva 
worships Saṅkarṣaṇa in Ilāvṛta -varṣa, 
Bhadraśravā, accompanied b y his intimate 
servants and all the residents of the land, wor-
ships the plenary expansion of Vāsudeva 
known as Hayaśīrṣa. Lord Hayaśīrṣa is very 
dear to the devotees, and He is the director of 
all religious principles. Fixed in the topmost 
trance, Bhadraśr avā and his associates offer 
their respectful obeisances to the Lord and 
chant the following prayers with careful pro-
nunciation. (1)  
The ruler Bhadraśravā and his intimate 
associates utter the following prayer:  We of-
fer our respectful obeisances unto the S upreme 
Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all re-
ligious principles, who cleanses the heart of the 
conditioned soul in this material world. Again 
and again we offer our respectful obeisances 
unto Him. (2) Alas! How wonderful it is that the 
foolish mate rialist does not heed the great dan-
ger of impending death! He knows that death 
will surely come, yet he is nevertheless callous 
and neglectful. If his father dies, he wants to 
enjoy his father’s property, and if his son dies, 
he wants to enjoy his son’s po ssessions as well. 
In either case, he heedlessly tries to enjoy ma-
terial happiness with the acquired money. (3) O 
unborn one, learned Vedic scholars who are ad-
vanced in spiritual knowledge certainly know 
that this material world is perishable, as do 
other l ogicians and philosophers. In trance they 
realize the factual position of this world, and 
they preach the truth as well. Yet even they are 
sometimes bewildered by Your illusory energy. 
This is Your own wonderful pastime. There-
fore, I can understand that Yo ur illusory energy 
is very wonderful, and I offer my respectful 
obeisances unto You. (4) O Lord, although You are completely detached from the creation, 
maintenance and annihilation of this material 
world and are not directly affected by these ac-
tivities, t hey are all attributed to You. We do 
not wonder at this, for Your inconceivable en-
ergies perfectly qualify You to be the cause of 
all causes. You are the active principle in eve-
rything, although You are separate from every-
thing. Thus we can realize that ev erything is 
happening because of Your inconceivable en-
ergy. (5) At the end of the millennium, igno-
rance personified assumed the form of a de-
mon, stole all the Vedas and took them down to 
the planet of Rasātala. The Supreme Lord, 
however, in His form of Haya grīva retrieved 
the Vedas and returned them to Lord Brahmā 
when he begged for them. I offer my respectful 
obeisances unto the Supreme Lord, whose de-
termination never fails. (6) 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear 
King, Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva resides in the tract of 
land known as Hari -varṣa. In the Seventh Canto  
of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, I shall describe to you 
how Prahlāda Mahārāja caused the Lord to as-
sume the form of Nṛsiṁhadeva. Prahlāda 
Mahārāja, the topmost devotee of the Lord, is a 
reservoir of all the good qual ities of great per-
sonalities. His character and activities have de-
livered all the fallen members of his demoniac 
family. Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva is very dear to this 
exalted personality. Thus Prahlāda Mahārāja, 
along with his servants and all the denizens of 
Hari-varṣa, worships Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva by 
chanting the following mantra. (7) I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, 
the source of all power. O my Lord who possess 
nails and teeth just like thunderbolts, kindly 
vanquish our demonlike desires for fruitive ac-
tivity in this material world. Please appear in 
our hearts and drive away our ignorance so that 
by Your mercy we may become fearless in the 
struggle for existence in this material world. (8)  
May there be good fortune throughout the 
universe, and  may all envious persons be paci-
fied. May all living entities become calm by 
practicing bhakti -yoga, for by accepting devo-
tional service they will think of each other’s 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

327 
 welfare. Therefore let us all engage in the ser-
vice of the supreme transcendence, Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, and always remain absorbed in thought 
of Him. (9) My dear Lord, we pray that we may 
never feel attraction for the prison of family 
life, consisting of home, wife, children, friends, 
bank balance, relatives and so on. If we do have 
some attachment , let it be for devotees, whose 
only dear friend is Kṛṣṇa. A person who is ac-
tually self -realized and who has controlled his 
mind is perfectly satisfied with the bare neces-
sities of life. He does not try to gratify his 
senses. Such a person quickly advance s in 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, whereas others, who are 
too attached to material things, find advance-
ment very difficult. (10) By associating with 
persons for whom the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Mukunda, is the all in all, one can 
hear of His powerful activi ties and soon come 
to understand them. The activities of Mukunda 
are so potent that simply by hearing of them 
one immediately associates with the Lord. For 
a person who constantly and very eagerly hears 
narrations of the Lord’s powerful activities, the 
Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead in 
the form of sound vibrations, enters within his 
heart and cleanses it of all contamination. On 
the other hand, although bathing in the Ganges 
diminishes bodily contaminations and infec-
tions, this process and the p rocess of visiting 
holy places can cleanse the heart only after a 
long time. Therefore who is the sane man who 
will not associate with devotees to quickly per-
fect his life? (11) All the demigods and their ex-
alted qualities, such as religion, knowledge and 
renunciation, become manifest in the body of 
one who has developed unalloyed devotion fo r 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Vāsudeva. On the other hand, a person devoid 
of devotional service and engaged in material 
activities has no good qualities. Even if he is 
adept at the practice of mystic yoga or the hon-
est endeavor of maintaining his family and rel-
atives, he must be driven by his own mental 
speculations and must engage in the service of 
the Lord’s external energy. How can there be 
any good qualities in such a man? (12) Just as 
aquatics always desire to remain in the vast 
mass of water, all conditioned living entities naturally desire to remain in the vast existence 
of the Supreme Lord. Therefore if someone 
very great by material calculations fails to take 
shelter of the Supreme Soul but instead be-
comes attached to material household life , his 
greatness is like that of a young, low -class cou-
ple. One who is too attached to material life 
loses all good spiritual qualities. (13) Therefore, 
O demons, give up the so -called happiness of 
family life and simply take shelter of the lotus 
feet of Lor d Nṛsiṁhadeva, which are the actual 
shelter of fearlessness. Entanglement in family 
life is the root cause of material attachment, in-
defatigable desires, moroseness, anger, despair, 
fear and the desire for false prestige, all of 
which result in the repetit ion of birth and 
death. (14)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: In the tract of 
land called Ketumāla -varṣa, Lord Viṣṇu lives 
in the form of Kāmadeva, only for the satisfac-
tion of His devotees. These include Lakṣmījī 
[the goddess of fortune], the Prajāpati 
Saṁvats ara and all of Saṁvatsara’s sons and 
daughters. The daughters of Prajāpati are con-
sidered the controlling deities of the nights, and 
his sons are considered the controllers of the 
days. The Prajāpati’s offspring number 36,000, 
one for each day and each nig ht in the lifetime 
of a human being. At the end of each year, the 
Prajāpati’s daughters become very agitated 
upon seeing the extremely effulgent disc of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus they 
all suffer miscarriages. (15)  
In Ketumāla -varṣa, Lord  Kāmadeva [Pra-
dyumna] moves very graciously. His mild 
smile is very beautiful, and when He increases 
the beauty of His face by slightly raising His 
eyebrows and glancing playfully, He pleases 
the goddess of fortune. Thus He enjoys His 
transcendental senses .(16) Accompanied dur-
ing the daytime by the sons of the Prajāpati [the 
predominating deities of the days] and accom-
panied at night by his daughters [the deities of 
the nights], Lakṣmīdevī worships the Lord dur-
ing the period known as the Saṁvatsara in His 
most merciful form as Kāmadeva. Fully ab-
sorbed in devotional service, she chants the fol-
lowing mantras. (17) Let me offer my respectful 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

328 
 obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Lord Hṛṣīkeśa, the controller of all 
my senses and the origin of every thing. As the 
supreme master of all bodily, mental and intel-
lectual activities, He is the only enjoyer of their 
results. The five sense objects and eleven 
senses, including the mind, are His partial man-
ifestations. He supplies all the necessities of 
life, which are His energy and thus nondifferent 
from Him, and He is the cause of everyone’s 
bodily and mental prowess, which is also non-
different from Him. Indeed, He is the husband  
and provider of necessities for all living enti-
ties. The purpose of all the Ved as is to worship 
Him. Therefore let us all offer Him our respect-
ful obeisances. May He always be favorable to-
ward us in this life and the next. (18)  
My dear Lord, You are certainly the fully in-
dependent master of all the senses. Therefore 
all women who wor ship You by strictly observ-
ing vows because they wish to acquire a hus-
band  to satisfy their senses are surely under il-
lusion. They do not know that such a husband  
cannot actually give protection to them or their 
children. Nor can he protect their wealth or  du-
ration of life, for he himself is dependent on 
time, fruitive results and the modes of nature, 
which are all subordinate to You. (19) He alone 
who is never afraid but who, on the contrary, 
gives complete shelter to all fearful persons can 
actually become  a husband  and protector. 
Therefore, my Lord, You are the only husband , 
and no one else can claim this position. If You 
were not the only husband , You would be 
afraid of others. Therefore persons learned in 
all Vedic literature accept only Your Lordship 
as everyone’s master, and they think no one 
else a better husband  and protector than 
You. (20) My dear Lord, You automatically ful-
fill all the desires of a woman who worships 
Your lotus feet in pure love. However, if a 
woman worships Your lotus feet for a par ticu-
lar purpose, You also quickly fulfill her desires, 
but in the end she becomes broken -hearted and 
laments. Therefore one need not worship Your 
lotus feet for some material benefit. (21) O su-
preme unconquerable Lord, when they become 
absorbed in thoughts of material enjoyment, 
Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, as well as other demigods and demons, undergo severe pen-
ances and austerities to receive my benedic-
tions. But I do not favor anyone, however great 
he may be, unless he is always engaged in the 
service of Yo ur lotus feet. Because I always 
keep You within my heart, I cannot favor any-
one but a devotee. (22) O infallible one, Your 
lotus palm is the source of all benediction. 
Therefore Your pure devotees worship it, and 
You very mercifully place Your hand on their  
heads. I wish that You may also place Your 
hand on My head, for although You already 
bear my insignia of golden streaks on Your 
chest, I regard this honor as merely a kind of 
false prestige for me. You show Your real 
mercy to Your devotees, not to me. Of course, 
You are the supreme absolute controller, and no 
one can understand Your motives. (23)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: In Ramyaka -
varṣa, where Vaivasvata Manu rules, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead appeared as 
Lord Matsya at the end of the last era [ the 
Cākṣuṣa -manvantara]. Vaivasvata Manu now 
worships Lord Matsya in pure devotional ser-
vice and chants the following mantra. (24) I of-
fer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is pure transcend-
ence. He is the origin of all l ife, bodily strength, 
mental power and sensory ability. Known as 
Matsyāvatāra, the gigantic fish incarnation, He 
appears first among all the incarnations. Again 
I offer my obeisances unto Him. (25)  
My dear Lord, just as a puppeteer controls 
his dancing dol ls and a husband  controls his 
wife, Your Lordship controls all the living en-
tities in the universe, such as the brāhmaṇas, 
kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras. Although You 
are in everyone’s heart as the supreme witness 
and commander and are outside everyone as 
well, the so -called leaders of societies, commu-
nities and countries cannot realize You. Only 
those who hear the vibration of the Vedic man-
tras can appreciate You. (26) My Lord, from the 
great leaders of the universe, such as Lord 
Brahmā and other demigods, down to the polit-
ical leaders of this world, all are envious of 
Your authority. Without Your help, however, 
they could neither separately nor concertedly 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

329 
 maintain the innumerable living entities within 
the universe. You are actually the only main-
tainer of all human beings, of animals like cows 
and asses, and of plants, reptiles, birds, moun-
tains and whatever else is visible within this 
material world. (27) O almighty Lord, at the end 
of the millennium this planet earth, which is the 
source of all kinds of he rbs, drugs and trees, 
was inundated by water and drowned beneath 
the devastating waves. At that time, You pro-
tected me along with the earth and roamed the 
sea with great speed. O unborn one, You are the 
actual maintainer of the entire universal crea-
tion, a nd therefore You are the cause of all liv-
ing entities. I offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You. (28)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: In 
Hiraṇmaya -varṣa, the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, 
lives in the form of a tortoise [kūrma -śarīra]. 
This most dear and beautiful form is always 
worshiped there in devotional service by Ary-
amā, the chief resident of Hiraṇmaya -varṣa, 
along with the other inhabitants of that land. 
They chant the following hymns. (29) O my 
Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
You, who have assumed the form of a tortoise. 
You are the reservoir of all transcendental qual-
ities, and being entirely untinge d by matter, 
You are perfectly situated in pure goodness. 
You move here and there in the water, but no 
one can discern Your position. Therefore I of-
fer my respectful obeisances unto You. Be-
cause of Your transcendental position, You are 
not limited by past,  present and future. You are 
present everywhere as the shelter of all things, 
and therefore I offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You again and again. (30)  
My dear Lord, this visible cosmic manifes-
tation is a demonstration of Your own creative 
energy. Sinc e the countless varieties of forms 
within this cosmic manifestation are simply a 
display of Your external energy, this virāṭ -rūpa 
[universal body] is not Your real form. Except 
for a devotee in transcendental consciousness, 
no one can perceive Your actual form. There-
fore I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
You. (31) My dear Lord, You manifest Your 
different energies in countless forms: as living entities born from wombs, from eggs and from 
perspiration; as plants and trees that grow out 
of the earth; as al l living entities, both moving 
and standing, including the demigods, the 
learned sages and the pitās; as outer space, as 
the higher planetary system containing the 
heavenly planets, and as the planet earth with 
its hills, rivers, seas, oceans and islands. In-
deed, all the stars and planets are simply mani-
festations of Your different energies, but origi-
nally You are one without a second. Therefore 
there is nothing beyond You. This entire cos-
mic manifestation is therefore not false but is 
simply a temporary ma nifestation of Your in-
conceivable energy. (32) O my Lord, Your 
name, form and bodily features are expanded in 
countless forms. No one can determine exactly 
how many forms exist, yet You Yourself, in 
Your incarnation as the learned scholar Ka-
piladeva, have a nalyzed the cosmic manifesta-
tion as containing twenty -four elements. There-
fore if one is interested in Sāṅkhya philosophy, 
by which one can enumerate the different 
truths, he must hear it from You. Unfortunately, 
nondevotees simply count the different ele-
ments and remain ignorant of Your actual form. 
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You. (33) 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Dear King, the Su-
preme Lord in His boar incarnation, who ac-
cepts all sacrificial offerings, lives in the north-
ern part of Jambūdvīpa. There,  in the tract of 
land known as Uttarakuru -varṣa, mother earth 
and all the other inhabitants worship Him with 
unfailing devotional service by repeatedly 
chanting the following Upaniṣadic mantra. (34) 
O Lord, we offer our respectful obeisances unto 
You as the  gigantic person. Simply by chanting 
mantras, we shall be able to understand You 
fully. You are yajña [sacrifice], and You are the 
kratu [ritual]. Therefore all the ritualistic cere-
monies of sacrifice are part of Your transcen-
dental body, and You are the o nly enjoyer of all 
sacrifices. Your form is composed of transcen-
dental goodness. You are known as tri -yuga be-
cause in Kali -yuga You appeared as a con-
cealed incarnation and because You always 
fully possess the three pairs of opulences. (35)  
By manipulating a fire -generating stick, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

330 
 great saints and sages can bring forth the fire 
lying dormant within wood. In the same way, 
O Lord, those expert in understanding the Ab-
solute Truth try to see You in everythingeven 
in their own bodies. Yet you remain concealed. 
You are not to be understood by indirect pro-
cesses involving mental or physical activities. 
Because You are self -manifested, only when 
You see that a person is wholeheartedly en-
gaged in searching for You do You reveal 
Yourself. Therefore I offer my respectfu l obei-
sances unto You. (36) The objects of material 
enjoyment [sound, form, taste, touch and 
smell], the activities of the senses, the control-
lers of sensory activities [the demigods], the 
body, eternal time and egotism are all creations 
of Your material en ergy. Those whose intelli-
gence has become fixed by perfect execution of 
mystic yoga can see that all these elements re-
sult from the actions of Your external energy. 
They can also see Your transcendental form as 
Supersoul in the background of everything. 
Therefore I repeatedly offer my respectful obei-
sances unto You. (37) O Lord, You do not de-
sire the creation, maintenance or annihilation of 
this material world, but You perform these ac-
tivities for the conditioned souls by Your crea-
tive energy. Exactly as a p iece of iron moves 
under the influence of a lodestone, inert matter 
moves when You glance over the total material 
energy. (38) My Lord, as the original boar 
within this universe, You fought and killed the 
great demon Hiraṇyakṣa. Then You lifted me 
[the earth] from the Garbhodaka Ocean on the 
end of Your tusk, exactly as a sporting elephant 
plucks a lotus flower from the water. I b ow 
down before You. (39)  
SB 5.19: A Description of the Island of 
Jambūdvīpa  
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear 
King, in Kimpuruṣa -varṣa the great devotee 
Hanumān is always engaged with the inhabit-
ants of that land in devotional service to Lord 
Rāmacandra , the elder brother of Lakṣmaṇa 
and dear husband  of Sītādevī. (1) A host of 
Gandharvas is always engaged in chanting the 
glories of Lord Rāmacandra. That chanting is 
always extremely auspicious. Hanumānjī and Arṣṭiṣeṇa, the chief person in Kimpuruṣa -varṣa, 
constantly hear those glories with complete at-
tention. Hanumān chants the following man-
tras.(2) Let me please Your Lordship by chant-
ing the bīja -mantra oṁkāra. I wish to offer my 
respectful obeisances unto the Personality of 
Godhead, who is the best among the most 
highly elevated personalities. Your Lordship is 
the reservoir of all the good qualities of Āryans, 
people who are advanced. Your character and 
behavior are always consistent, and You al-
ways control Your senses and mind. Acting just 
like an ordinar y human being, You exhibit ex-
emplary character to teach others how to be-
have. There is a touchstone that can be used to 
examine the quality of gold, but You are like a 
touchstone that can verify all good qualities. 
You are worshiped by brāhmaṇas who are th e 
foremost of all devotees. You, the Supreme 
Person, are the King of kings, and therefore I 
offer my respectful obeisances unto You. (3)  
The Lord, whose pure form [sac -cid-
ānanda -vigraha] is uncontaminated by the 
modes of material nature, can be perceived by 
pure consciousness. In the Vedānta He is de-
scribed as being one without a second. Because 
of His spiritual potency, He is untouched by the 
contamination of material nature, and because 
He is not subjected to material vision, He is 
known as transcendenta l. He has no material 
activities, nor has He a material form or name. 
Only in pure consciousness, Kṛṣṇa conscious-
ness, can one perceive the transcendental form 
of the Lord. Let us be firmly fixed at the lotus 
feet of Lord Rāmacandra, and let us offer our 
respectful obeisances unto those transcendental 
lotus feet. (4) It was ordained that Rāvaṇa, chief 
of the Rākṣasas, could not be killed by anyone 
but a man, and for this reason Lord Rāmacan-
dra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ap-
peared in the form of a hu man being. Lord 
Rāmacandra’s mission, however, was not only 
to kill Rāvaṇa but also to teach mortal beings 
that material happiness centered around sex life 
or centered around one’s wife is the cause of 
many miseries. He is the self -sufficient Su-
preme Perso nality of Godhead, and nothing is 
lamentable for Him. Therefore why else could 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

331 
 He be subjected to tribulations by the kidnap-
ping of mother Sītā? (5) Since Lord Śrī 
Rāmacandra is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Vāsudeva, He is not attached to any-
thing in  this material world. He is the most be-
loved Supersoul of all self -realized souls, and 
He is their very intimate friend. He is full of all 
opulences. Therefore He could not possibly 
have suffered because of separation from His 
wife, nor could He have given  up His wife and 
Lakṣmaṇa, His younger brother. To give up ei-
ther would have been absolutely impossible. (6) 
One cannot establish a friendship with the Su-
preme Lord Rāmacandra on the basis of mate-
rial qualities such as one’s birth in an aristo-
cratic family,  one’s personal beauty, one’s elo-
quence, one’s sharp intelligence or one’s supe-
rior race or nation. None of these qualifications 
is actually a prerequisite for friendship with 
Lord Śrī Rāmacandra. Otherwise how is it pos-
sible that although we uncivilized i nhabitants 
of the forest have not taken noble births, alt-
hough we have no physical beauty and alt-
hough we cannot speak like gentlemen, Lord 
Rāmacandra has nevertheless accepted us as 
friends? (7) Therefore, whether one is a demi-
god or a demon, a man or a cr eature other than 
man, such as a beast or bird, everyone should 
worship Lord Rāmacandra, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who appears on this earth 
just like a human being. There is no need of 
great austerities or penances to worship the 
Lord, for He ac cepts even a small service of-
fered by His devotee. Thus He is satisfied, and 
as soon as He is satisfied, the devotee is suc-
cessful. Indeed, Lord Śrī Rāmacandra brought 
all the devotees of Ayodhyā back home, back 
to Godhead [Vaikuṇṭha]. (8)  
[Śukadeva Gosvām ī continued:] The glories 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are in-
conceivable. He has appeared in the form of 
Nara -Nārāyaṇa in the land of Bhārata -varṣa, at 
the place known as Badarikāśrama, to favor His 
devotees by teaching them religion, 
knowledge, r enunciation, spiritual power, 
sense control and freedom from false ego. He 
is advanced in the opulence of spiritual assets, 
and He engages in executing austerity until the 
end of this millennium. This is the process of self-realization. (9) In his own book,  known as 
Nārada Pañcarātra, Bhagavān Nārada has very 
vividly described how to work to achieve the 
ultimate goal of lifedevotionthrough 
knowledge and through execution of the mystic 
yoga system. He has also described the glories 
of the Lord, the Supreme Pe rsonality of God-
head. The great sage Nārada instructed the ten-
ets of this transcendental literature to Sāvarṇi 
Manu in order to teach those inhabitants of 
Bhārata -varṣa who strictly follow the principles 
of varṇāśrama -dharma how to achieve the de-
votional s ervice of the Lord. Thus Nārada 
Muni, along with the other inhabitants of 
Bhārata -varṣa, always engages in the service of 
Nara -Nārāyaṇa, and he chants as follows. (10) 
Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto 
Nara -Nārāyaṇa, the best of all saintly persons , 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the 
most self -controlled and self -realized, He is 
free from false prestige, and He is the asset of 
persons who have no material possessions. He 
is the spiritual master of all paramahaṁsas, 
who are the most exalte d human beings, and He 
is the master of the self -realized. Let me offer 
my repeated obeisances at His lotus feet. (11) 
Nārada, the most powerful saintly sage, also 
worships Nara -Nārāyaṇa by chanting the fol-
lowing mantra: The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead i s the master of the creation, mainte-
nance and annihilation of this visible cosmic 
manifestation, yet He is completely free from 
false prestige. Although to the foolish He ap-
pears to have accepted a material body like us, 
He is unaffected by bodily tribulat ions like 
hunger, thirst and fatigue. Although He is the 
witness who sees everything, His senses are un-
polluted by the objects He sees. Let me offer 
my respectful obeisances unto that unattached, 
pure witness of the world, the Supreme Soul, 
the Personality  of Godhead. (12) O my Lord, 
master of all mystic yoga, this is the explana-
tion of the yogic process spoken of by Lord 
Brahmā [Hiraṇyagarbha], who is self -realized. 
At the time of death, all yogīs give up the ma-
terial body with full detachment simply by 
placing their minds at Your lotus feet. That is 
the perfection of yoga. (13) Materialists are 
generally very attached to their present bodily 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

332 
 comforts and to the bodily comforts they expect 
in the future. Therefore they are always ab-
sorbed in thoughts of their  wives, children and 
wealth and are afraid of giving up their bodies, 
which are full of stool and urine. If a person en-
gaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, however, is also 
afraid of giving up his body, what is the use of 
his having labored to study the śāstras? It was 
simply a waste of time. (14) Therefore, O Lord, 
O Transcendence, kindly help us by giving us 
the power to execute bhakti -yoga so that we can 
control our restless minds and fix them upon 
You. We are all infected by Your illusory en-
ergy; therefore we a re very attached to the 
body, which is full of stool and urine, and to 
anything related with the body. Except for de-
votional service, there is no way to give up this 
attachment. Therefore kindly bestow upon us 
this benediction. (15)  
In the tract of land kn own as Bhārata -varṣa, 
as in Ilāvṛta -varṣa, there are many mountains 
and rivers. Some of the mountains are known 
as Malaya, Maṅgala -prastha, Maināka, Trikūṭa, 
Ṛṣabha, Kūṭaka, Kollaka, Sahya, Devagiri, 
Ṛṣyamūka, Śrī -śaila, Veṅkaṭa, Mahendra, 
Vāridhāra, Vindh ya, Śuktimān, Ṛkṣagiri, Pāri-
yātra, Droṇa, Citrakūṭa, Govardhana, Rai-
vataka, Kakubha, Nīla, Gokāmukha, Indrakīla 
and Kāmagiri. Besides these, there are many 
other hills, with many large and small rivers 
flowing from their slopes. (16) Two of the riv-
ersthe Br ahmaputra and the Śoṇaare called na-
das, or main rivers. These are other great rivers 
that are very prominent: Candravasā, 
Tāmraparṇī, Avaṭodā, Kṛtamālā, Vaihāyasī, 
Kāverī, Veṇī, Payasvinī, Śarkarāvartā, 
Tuṅgabhadrā, Kṛṣṇāveṇyā, Bhīmarathī, 
Godāvarī, Nirvin dhyā, Payoṣṇī, Tāpī, Revā, 
Surasā, Narmadā, Carmaṇvatī, Mahānadī, Ve-
dasmṛti, Ṛṣikulyā, Trisāmā, Kauśikī, Man-
dākinī, Yamunā, Sarasvatī, Dṛṣadvatī, Gomatī, 
Sarayū, Rodhasvatī, Saptavatī, Suṣomā, Śa-
tadrū, Candrabhāgā, Marudvṛdhā, Vitastā, 
Asiknī and Viśvā. Th e inhabitants of Bhārata -
varṣa are purified because they always remem-
ber these rivers. Sometimes they chant the 
names of these rivers as mantras, and some-
times they go directly to the rivers to touch 
them and bathe in them. Thus the inhabitants of Bhārata -varṣa become purified. (17-18) The 
people who take birth in this tract of land are 
divided according to the qualities of material 
naturethe modes of goodness [sattva -guṇa], 
passion [rajo -guṇa], and ignorance [tamo -
guṇa]. Some of them are born as exalted per-
sonalities, some are ordinary human beings, 
and some are extremely abominable, for in 
Bhārata -varṣa one takes birth exactly according 
to one’s past karma. If one’s position is ascer-
tained by a bona fide spiritual master and one 
is properly trained to engag e in the service of 
Lord Viṣṇu according to the four social divi-
sions [brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra] 
and the four spiritual divisions [brahmacārī, 
gṛhastha, vānaprastha and sannyāsa], one’s life 
becomes perfect. (19) After many, many births, 
when th e results of one’s pious activities ma-
ture, one gets an opportunity to associate with 
pure devotees. Then one is able to cut the knot 
of bondage to ignorance, which bound him be-
cause of varied fruitive activities. As a result of 
associating with devotees, one gradually ren-
ders service to Lord Vāsudeva, who is transcen-
dental, free from attachment to the material 
world, beyond the mind and words, and inde-
pendent of everything else. That bhakti -yoga, 
devotional service to Lord Vāsudeva, is the real 
path of lib eration. (20) Since the human form of 
life is the sublime position for spiritual realiza-
tion, all the demigods in heaven speak in this 
way: How wonderful it is for these human be-
ings to have been born in the land of Bhārata -
varṣa. They must have executed pi ous acts of 
austerity in the past, or the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead Himself must have been pleased 
with them. Otherwise, how could they engage 
in devotional service in so many ways? We 
demigods can only aspire to achieve human 
births in Bhārata -varṣa to execute devotional 
service, but these human beings are already en-
gaged there. (21) The demigods continue: After 
performing the very difficult tasks of executing 
Vedic ritualistic sacrifices, undergoing austeri-
ties, observing vows and giving charity, we 
have achieved this position as inhabitants of the 
heavenly planets. But what is the value of this 
achievement? Here we are certainly very en-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

333 
 gaged in material sense gratification, and there-
fore we can hardly remember the lotus feet of 
Lord Nārāyaṇa. Indeed, because of our exces-
sive sense gratification, we have almost forgot-
ten His lotus feet. (22) A short life in the land of 
Bharata -varṣa is preferable to a life achieved in 
Brahmaloka for millions and billions of years 
because even if one is elevated to Brahma loka, 
he must return to repeated birth and death. Alt-
hough life in Bhārata -varṣa, in a lower plane-
tary system, is very short, one who lives there 
can elevate himself to full Kṛṣṇa consciousness 
and achieve the highest perfection, even in this 
short life, b y fully surrendering unto the lotus 
feet of the Lord. Thus one attains 
Vaikuṇṭhaloka, where there is neither anxiety 
nor repeated birth in a material body. (23)  
An intelligent person does not take interest 
in a place, even in the topmost planetary sys-
tem, if the pure Ganges of topics concerning the 
Supreme Lord’s activities does not flow there, 
if there are not devotees engaged in service on 
the banks of such a river of piety, or if there are 
no festivals of saṅkīrtana -yajña to satisfy the 
Lord [especially since saṅkīrtana -yajña is rec-
ommended in this age]. (24) Bhārata -varṣa of-
fers the proper land and circumstances in which 
to execute devotional service, which can free 
one from the results of Jnana  and karma. If one 
obtains a human body in the land of Bhārat a-
varṣa, with clear sensory organs with which to 
execute the saṅkīrtana -yajña, but in spite of this 
opportunity he does not take to devotional ser-
vice, he is certainly like liberated forest animals 
and birds that are careless and are therefore 
again bound by a hunter. (25) 
In India [Bhārata -varṣa], there are many 
worshipers of the demigods, the various offi-
cials appointed by the Supreme Lord, such as 
Indra, Candra and Sūrya, all of whom are wor-
shiped differently. The worshipers offer the 
demigods their oblat ions, considering the dem-
igods part and parcel of the whole, the Supreme 
Lord. Therefore the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead accepts these offerings and gradually 
raises the worshipers to the real standard of de-
votional service by fulfilling their desires a nd 
aspirations. Because the Lord is complete, He offers the worshipers the benedictions they de-
sire even if they worship only part of His tran-
scendental body. (26) The Supreme Personality 
of Godhead fulfills the material desires of a 
devotee who approaches Him with such mo-
tives, but He does not bestow benedictions 
upon the devotee that will cause him to demand 
more benedictions again. However, the Lord 
willingly gives the devotee shelter at His own 
lotus feet, even though such a person does not 
aspire for it , and that shelter satisfies all his de-
sires. That is the Supreme Personality’s special 
mercy. (27)  
We are now living in the heavenly planets, 
undoubtedly as a result of our having per-
formed ritualistic ceremonies, pious activities 
and yajñas and having st udied the Vedas. How-
ever, our lives here will one day be finished. 
We pray that at that time, if any merit remains 
from our pious activities, we may again take 
birth in Bhārata -varṣa as human beings able to 
remember the lotus feet of the Lord. The Lord 
is so kind that He personally comes to the land 
of Bhārata -varṣa and expands the good fortune 
of its people. (28)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, 
in the opinion of some learned scholars, eight 
smaller islands surround Jambūdvīpa. When 
the sons of Mahā rāja Sagara were searching all 
over the world for their lost horse, they dug up 
the earth, and in this way eight adjoining is-
lands came into existence. The names of these 
islands are Svarṇaprastha, Candraśukla, Āvar-
tana, Ramaṇaka, Mandara -hariṇa, Pāñcajany a, 
Siṁhala and Laṅkā. (29-30) My dear King 
Parīkṣit, O best of the descendants of Bharata 
Mahārāja, I have thus described to you, as I my-
self have been instructed, the island of Bhārata -
varṣa and its adjo ining islands. These are the is-
lands that constitute Jambūdvīpa. (31)  
SB 5.20: Studying the Structure of the 
Universe  
The great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: 
Hereafter I shall describe the dimensions, char-
acteristics and forms of the six islands begin-
ning wi th the island of Plakṣa. (1) As Sumeru 
Mountain is surrounded by Jambūdvīpa, 
Jambūdvīpa is also surrounded by an ocean of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

334 
 salt water. The breadth of Jambūdvīpa is 
100,000 yojanas [800,000 miles], and the 
breadth of the saltwater ocean is the same. As a 
moat  around a fort is sometimes surrounded by 
gardenlike forest, the saltwater ocean surround-
ing Jambūdvīpa is itself surrounded by 
Plakṣadvīpa. The breadth of Plakṣadvīpa is 
twice that of the saltwater oceanin other words 
200,000 yojanas [1,600,000 miles]. On  
Plakṣadvīpa there is a tree shining like gold and 
as tall as the jambū tree on Jambūdvīpa. At its 
root is a fire with seven flames. It is because 
this tree is a plakṣa tree that the island is called 
Plakṣadvīpa. Plakṣadvīpa was governed by 
Idhmajihva, one  of the sons of Mahārāja Pri-
yavrata. He endowed the seven islands with the 
names of his seven sons, divided the islands 
among the sons, and then retired from active 
life to engage in the devotional service of the 
Lord. (2) The seven islands [varṣas] are nam ed 
according to the names of those seven 
sonsŚiva, Yavasa, Subhadra, Śānta, Kṣema, 
Amṛta and Abhaya. In those seven tracts of 
land, there are seven mountains and seven riv-
ers. The mountains are named Maṇikūṭa, Va-
jrakūṭa, Indrasena, Jyotiṣmān, Suparṇa, 
Hiraṇyaṣṭhīva and Meghamāla, and the rivers 
are named Aruṇā, Nṛmṇā, Āṅgirasī, Sāvitrī, 
Suptabhātā, Ṛtambharā and Satyambharā. One 
can immediately be free from material contam-
ination by touching or bathing in those rivers, 
and the four castes of people who live  in 
Plakṣadvīpathe Haṁsas, Pataṅgas, 
Ūrdhvāyanas and Satyāṅgaspurify themselves 
in that way. The inhabitants of Plakṣadvīpa live 
for one thousand years. They are beautiful like 
the demigods, and they also beget children like 
the demigods. By completely per forming the 
ritualistic ceremonies mentioned in the Vedas 
and by worshiping the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead as represented by the sun -god, they 
attain the sun, which is a heavenly planet. (3-4) 
[This is the mantra by which the inhabitants of 
Plakṣadvīpa worship the Supreme Lord.] Let us 
take shelter of the sun -god, who is a reflection 
of Lord Viṣṇu, the all -expanding Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the oldest of all persons. 
Viṣṇu is the only worshipable Lord. He is the 
Vedas, He is religion, and He is th e origin of all auspicious and inauspicious results. (5) O King, 
longevity, sensory prowess, physical and men-
tal strength, intelligence and bravery are natu-
rally and equally manifested in all the inhabit-
ants of the five islands headed by 
Plakṣadvīpa. (6)  
Plakṣadvīpa is surrounded by an ocean of 
sugarcane juice, equal in breadth to the island 
itself. Similarly, there is then another is-
landSālmalīdvīpatwice as broad as Plakṣadvīpa 
[400,000 yojanas, or 3,200,000 miles] and sur-
rounded by an equally broad body of  water 
called Surāsāgara, the ocean that tastes like liq-
uor.(7) On Sālmalīdvīpa there is a śālmalī tree, 
from which the island takes its name. That tree 
is as broad and tall as the plakṣa treein other 
words 100 yojanas [800 miles] broad and 1,100 
yojanas [ 8,800 miles] tall. Learned scholars say 
that this gigantic tree is the residence of 
Garuḍa, the king of all birds and carrier of Lord 
Viṣṇu. In that tree, Garuḍa offers Lord Viṣṇu 
his Vedic prayers. (8) The son of Mahārāja Pri-
yavrata named Yajñabāhu, the ma ster of 
Sālmalīdvīpa, divided the island into seven 
tracts of land, which he gave to his seven sons. 
The names of those divisions, which corre-
spond to the names of the sons, are Surocana, 
Saumanasya, Ramaṇaka, Deva -varṣa, 
Pāribhadra, Āpyāyana and Avijñāta. (9) In 
those tracts of land there are seven mountains-
Svarasa, Śataśṛṅga, Vāmadeva, Kunda, 
Mukunda, Puṣpa -varṣa and Sahasra -śruti. 
There are also seven riversAnumati, Sinīvālī, 
Sarasvatī, Kuhū, Rajanī, Nandā and Rākā. 
They are still existing. (10) Strictly f ollowing 
the cult of varṇāśrama -dharma, the inhabitants 
of those islands, who are known as Śrutidharas, 
Vīryadharas, Vasundharas and Iṣandharas, all 
worship the expansion of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead named Soma, the moon -
god.(11) [The inhabitants of Śālmalīdvīpa wor-
ship the demigod of the moon in the following 
words.] By his own rays, the moon -god has di-
vided the month into two fortnights, known as 
śukla and kṛṣṇa, for the distribution of food 
grains to the pitās and the demigods. The dem-
igod of th e moon is he who divides time, and 
he is the king of all the residents of the uni-
verse. We therefore pray that he may remain 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

335 
 our king and guide, and we offer him our re-
spectful obeisances. (12)  
Outside the ocean of liquor is another island, 
known as Kuśadv īpa, which is 800,000 yojanas 
[6,400,000 miles] wide, twice as wide as the 
ocean of liquor. As Śālmalīdvīpa is surrounded 
by a liquor ocean, Kuśadvīpa is surrounded by 
an ocean of liquid ghee as broad as the island 
itself. On Kuśadvīpa there are clumps of kuśa 
grass, from which the island takes its name. 
This kuśa grass, which was created by the dem-
igods by the will of the Supreme Lord, appears 
like a second form of fire, but with very mild 
and pleasing flames. Its young shoots illumi-
nate all directions. (13) O King, another son of 
Mahārāja Priyavrata, Hiraṇyaretā, was the king 
of this island. He divided it into seven parts, 
which he delivered to his seven sons according 
to the rights of inheritance. The King then re-
tired from family life to engage in austeri ties. 
The names of those sons are Vasu, Vasudāna, 
Dṛḍharuci, Stutyavrata, Nābhigupta, Vivikta 
and Vāmadeva. (14) In those seven islands there 
are seven boundary mountains, known as 
Cakra, Catuḥśṛṅga, Kapila, Citrakūṭa, 
Devānīka, Ūrdhvaromā and Draviṇa. Ther e are 
also seven rivers, known as Ramakulyā, 
Madhukulyā, Mitravindā, Śrutavindā, 
Devagarbhā, Ghṛtacyutā and Mantramālā. (15) 
The inhabitants of the island of Kuśadvīpa are 
celebrated as the Kuśalas, Kovidas, Abhiyuktas 
and Kulakas. They are like the brāhmaṇ as, 
kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras respectively. By 
bathing in the waters of those rivers, they all 
become purified. They are expert in performing 
ritualistic ceremonies according to the orders of 
the Vedic scriptures. Thus they worship the 
Lord in His aspe ct as the demigod of fire. (16) 
[This is the mantra by which the inhabitants of 
Kuśadvīpa worship the fire -god.] O fire -god, 
you are a part of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Hari, and you carry to Him all the of-
ferings of sacrifices. Therefore we reque st you 
to offer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
the yajñic ingredients we are offering the dem-
igods, for the Lord is the real enjoyer. (17)  
Outside the ocean of clarified butter is an-
other island, known as Krauñcadvīpa, which has a width of 1,600,000  yojanas [12,800,000 
miles], twice the width of the ocean of clarified 
butter. As Kuśadvīpa is surrounded by an ocean 
of clarified butter, Krauñcadvīpa is surrounded 
by an ocean of milk as broad as the island itself. 
On Krauñcadvīpa there is a great mounta in 
known as Krauñca, from which the island takes 
its name. (18) Although the vegetables living on 
the slopes of Mount Krauñca were attacked and 
devastated by the weapons of Kārttikeya, the 
mountain has become fearless because it is al-
ways bathed on all side s by the Ocean of Milk 
and protected by Varuṇadeva. (19) The ruler of 
this island was another son of Mahārāja Pri-
yavrata. His name was Ghṛtapṛṣṭha, and he was 
a very learned scholar. He also divided his own 
island among his seven sons. After dividing the 
island into seven parts, named according to the 
names of his sons, Ghṛtapṛṣṭha Mahārāja com-
pletely retired from family life and took shelter 
at the lotus feet of the Lord, the soul of all souls, 
who has all auspicious qualities. Thus he at-
tained perfection. (20) The sons of Mahārāja 
Ghṛtapṛṣṭha were named Āma, Madhuruha, 
Meghapṛṣṭha, Sudhāmā, Bhrājiṣṭha, Lohitārṇa 
and Vanaspati. In their island there are seven 
mountains, which indicate the boundaries of 
the seven tracts of land, and there are also seven 
rivers . The mountains are named Śukla, Vard-
hamāna, Bhojana, Upabarhiṇa, Nanda, Nan-
dana and Sarvatobhadra. The rivers are named 
Abhayā, Amṛtaughā, Āryakā, Tīrthavatī, 
Rūpavatī, Pavitravatī and Śuklā. (21) The in-
habitants of Krauñcadvīpa are divided into four 
caste s, called the Puruṣas, Ṛṣabhas, Draviṇas 
and Devakas. Using the waters of those sancti-
fied rivers, they worship the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead by offering a palmful of water 
at the lotus feet of Varuṇa, the demigod who 
has a form of water. (22) [The inh abitants of 
Krauñcadvīpa worship with this mantra.] O wa-
ter of the rivers, you have obtained energy from 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There-
fore you purify the three planetary systems, 
known as Bhūloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka. 
By your constitutional  nature, you take away 
sins, and that is why we are touching you. 
Kindly continue to purify us. (23) Outside the 
Ocean of Milk is another island, Śākadvīpa, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

336 
 which has a width of 3,200,000 yojanas 
[25,600,000 miles]. As Krauñcadvīpa is sur-
rounded by its own ocean of milk, Śākadvīpa is 
surrounded by an ocean of churned yogurt as 
broad as the island itself. In Śākadvīpa there is 
a big śāka tree, from which the island takes its 
name. This tree is very fragrant. Indeed, it lends 
its scent to the entire island. (24) The master of 
this island, also one of the sons of Priyavrata, 
was known as Medhātithi. He also divided his 
island into seven sections, named according to 
the names of his own sons, whom he made the 
kings of that island. The names of those sons 
are Puroj ava, Manojava, Pavamāna, 
Dhūmrānīka, Citrarepha, Bahurūpa and 
Viśvadhāra. After dividing the island and situ-
ating his sons as its rulers, Medhātithi person-
ally retired, and to fix his mind completely 
upon the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhea d, he entered a forest suitable for 
meditation. (25) For these lands also, there are 
seven boundary mountains and seven rivers. 
The mountains are Īśāna, Uruśṛṅga, 
Balabhadra, Śatakesara, Sahasrasrota, Devap-
āla and Mahānasa. The rivers are Anaghā, 
Āyurdā, Ub hayaspṛṣṭi, Aparājitā, Pañcapadī, 
Sahasra -śruti and Nijadhṛti. (26) The inhabit-
ants of those islands are also divided into four 
castesṚtavrata, Satyavrata, Dānavrata and 
Anuvratawhich exactly resemble brāhmaṇa, 
kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra. They practice 
prāṇāyāma and mystic yoga, and in trance they 
worship the Supreme Lord in the form of 
Vāyu. (27) [The inhabitants of Śākadvīpa wor-
ship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the 
form of Vāyu in the following words.] O Su-
preme Person, situated as the Supersoul wi thin 
the body, You direct the various actions of the 
different airs, such as prāṇa, and thus You 
maintain all living entities. O Lord, O Super-
soul of everyone, O controller of the cosmic 
manifestation under whom everything exists, 
may You protect us from a ll dangers. (28)  
Outside the ocean of yogurt is another is-
land, known as Puṣkaradvīpa, which is 
6,400,000 yojanas [51,200,000 miles] wide, 
twice as wide as the ocean of yogurt. It is sur-
rounded by an ocean of very tasteful water as 
broad as the island itse lf. On Puṣkaradvīpa there is a great lotus flower with 100,000,000 
pure golden petals, as effulgent as the flames of 
fire. That lotus flower is considered the sitting 
place of Lord Brahmā, who is the most power-
ful living being and who is therefore sometime s 
called bhagavān. (29) In the middle of that is-
land is a great mountain named Mānasottara, 
which forms the boundary between the inner 
side and the outer side of the island. Its breadth 
and height are 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles]. 
On that mountain, in the four directions, are the 
residential quarters of demigods such as Indra. 
In the chariot of the sun -god, the sun travels on 
the top of the mountain in an orbit called the 
Saṁvatsara, encircling Mount Meru. The sun’s 
path on the northern side is called Uttar āyaṇa, 
and its path on the southern side is called 
Dakṣiṇāyana. One side represents a day for the 
demigods, and the other represents their 
night. (30) The ruler of this island, the son of 
Mahārāja Priyavrata named Vītihotra, had two 
sons named Ramaṇaka and Dhātaki. He 
granted the two sides of the island to these two 
sons and then personally engaged himself in ac-
tivities for the sake of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead like his elder brother 
Medhātithi. (31) For the fulfillment of material 
desires, the inhab itants of this tract of land wor-
ship the Supreme Personality of Godhead as 
represented by Lord Brahmā. They offer pray-
ers to the Lord as follows. (32) Lord Brahmā is 
known as karma -maya, the form of ritualistic 
ceremonies, because by performing ritualistic 
ceremonies one may attain his position and be-
cause the Vedic ritualistic hymns become man-
ifest from him. He is devoted to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead without deviation, and 
therefore in one sense he is not different from 
the Lord. Nevertheless, he s hould be worshiped 
not as the monists worship him, but in duality. 
One should always remain a servitor of the Su-
preme Lord, the supreme worshipable Deity. 
We therefore offer our respectful obeis ances 
unto Lord Brahmā, the form of manifest Vedic 
knowledge. (33) 
Thereafter, beyond the ocean of sweet water 
and fully surrounding it, is a mountain named 
Lokāloka, which divides the countries that are 
full of sunlight from those not lit by the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

337 
 sun.(34) Beyond the ocean of sweet water is a 
tract of land as broad as the area between the 
middle of Mount Sumeru and the boundary of 
Mānasottara Mountain. In that tract of land 
there are many living beings. Beyond it, ex-
tending to Lokāloka Mountain, is another la nd, 
which is made of gold. Because of its golden 
surface, it reflects light like the surface of a mir-
ror, and any physical article that falls on that 
land can never be perceived again. All living 
entities, therefore, have abandoned that golden 
land. (35) Between the lands inhabited by living 
entities and those that are uninhabited stands 
the great mountain which separates the two and 
which is therefore celebrated as Lokāloka. (36) 
By the supreme will of Kṛṣṇa, the mountain 
known as Lokāloka has been installed  as the 
outer border of the three worldsBhūrloka, Bhu-
varloka and Svarlokato control the rays of the 
sun throughout the universe. All the luminaries, 
from the sun up to Dhruvaloka, distribute their 
rays throughout the three worlds, but only 
within the bound ary formed by this mountain. 
Because it is extremely high, extending even 
higher than Dhruvaloka, it blocks the rays of 
the luminaries, which therefore can never ex-
tend beyond it. (37)  
Learned scholars who are free from mis-
takes, illusions and propensities  to cheat have 
thus described the planetary systems and their 
particular symptoms, measurements and loca-
tions. With great deliberation, they have estab-
lished the truth that the distance between Su-
meru and the mountain known as Lokāloka is 
one fourth of the  diameter of the universeor, in 
other words, 125,000,000 yojanas [1 billion 
miles]. (38) On the top of Lokāloka Mountain 
are the four gaja -patis, the best of elephants, 
which were established in the four directions by 
Lord Brahmā, the supreme spiritual mast er of 
the entire universe. The names of those ele-
phants are Ṛṣabha, Puṣkaracūḍa, Vāmana and 
Aparājita. They are responsible for maintaining 
the planetary systems of the universe. (39) The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master 
of all transcendental op ulences and the master 
of the spiritual sky. He is the Supreme Person, 
Bhagavān, the Supersoul of everyone. The 
demigods, led by Indra, the King of heaven, are entrusted with seeing to the affairs of the mate-
rial world. To benefit all living beings in all the 
varied planets and to increase the power of 
those elephants and of the demigods, the Lord 
manifests Himself on top of that mountain in a 
spiritual body, uncontaminated by the modes of 
material nature. Surrounded by His personal 
expansions and assistant s like Viṣvaksena, He 
exhibits all His perfect opulences, such as reli-
gion and knowledge, and His mystic powers 
such as aṇimā, laghimā and mahimā. He is 
beautifully situated, and He is decorated by the 
different weapons in His four hands. (40) The 
various f orms of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, such as Nārāyaṇa and Viṣṇu, are 
beautifully decorated with different weapons. 
The Lord exhibits those forms to maintain all 
the varied planets created by His personal po-
tency, yoga -māyā. (41) My dear King, outside  
Lokāloka Mountain is the tract of land known 
as Aloka -varṣa, which extends for the same 
breadth as the area within the mountainin other 
words, 125,000,000 yojanas [one billion 
miles]. Beyond Aloka -varṣa is the destination 
of those who aspire for liberatio n from the ma-
terial world. It is beyond the jurisdiction of the 
material modes of nature, and therefore it is 
completely pure. Lord Kṛṣṇa took Arjuna 
through this place to bring back the sons of the 
brāhmaṇa. (42)  
The sun is situated [vertically] in the middle 
of the universe, in the area between Bhūrloka 
and Bhuvarloka, which is called antarikṣa, 
outer space. The distance between the sun and 
the circumference of the universe is twenty -five 
koṭi yojanas [two  billion miles]. (43) The sun -
god is also known as Vairāja, the total material 
body for all living entities. Because he entered 
this dull egg of the universe at the time of cre-
ation, he is also called Mārtaṇḍa. He is also 
known as Hiraṇyagarbha because he r eceived 
his material body from Hiraṇyagarbha [Lord 
Brahmā]. (44) O King, the sun -god and the sun 
planet divide all the directions of the universe. 
It is only because of the presence of the sun that 
we can understand what the sky, the higher 
planets, this wo rld and the lower planets are. It 
is also only because of the sun that we can un-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

338 
 derstand which places are for material enjoy-
ment, which are for liberation, which are hell-
ish and subterranean. (45) All living entities, in-
cluding demigods, human beings, anima ls, 
birds, insects, reptiles, creepers and trees, de-
pend upon the heat and light given by the sun -
god from the sun planet. Furthermore, it is be-
cause of the sun’s presence that all living enti-
ties can see, and therefore he is called dṛg -
īśvara, the Persona lity of Godhead presiding 
over sight. (46)  

SB 5.21 The Movements of the Sun  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, I 
have thus far described the diameter of the uni-
verse [fifty crores of yojanas, or four billion 
miles] and its general characteristics, accor ding 
to the estimations of learned scholars. (1) As a 
grain of wheat is divided into two parts and one 
can estimate the size of the upper part by know-
ing that of the lower, so, expert geographers in-
struct, one can understand the measurements of 
the upper pa rt of the universe by knowing those 
of the lower part. The sky between the earthly 
sphere and heavenly sphere is called antarikṣa, 
or outer space. It adjoins the top of the sphere 
of earth and the bottom of that of heaven. (2) In 
the midst of that region of  outer space 
[antarikṣa] is the most opulent sun, the king of 
all the planets that emanate heat, such as the 
moon. By the influence of its radiation, the sun 
heats the universe and maintains its proper or-
der. It also gives light to help all living entities  
see. While passing toward the north, toward the 
south or through the equator, in accordance 
with the order of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, it is said to move slowly, swiftly or 
moderately. According to its movements in ris-
ing above, going beneath o r passing through the 
equatorand correspondingly coming in touch 
with various signs of the zodiac, headed by 
Makara [Capricorn]days and nights are short, 
long or equal to one another. (3) When the sun 
passes through Meṣa [Aries] and Tulā [Libra], 
the durations of day and night are equal. When 
it passes through the five signs headed by 
Vṛṣabha [Taurus], the duration of the days in-creases [until Cancer], and then it gradually de-
creases by hal f an hour each month, until day 
and night again become equal [in Libra]. (4) 
When the sun passes through the five signs be-
ginning with Vṛścika [Scorpio], the duration of 
the days decreases [until Capricorn], and then 
gradually it increases month after month , until 
day and night become equal [in Aries]. (5) Until 
the sun travels to the south the days grow 
longer, and until it travels to the north the nights 
grow longer.  (6)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued; My dear 
King, as stated before, the learned say that the 
sun travels over all sides of Mānasottara Moun-
tain in a circle whose length is 95,100,000 yoja-
nas [760,800,000 miles]. On Mānasottara 
Mountain, due east of Mount Sumeru, is a place 
known as Devadhānī, possessed by King Indra. 
Similarly, in the south is a pl ace known as 
Saṁyamanī, possessed by Yamarāja, in the 
west is a place known as Nimlocanī, possessed 
by Varuṇa, and in the north is a place named 
Vibhāvarī, possessed by the moon -god. Sun-
rise, midday, sunset and midnight occur in all 
those places according to specific times, thus 
engaging all living entities in their various oc-
cupational duties and also making them cease 
such duties. (7) The living entities residing on 
Sumeru Mountain are always very warm, as at 
midday, because for them the sun is always 
overhead. Although the sun moves counter-
clockwise, facing the constellations, with Su-
meru Mountain on its left, it also moves clock-
wise and appears to have the mountain on its 
right because it is influenced by the 
dakṣiṇāvarta wind. People living in countries at 
points diametrically opposite to where the sun 
is first seen rising will see the sun setting, and 
if a straight line were drawn from a point where 
the sun is at midday, the people in countries at 
the opposite end of the line would be experi-
encing midnig ht. Similarly, if people residing 
where the sun is setting were to go to countries 
diametrically opposite, they would not see the 
sun in the same condition. (8-9)  
When the sun travels from Devadhānī, the 
residence of Indra, to Saṁyamanī, the resi-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

339 
 dence of Yamarāja, it travels 23,775,000 yoja-
nas [190,200,000 miles] in fifteen ghaṭikās [six 
hours]. (10) From the residence of Yamarāja the 
sun travels to Nimlocanī, the re sidence of Var-
uṇa, from there to Vibhāvarī, the residence of 
the moon -god, and from there again to the res-
idence of Indra. In a similar way, the moon, 
along with the other stars and planets, becomes 
visible in the celestial sphere and then sets and 
again b ecomes invisible. (11) Thus the chariot 
of the sun -god, which is trayīmaya, or wor-
shiped by the words om bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ, 
travels through the four residences mentioned 
above at a speed of 3,400,800 yojanas 
[27,206,400 miles] in a muhūrta. (12)  
The chariot of the sun -god has only one 
wheel, which is known as Saṁvatsara. The 
twelve months are calculated to be its twelve 
spokes, the six seasons are the sections of its 
rim, and the three cātur -māsya periods are its 
three -sectioned hub. One side of the axle carr y-
ing the wheel rests upon the summit of Mount 
Sumeru, and the other rests upon Mānasottara 
Mountain. Affixed to the outer end of the axle, 
the wheel continuously rotates on Mānasottara 
Mountain like the wheel of an oil -pressing ma-
chine. (13) As in an oil -pressing machine, this 
first axle is attached to a second axle, which is 
one-fourth as long [3,937,500 yojanas, or 
31,500,000 miles]. The upper end of this sec-
ond axle is attached to Dhruvaloka by a rope of 
wind. (14)  
My dear King, the carriage of the sun -god’s 
chariot is estimated to be 3,600,000 yojanas 
[28,800,000 miles] long and one -fourth as wide 
[900,000 yo janas, or 7,200,000 miles]. The 
chariot’s horses, which are named after Gāyatrī 
and other Vedic meters, are harnessed by 
Aruṇadeva to a yoke that is also 900,000 yoja-
nas wide. This chariot continuously carries the 
sun-god.(15) Although Aruṇadeva sits in fr ont 
of the sun -god and is engaged in driving the 
chariot and controlling the horses, he looks 
backward toward the sun -god.(16) There are 
sixty thousand saintly persons named Vālikh-
ilyas, each the size of a thumb, who are located 
in front of the sun -god and  who offer him elo-
quent prayers of glorification.  (17) Similarly, fourteen other saints, Gandharvas, Apsarās, 
Nāgas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas and demigods, who 
are divided into groups of two, assume differ-
ent names every month and continuously per-
form different ri tualistic ceremonies to worship 
the Supreme Lord as the most powerful demi-
god Sūryadeva, who holds many names. (18) 
My dear King, in his orbit through Bhū -
maṇḍala, the sun -god traverses a distance of 
95,100,000 yojanas [760,800,000 miles] at the 
speed of 2, 000 yojanas and two krośas [16,004 
miles] in a moment. (19)  
SB 5.22: The Orbits of the Planets  
King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī:  My dear lord, you have already af-
firmed the truth that the supremely powerful 
sun-god travels around Dhruvaloka wit h both 
Dhruvaloka and Mount Sumeru on his right. 
Yet at the same time the sun -god faces the signs 
of the zodiac and keeps Sumeru and Dhruva-
loka on his left. How can we reasonably accept 
that the sun -god proceeds with Sumeru and 
Dhruvaloka on both his left and right simulta-
neously? (1)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī clearly answered:  
When a potter’s wheel is moving and small ants 
located on that big wheel are moving with it, 
one can see that their motion is different from 
that of the wheel because they appear some-
times on one part of the wheel and sometimes 
on another. Similarly, the signs and constella-
tions, with Sumeru and Dhruvaloka on their 
right, move with the wheel of time, and the ant-
like sun and other planets move with them. The 
sun and planets, however, are seen in different 
signs and const ellations at different times. This 
indicates that their motion is different from that 
of the zodiac and the wheel of time itself. (2) 
The original cause of the cosmic manifestation 
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāyaṇa. When great saintly persons, fully 
aware of the Vedic knowledge, offered prayers 
to the Supreme Person, He descended to this 
material world in the form of the su n to benefit 
all the planets and purify fruitive activities. He 
divided Himself into twelve parts and created 
seasonal forms, beginning with spring. In this 
way He created the seasonal qualities, such as 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

340 
 heat, cold and so on. (3) According to the sys-
tem of four varṇas and four āśramas, people 
generally worship the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, who is situated as the sun -
god. With great faith they worship the Supreme 
Personality as the Supersoul according to ritu-
alistic ceremonies handed down in t he three 
Vedas, such as agnihotra and similar higher and 
lower fruitive acts, and according to the process 
of mystic yoga. In this way they very easily at-
tain the ultimate goal of life. (4) The sun -god, 
who is Nārāyaṇa, or Viṣṇu, the soul of all the 
worlds,  is situated in outer space between the 
upper and lower portions of the universe. Pass-
ing through twelve months on the wheel of 
time, the sun comes in touch with twelve dif-
ferent signs of the zodiac and assumes twelve 
different names according to those sig ns. The 
aggregate of those twelve months is called a 
saṁvatsara, or an entire year. According to lu-
nar calculations, two fortnightsone of the wax-
ing moon and the other of the waningform one 
month. That same period is one day and night 
for the planet Pitṛlo ka. According to stellar cal-
culations, a month equals two and one quarter 
constellations. When the sun travels for two 
months, a season passes, and therefore the sea-
sonal changes are considered parts of the body 
of the year. (5) Thus the time the sun takes to 
rotate through half of outer space is called an 
ayana, or its period of movement [in the north 
or in the south]. (6) The sun -god has three 
speedsslow, fast and moderate. The time he 
takes to travel entirely around the spheres of 
heaven, earth and space a t these three speeds is 
referred to, by learned scholars, by the five 
names Saṁvatsara, Parivatsara, Iḍāvatsara, 
Anuvatsara and Vatsara. (7)  
Above the rays of the sunshine by a distance 
of 100,000 yojanas [800,000 miles] is the 
moon, which travels at a spe ed faster than that 
of the sun. In two lunar fortnights the moon 
travels through the equivalent of a saṁvatsara 
of the sun, in two and a quarter days it passes 
through a month of the sun, and in one day it 
passes through a fortnight of the sun. (8) When 
the moon is waxing, the illuminating portions 
of it increase daily, thus creating day for the 
demigods and night for the pitās. When the moon is waning, however, it causes night for 
the demigods and day for the pitās. In this way 
the moon passes through each constellation of 
stars in thirty muhūrtas [an entire day]. The 
moon is the source of nectarean coolness that 
influences the growth of food grains, and there-
fore the moon -god is considered the life of all 
living entities. He is consequently called Jīva, 
the chief living being within the universe. (9) 
Because the moon is full of all potentialities, it 
represents the influence of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. The moon is the predominat-
ing deity of everyone’s mind, and therefore the 
moon -god is called Mano maya. He is also 
called Annamaya because he gives potency to 
all herbs and plants, and he is called Amṛta-
maya because he is the source of life for all liv-
ing entities. The moon pleases the demigods, 
pitās, human beings, animals, birds, reptiles, 
trees, pla nts and all other living entities. Every-
one is satisfied by the presence of the moon. 
Therefore the moon is also called Sarvamaya 
[all-pervading]. (10)  
There are many stars located 200,000 yoja-
nas [1,600,000 miles] above the moon. By the 
supreme will of th e Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, they are fixed to the wheel of time, 
and thus they rotate with Mount Sumeru on 
their right, their motion being different from 
that of the sun. There are twenty -eight im-
portant stars, headed by Abhijit. (11) Some 
1,600,000 m iles above this group of stars is the 
planet Venus, which moves at almost exactly 
the same pace as the sun according to swift, 
slow and moderate movements. Sometimes 
Venus moves behind the sun, sometimes in 
front of the sun and sometimes along with it. 
Venus nullifies the influence of planets that are 
obstacles to rainfall. Consequently its presence 
causes rainfall, and it is therefore considered 
very favorable for all living beings within this 
universe. This has been accepted by learned 
scholars. (12)  
Merc ury is described to be similar to Venus, 
in that it moves sometimes behind the sun, 
sometimes in front of the sun and sometimes 
along with it. It is 1,600,000 miles above Ve-
nus, or 7,200,000 miles above earth. Mercury, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

341 
 which is the son of the moon, is almo st always 
very auspicious for the inhabitants of the uni-
verse, but when it does not move along with the 
sun, it forbodes cyclones, dust, irregular rain-
fall, and waterless clouds. In this way it creates 
fearful conditions due to inadequate or exces-
sive rain fall.(13) Situated 1,600,000 miles 
above Mercury, or 8,800,000 miles above 
earth, is the planet Mars. If this planet does not 
travel in a crooked way, it crosses through each 
sign of the zodiac in three fortnights and in this 
way travels through all twelve , one after an-
other. It almost always creates unfavorable 
conditions in respect to rainfall and other influ-
ences. (14) Situated 1,600,000 miles above 
Mars, or 10,400,000 miles above earth, is the 
planet Jupiter, which travels through one sign 
of the zodiac within the period of a Parivatsara. 
If its movement is not curved, the planet Jupiter 
is very favorable to the brāhmaṇas of the uni-
verse. (15)  
Situated 1,600,000 miles above Jupiter, or 
12,000,000 miles above earth, is the planet Sat-
urn, which passes throu gh one sign of the zo-
diac in thirty months and covers the entire zo-
diac circle in thirty Anuvatsaras. This planet is 
always very inauspicious for the universal situ-
ation. (16) Situated 8,800,000 miles above Sat-
urn, or 20,800,000 miles above earth, are the 
seven saintly sages, who are always thinking of 
the well -being of the inhabitants of the uni-
verse. They circumambulate the supreme 
abode of Lord Viṣṇu, known as Dhruvaloka, 
the polestar. (17)  
SB 5.23: The Śiśumāra Planetary Sys-
tems  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continue d: My dear 
King, 1,300,000 yojanas [10,400,000 miles] 
above the planets of the seven sages is the place 
that learned scholars describe as the abode of 
Lord Viṣṇu. There the son of Mahārāja Ut-
tānapāda, the great devotee Mahārāja Dhruva, 
still resides as the  life source of all the living 
entities who live until the end of the creation. 
Agni, Indra, Prajāpati, Kaśyapa and Dharma all 
assemble there to offer him honor and respect-
ful obeisances. They circumambulate him with their right sides toward him. I have al ready de-
scribed the glorious activities of Mahārāja 
Dhruva [in the Fourth Canto  of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam]. (1) Established by the supreme 
will of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the polestar, which is the planet of Mahārāja 
Dhruva, constantly shines as the central pivot 
for all the stars and planets. The unsleeping, in-
visible, most powerful time factor causes these 
luminaries to revolve around the polestar with-
out cessation. (2) 
When bulls are yoked together and tied to a 
central post to thresh rice, they tre ad around 
that pivot without deviating from their proper 
positionsone bull being closest to the post, an-
other in the middle, and a third on the outside. 
Similarly, all the planets and all the hundreds 
and thousands of stars revolve around the 
polestar, the  planet of Mahārāja Dhruva, in 
their respective orbits, some higher and some 
lower. Fastened by the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead to the machine of material nature ac-
cording to the results of their fruitive acts, they 
are driven around the polestar by the  wind and 
will continue to be so until the end of creation. 
These planets float in the air within the vast 
sky, just as clouds with hundreds of tons of wa-
ter float in the air or as the great śyena eagles, 
due to the results of past activities, fly high in 
the sky and have no chance of falling to the 
ground. (3)  
This great machine, consisting of the stars 
and planets, resembles the form of a śiśumāra 
[dolphin] in the water. It is sometimes consid-
ered an incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva. Great 
yogīs meditate up on Vāsudeva in this form be-
cause it is actually visible. (4) This form of the 
śiśumāra has its head downward and its body 
coiled. On the end of its tail is the planet of 
Dhruva, on the body of its tail are the planets of 
the demigods Prajāpati, Agni, Indra and 
Dharma, and at the base of its tail are the plan-
ets of the demigods Dhātā and Vidhātā. Where 
the hips might be on the śiśumāra are the seven 
saintly sages like Vasiṣṭha and Aṅgirā. The 
coiled body of the Śiśumāra -cakra turns toward 
its right side, on w hich the fourteen constella-
tions from Abhijit to Punarvasu are located. On 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

342 
 its left side are the fourteen stars from Puṣyā to 
Uttarāṣāḍhā. Thus its body is balanced because 
its sides are occupied by an equal number of 
stars. On the back of the śiśumāra is the group 
of stars known as Ajavīthī, and on its abdomen 
is the Ganges that flows in the sky [the Milky 
Way]. (5) On the right and left sides of where 
the loins might be on the Śiśumāra -cakra are 
the stars named Punarvasu and Puṣyā. Ārdrā 
and Aśleṣā are on its right and left feet, Abhijit 
and Uttarāṣāḍhā are on its right and left nostrils, 
Śravaṇā and Pūrvāṣāḍhā are at its right and left 
eyes, and Dhaniṣṭhā and Mūlā are on its right 
and left ears. The eight stars from Maghā to 
Anurādhā, which mark the southe rn course, are 
on the ribs of the left of its body, and the eight 
stars from Mṛgaśīrṣā to Pūrvabhādra, which 
mark the northern course, are on the ribs on the 
right side. Śatabhiṣā and Jyeṣṭhā are on the 
right and left shoulders. (6) On the upper chin 
of the  śiśumāra is Agasti; on its lower chin, 
Yamarāja; on its mouth, Mars; on its genitals, 
Saturn; on the back of its neck, Jupiter; on its 
chest, the sun; and within the core of its heart, 
Nārāyaṇa. Within its mind is the moon; on its 
navel, Venus; and on its  breasts, the Aśvinī -
kumāras. Within its life air, which is known as 
prāṇāpāna, is Mercury, on its neck is Rāhu, all 
over its body are comets, and in its pores are the 
numerous stars. (7)  
My dear King, the body of the śiśumāra, as 
thus described, should be  considered the exter-
nal form of Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead. Morning, noon and evening, 
one should silently observe the form of the 
Lord as the Śiśumāra -cakra and worship Him 
with this mantra: “O Lord who have assumed 
the form of time! O resting place of all the plan-
ets moving in different orbits! O master of all 
demigods, O Supreme Person, I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You and meditate 
upon You.” (8) The body of the Supreme Lord, 
Viṣṇu, which forms the Śiśumāra -cakra, is the 
resting place of all the demigods and all the 
stars and planets. One who chants this mantra 
to worship that Supreme Person three times a 
daymorning, noon and eveningwill surely be 
freed from all sinful reactions. If one simply of-
fers his obeisances to this for m or remembers this form three times a day, all his recent sinful 
activities will be destroyed. (9)  
SB 5.24: The Subterranean Heavenly 
Planets  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  My dear King, 
some historians, the speakers of the Purāṇas, 
say that 10,000 yojanas [80,000 miles] below 
the sun is the planet known as Rāhu, which 
moves like one of the stars. The presiding deity 
of that planet, who is the son of  Siṁhikā, is the 
most abominable of all asuras, but although he 
is completely unfit to assume the position of a 
demigod or planetary deity, he has achieved 
that position by the grace of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Later I shall speak further 
about him.(1) The sun globe, which is a source 
of heat, extends for 10,000 yojanas [80,000 
miles]. The moon extends for 20,000 yojanas 
[160,000 miles], and Rāhu extends for 30,000 
yojanas [240,000 miles]. Formerly, when nec-
tar was being distributed, Rāhu tried t o create 
dissension between the sun and moon by inter-
posing himself between them. Rāhu is inimical 
toward both the sun and the moon, and there-
fore he always tries to cover the sunshine and 
moonshine on the dark -moon day and full -
moon night. (2) After hearin g from the sun and 
moon demigods about Rāhu’s attack, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, engages 
His disc, known as the Sudarśana cakra, to pro-
tect them. The Sudarśana cakra is the Lord’s 
most beloved devotee and is favored by the 
Lord. The intense  heat of its effulgence, meant 
for killing non -Vaiṣṇavas, is unbearable to 
Rāhu, and he therefore flees in fear of it. During 
the time Rāhu disturbs the sun or moon, there 
occurs what people commonly know as an 
eclipse. (3) Below Rāhu by 10,000 yojanas 
[80,000 miles] are the planets known as Sid-
dhaloka, Cāraṇaloka and Vidyādhara -loka. (4) 
Beneath Vidyādhara -loka, Cāraṇaloka and Sid-
dhaloka, in the sky called antarikṣa, are the 
places of enjoyment for the Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, 
Piśācas, ghosts and so on. Antarikṣa e xtends as 
far as the wind blows and the clouds float in the 
sky. Above this there is no more air. (5) Below 
the abodes of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas by a dis-
tance of 100 yojanas [800 miles] is the planet 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

343 
 earth. Its upper limits extend as high as swans, 
hawks, eagles and similar large birds can fly. (6) 
My dear King, beneath this earth are seven 
other planets, known as Atala, Vitala, Sutala, 
Talātala, Mahātala, Rasātala and Pātāla. I have 
already explained the situation of the planetary 
systems of earth. The widt h and length of the 
seven lower planetary systems are calculated to 
be exactly the same as those of earth. (7) In 
these seven planetary systems, which are also 
known as the subterranean heavens [bila -
svarga], there are very beautiful houses, gar-
dens and pla ces of sense enjoyment, which are 
even more opulent than those in the higher 
planets because the demons have a very high 
standard of sensual pleasure, wealth and influ-
ence. Most of the residents of these planets, 
who are known as Daityas, Dānavas and Nāgas , 
live as householders. Their wives, children, 
friends and society are all fully engaged in illu-
sory material happiness. The sense enjoyment 
of the demigods is sometimes disturbed, but the 
residents of these planets enjoy life without dis-
turbances. Thus th ey are understood to be very 
attached to illusory happiness. (8)  
My dear King, in the imitation heavens 
known as bila -svarga there is a great demon 
named Maya Dānava, who is an expert artist 
and architect. He has constructed many bril-
liantly decorated cities. There are many won-
derful houses, walls, gates, assembly house s, 
temples, yards and temple compounds, as well 
as many hotels serving as residential quarters 
for foreigners. The houses for the leaders of 
these planets are constructed with the most val-
uable jewels, and they are always crowded with 
living entities known  as Nāgas and Asuras, as 
well as many pigeons, parrots and similar birds. 
All in all, these imitation heavenly cities are 
most beautifully situated and attractively deco-
rated. (9) The parks and gardens in the artificial 
heavens surpass in beauty those of th e upper 
heavenly planets. The trees in those gardens, 
embraced by creepers, bend with a heavy bur-
den of twigs with fruits and flowers, and there-
fore they appear extraordinarily beautiful. That 
beauty could attract anyone and make his mind 
fully blossom in the pleasure of sense gratifica-
tion. There are many lakes and reservoirs with clear, transparent water, agitated by jumping 
fish and decorated with many flowers such as 
lilies, kuvalayas, kah lāras and blue and red lo-
tuses. Pairs of cakravākas and many other wa-
ter birds nest in the lakes and always enjoy in a 
happy mood, making sweet, pleasing vibrations 
that are very satisfying and conducive to enjoy-
ment of the senses. (10) Since there is no su n-
shine in those subterranean planets, time is not 
divided into days and nights, and consequently 
fear produced by time does not exist. (11) Many 
great serpents reside there with gems on their 
hoods, and the effulgence of these gems dissi-
pates the darkness i n all directions. (12) Since 
the residents of these planets drink and bathe in 
juices and elixirs made from wonderful herbs, 
they are freed from all anxieties and physical 
diseases. They have no experience of grey hair, 
wrinkles or invalidity, their bodily lusters do 
not fade, their perspiration does not cause a bad 
smell, and they are not troubled by fatigue or 
by lack of energy or enthusiasm due to old 
age.(13) They live very auspiciously and do not 
fear death from anything but death’s estab-
lished time, wh ich is the effulgence of the Su-
darśana cakra of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.(14) When the Sudarśana disc enters 
those provinces, the pregnant wives of the de-
mons all have miscarriages due to fear of its ef-
fulgence. (15)  
My dear King, now I shall des cribe to you 
the lower planetary systems, one by one, begin-
ning from Atala. In Atala there is a demon, the 
son of Maya Dānava named Bala, who created 
ninety -six kinds of mystic power. Some so -
called yogīs and svāmīs take advantage of this 
mystic power to c heat people even today. 
Simply by yawning, the demon Bala created 
three kinds of women, known as svairiṇī, 
kāmiṇī and puṁścalī. The svairiṇīs like to 
marry men from their own group, the kāmiṇīs 
marry men from any group, and the puṁścalīs 
change husband s one after another. If a man en-
ters the planet of Atala, these women immedi-
ately capture him and induce him to drink an 
intoxicating beverage made with a drug known 
as hāṭaka [cannabis indica]. This intoxicant en-
dows the man with great sexual prowess, of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

344 
 whic h the women take advantage for enjoy-
ment. A woman will enchant him with attrac-
tive glances, intimate words, smiles of love and 
then embraces. In this way she induces him to 
enjoy sex with her to her full satisfaction. Be-
cause of his increased sexual power,  the man 
thinks himself stronger than ten thousand ele-
phants and considers himself most perfect. In-
deed, illusioned and intoxicated by false pride, 
he thinks himself God, ignoring impending 
death. (16) 
The next planet below Atala is Vitala, 
wherein Lord Śiva, who is known as the master 
of gold mines, lives with his personal associ-
ates, the ghosts and similar living entities. Lord 
Śiva, as the progenitor, engages in sex with 
Bhavānī, the progenitress, to produce living en-
tities, and from the mixture of their vital fluid 
the river named Hāṭakī is generated. When fire, 
being made to blaze by the wind, drinks of this 
river and then sizzles and spits it out, it pro-
duces gold called Hāṭaka. The demons who live 
on that planet with their wives decorate them-
selves with various ornaments made from that 
gold, and thus they live there very happily. (17)  
Below the planet Vitala is another planet, 
known as Sutala, where the great son of 
Mahārāja Virocana, Bali Mahārāja,  who is cel-
ebrated as the most pious king, resides even 
now. For the welfare of Indra, the King of 
heaven, Lord Viṣṇu appeared in the form of a 
dwarf brahmacārī as the son of Aditi and 
tricked Bali Mahārāja by begging for only three 
paces of land but takin g all the three worlds. 
Being very pleased with Bali Mahārāja for giv-
ing all his possessions, the Lord returned his 
kingdom and made him richer than the opulent 
King Indra. Even now, Bali Mahārāja engages 
in devotional service by worshiping the Su-
preme Per sonality of Godhead in the planet of 
Sutala. (18) My dear King, Bali Mahārāja do-
nated all his possessions to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Vāmanadeva, but one 
should certainly not conclude that he achieved 
his great worldly opulence in bila -svarga as a 
result of his charitable disposition. The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is the 
source of life for all living entities, lives within everyone as the friendly Supersoul, and under 
His direction a living entity enjoys or suffers in 
the material world.  Greatly appreciating the 
transcendental qualities of the Lord, Bali 
Mahārāja offered everything at His lotus feet. 
His purpose, however, was not to gain anything 
material, but to become a pure devotee. For a 
pure devotee, the door of liberation is automat-
ically opened. One should not think that Bali 
Mahārāja was given so much material opulence 
merely because of his charity. When one be-
comes a pure devotee in love, he may also be 
blessed with a good material position by the 
will of the Supreme Lord. However , one should 
not mistakenly think that the material opulence 
of a devotee is the result of his devotional ser-
vice. The real result of devotional service is the 
awakening of pure love for the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, which continues under all 
circums tances. (19) If one who is embarrassed 
by hunger or who falls down or stumbles chants 
the holy name of the Lord even once, willingly 
or unwil lingly, he is immediately freed from 
the reactions of his past deeds. Karmīs entan-
gled in material activities face many difficulties 
in the practice of mystic yoga and other endeav-
ors to achieve that same freedom. (20) The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, wh o is situated 
in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul, sells Him-
self to His devotees such as Nārada Muni. In 
other words, the Lord gives pure love to such 
devotees and gives Himself to those who love 
Him purely. Great, self -realized mystic yogīs 
such as the f our Kumāras also derive great tran-
scendental bliss from realizing the Supersoul 
within themselves. (21) The Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead did not award His mercy to Bali 
Mahārāja by giving him material happiness and 
opulence, for these make one forget lovi ng ser-
vice to the Lord. The result of material opu-
lence is that one can no longer absorb his mind 
in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (22) 
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
could see no other means of taking everything 
away from Bali Mahārāja, He a dopted the trick 
of begging from him and took away all the 
three worlds. Thus only his body was left, but 
the Lord was still not satisfied. He arrested Bali 
Mahārāja, bound him with the ropes of Varuṇa 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

345 
 and threw him in a cave in a mountain. Never-
theless, a lthough all his property was taken and 
he was thrown into a cave, Bali Mahārāja was 
such a great devotee that he spoke as fol-
lows. (23) Alas, how pitiable it is for Indra, the 
King of heaven, that although he is very learned 
and powerful and although he cho se Bṛhaspati 
as his prime minister to instruct him, he is com-
pletely ignorant concerning spiritual advance-
ment. Bṛhaspati is also unintelligent because he 
did not properly instruct his disciple Indra. 
Lord Vāmanadeva was standing at Indra’s 
door, but King Indra, instead of begging Him 
for an opportunity to render transcendental lov-
ing service, engaged Him in asking me for alms 
to gain the three worlds for his sense gratifica-
tion. Sovereignty over the three worlds is very 
insignificant because whatever mater ial opu-
lence one may possess lasts only for an age of 
Manu, which is but a tiny fraction of endless 
time. (24) Bali Mahārāja said: My grandfather 
Prahlāda Mahārāja is the only person who un-
derstood his own self -interest. Upon the death 
of Prahlāda’s father, Hiraṇyakaśipu, Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva wanted to offer Prahlāda his fa-
ther’s kingdom and even wanted to grant him 
liberation from material bondage, but Prahlāda 
accepted neither. Liberation and material opu-
lence, he thought, are obstacles to devotional 
service, and therefore such gifts from the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead are not His ac-
tual mercy. Consequently, inste ad of accepting 
the results of karma and Jnana , Prahlāda 
Mahārāja simply begged the Lord for engage-
ment in the service of His servant. (25) Bali 
Mahārāja said: Persons like us, who are still at-
tached to material enjoyment, who are contam-
inated by the modes of material nature and who 
lack the mercy of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, cannot follow the supreme path of 
Prahlāda Mahārāja, the exalted devotee of the 
Lord. (26) Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My 
dear King, how shall I glorify the character of 
Bali M ahārāja? The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, the master of the three worlds, who 
is most compassionate to His own devotee, 
stands with club in hand at Bali Mahārāja’s 
door. When Rāvaṇa, the powerful demon, came to gain victory over Bali Mahārāja, Vāmana-
deva kicked him a distance of eighty thousand 
miles with His big toe. I shall explain the char-
acter and activities of Bali Mahārāja later [in 
the Eighth Canto  of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam]. (27) 
Beneath the planet known as Sutala is another 
planet, called Talātala, wh ich is ruled by the 
Dānava demon named Maya. Maya is known 
as the ācārya [master] of all the māyāvīs, who 
can invoke the powers of sorcery. For the ben-
efit of the three worlds, Lord Śiva, who is 
known as Tripurāri, once set fire to the three 
kingdoms of Ma ya, but later, being pleased 
with him, he returned his kingdom. Since that 
time, Maya Dānava has been protected by Lord 
Śiva, and therefore he falsely thinks that he 
need not fear the Sudarśana cakra of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. (28) The plane-
tary system below Talātala is known as 
Mahātala. It is the abode of many -hooded 
snakes, descendants of Kadrū, who are always 
very angry. The great snakes who are promi-
nent are Kuhaka, Takṣaka, Kāliya and Suṣeṇa. 
The snakes in Mahātala are always disturbed by 
fear of Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, but 
although they are full of anxiety, some of them 
nevertheless sport with their wives, children, 
friends and relatives. (29) Beneath Mahātala is 
the planetary system known as Rasātala, which 
is the abode of the de moniac sons of Diti and 
Danu. They are called Paṇis, Nivāta -kavacas, 
Kāleyas and Hiraṇya -puravāsīs [those living in 
Hiraṇya -pura]. They are all enemies of the 
demigods, and they reside in holes like snakes. 
From birth they are extremely powerful and 
cruel,  and although they are proud of their 
strength, they are always defeated by the Su-
darśana cakra of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who rules all the planetary systems. 
When a female messenger from Indra named 
Saramā chants a particular curse, the serpe ntine 
demons of Mahātala become very afraid of In-
dra.(30) Beneath Rasātala is another planetary 
system, known as Pātāla or Nāgaloka, where 
there are many demoniac serpents, the masters 
of Nāgaloka, such as Śaṅkha, Kulika, 
Mahāśaṅkha, Śveta, Dhanañjaya, Dhṛ tarāṣṭra, 
Śaṅkhacūḍa, Kambala, Aśvatara and 
Devadatta. The chief among them is Vāsuki. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

346 
 They are all extremely angry, and they have 
many, many hoodssome snakes five hoods, 
some seven, some ten, others a hundred and 
others a thousand. These hoods are bedecke d 
with valuable gems, and the light emanating 
from the gems illuminates the entire planetary 
system of bila -svarga. (31)  
SB 5.25: The Glories of Lord Ananta  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said to Mahārāja 
Parīkṣit:  My dear King, approximately 
240,000 miles beneath th e planet Pātāla lives 
another incarnation of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. He is the expansion of Lord Viṣṇu 
known as Lord Ananta or Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. He 
is always in the transcendental position, but be-
cause He is worshiped by Lord Śiva, the deity 
of tamo -guṇa or darkness, He is sometimes 
called tāmasī. Lord Ananta is the predominat-
ing Deity of the material mode of ignorance as 
well as the false ego of all conditioned souls. 
When a conditioned living being thinks, “I am 
the enjoyer, and this world is m eant to be en-
joyed by me,” this conception of life is dictated 
to him by Saṅkarṣaṇa. Thus the mundane con-
ditioned soul thinks himself the Supreme 
Lord. (1) Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: This 
great universe, situated on one of Lord Anan-
tadeva’s thousands of ho ods, appears just like a 
white mustard seed. It is infinitesimal com-
pared to the hood of Lord Ananta. (2) At the 
time of devastation, when Lord Anantadeva de-
sires to destroy the entire creation, He becomes 
slightly angry. Then from between His two eye-
brows appears three -eyed Rudra, carrying a tri-
dent. This Rudra, who is known as Sāṅkarṣaṇa, 
is the embodiment of the eleven Rudras, or in-
carnations of Lord Śiva. He appears in order to 
devastate the entire creation. (3) The pink, 
transparent toenails on the Lord’ s lotus feet are 
exactly like valuable gems polished to a mirror 
finish. When the unalloyed devotees and the 
leaders of the snakes offer their obeisances to 
Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa with great devotion, they be-
come very joyful upon seeing their own beauti-
ful faces reflected in His toenails. Their cheeks 
are decorated with glittering earrings, and the 
beauty of their faces is extremely pleasing to 
see.(4) Lord Ananta’s arms are attractively long, beautifully decorated with bangles and 
completely spiritual. They are w hite, and so 
they appear like silver columns. When the 
beautiful princesses of the serpent kings, hop-
ing for the Lord’s auspicious blessing, smear 
His arms with aguru pulp, sandalwood pulp and 
kuṅkuma, the touch of His limbs awakens lusty 
desires within th em. Understanding their 
minds, the Lord looks at the princesses with a 
merciful smile, and they become bashful, real-
izing that He knows their desires. Then they 
smile beautifully and look upon the Lord’s lo-
tus face, which is beautified by reddish eyes 
rolling slightly from intoxication and delighted 
by love for His devotees. (5) Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa is 
the ocean of unlimited spiritual qualities, and 
thus He is known as Anantadeva. He is nondif-
ferent from the Supreme Personality of God-
head. For the welfare of all living entities 
within this material world, He resides in His 
abode, restr aining His anger and intolerance. (6)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The demi-
gods, the demons, the Uragas [serpentine dem-
igods], the Siddhas, the Gandharvas, the 
Vidyādharas and many highly elevated sages 
constantly offer prayers to the Lord. Because 
He is in toxicated, the Lord looks bewildered, 
and His eyes, appearing like flowers in full 
bloom, move to and fro. He pleases His per-
sonal associates, the heads of the demigods, by 
the sweet vibrations emanating from His 
mouth. Dressed in bluish garments and weari ng 
a single earring, He holds a plow on His back 
with His two beautiful and well -constructed 
hands. Appearing as white as the heavenly 
King Indra, He wears a golden belt around His 
waist and a vaijayantī garland of ever -fresh tu-
lasī blossoms around His neck. Bees intoxi-
cated by the honeylike fragrance of the tulasī 
flowers hum very sweetly around the garland, 
which thus becomes more and more beautiful. 
In this way, the Lord enjoys His  very magnan-
imous pastimes. (7)  
If persons who are very serious about being 
liberated from material life hear the glories of 
Anantadeva from the mouth of a spiritual mas-
ter in the chain of disciplic succession, and if 
they always meditate upon Saṅkarṣaṇa, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

347 
 Lord enters the cores of their hearts, vanquishes 
all the dirty contamination of the material 
modes of nature, and cuts to pieces the hard 
knot within the heart, which has been tied 
tightly since time immemorial by the desire to 
dominate material natur e through fruitive activ-
ities. Nārada Muni, the son of Lord Brahmā, al-
ways glorifies Anantadeva in his father’s as-
sembly. There he sings blissful verses of his 
own composition, accompanied by his stringed 
instrument [or a celestial singer] known as 
Tumburu .(8) 
By His glance, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead enables the modes of material nature 
to act as the causes of universal creation, 
maintenance and destruction. The Supreme 
Soul is unlimited and beginningless, and alt-
hough He is one, He has manifested Himself in 
many forms. How can human society under-
stand the ways of the Supreme? (9) This mani-
festation of subtle and gross matter exists 
within the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Out of causeless mercy toward His devotees, 
He exhibits various forms, which  are all tran-
scendental. The Supreme Lord is most liberal, 
and He possesses all mystic power. To conquer 
the minds of His devotees and give pleasure to 
their hearts, He appears in different incarna-
tions and manifests many pastimes. (10) Even if 
he be distre ssed or degraded, any person who 
chants the holy name of the Lord, having heard 
it from a bona fide spiritual master, is immedi-
ately purified. Even if he chants the Lord’s 
name jokingly or by chance, he and anyone 
who hears him are freed from all sins. The re-
fore how can anyone seeking disentanglement 
from the material clutches avoid chanting the 
name of Lord Śeṣa? Of whom else should one 
take shelter? (11) Because the Lord is unlim-
ited, no one can estimate His power. This entire 
universe, filled with its man y great mountains, 
rivers, oceans, trees and living entities, is rest-
ing just like an atom on one of His many thou-
sands of hoods. Is there anyone, even with 
thousands of tongues, who can describe His 
glories? (12) There is no end to the great and 
glorious q ualities of that powerful Lord Anan-
tadeva. Indeed, His prowess is unlimited. Though self -sufficient, He Himself is the sup-
port of everything. He resides beneath the 
lower planetary systems and easily sustains the 
entire universe. (13) 
My dear King, as I hea rd of it from my spir-
itual master, I have fully described to you the 
creation of this material world according to the 
fruitive activities and desires of the conditioned 
souls. Those conditioned souls, who are full of 
material desires, achieve various situa tions in 
different planetary systems, and in this way 
they live within this material creation. (14) My 
dear King, I have thus described how people 
generally act according to their different desires 
and, as a result, get different types of bodies in 
higher o r lower planets. You inquired of these 
things from me, and I have explained to you 
whatever I have heard from authorities. What 
shall I speak of now? (15)  
SB 5.26: A Description of the Hellish 
Planets  
King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī:  My dear s ir, why are the living enti-
ties put into different material situations? 
Kindly explain this to me. (1)  
The great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmīsaid:  
My dear King, in this material world there are 
three kinds of activitiesthose in the mode of 
goodness, the mode of p assion and the mode of 
ignorance. Because all people are influenced by 
the three modes of material nature, the results 
of their activities are also divided into three. 
One who acts in the mode of goodness is reli-
gious and happy, one who acts in passion 
achieves mixed misery and happiness, and one 
who acts under the influence of ignorance is al-
ways unhappy and lives like an animal. Be-
cause of the varying degrees to which the living 
entities are influenced by the different modes 
of nature, their destinations are also of different 
varieties. (2) Just as by executing various pious 
activities one achieves different positions in 
heavenly life, by acting impiously one achieves 
different positions in hellish life. Those who are 
activated by the material mode of ignor ance en-
gage in impious activities, and according to the 
extent of their ignorance, they are placed in dif-
ferent grades of hellish life. If one acts in the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

348 
 mode of ignorance because of madness, his re-
sulting misery is the least severe. One who acts 
impiousl y but knows the distinction between 
pious and impious activities is placed in a hell 
of intermediate severity. And for one who acts 
impiously and ignorantly because of atheism, 
the resultant hellish life is the worst. Because 
of ignorance, every living ent ity has been car-
ried by various desires into thousands of differ-
ent hellish planets since time immemorial. I 
shall try to describe them as far as possible. (3)  
King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī:  My dear lord, are the hellish regions 
outside the universe, within the covering of the 
universe, or in different places on this 
planet? (4)  
The great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī an-
swered:  All the hellish planets are situated in 
the intermediate space between the three 
worlds and the Garbhodaka Ocean. They lie on 
the southern side of the universe, beneath Bhū -
maṇḍala, and slightly above the water of the 
Garbhodaka Ocean. Pitṛloka is also located in 
this region between the Garbhodaka Ocean and 
the lower planetary systems. All the residents 
of Pitṛloka, headed by Agniṣvāttā, meditate in 
great samādhi on the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and always wish their families 
well. (5) The King of the pitās is Yamarāja, the 
very p owerful son of the sun -god. He resides in 
Pitṛloka with his personal assistants and, while 
abiding by the rules and regulations set down 
by the Supreme Lord, has his agents, the Yama-
dūtas, bring all the sinful men to him immedi-
ately upon their death. After  bringing them 
within his jurisdiction, he properly judges them 
according to their specific sinful activities and 
sends them to one of the many hellish planets 
for suitable punishments. (6)  
Some authorities say that there is a total of 
twenty -one hellish p lanets, and some say 
twenty -eight. My dear King, I shall outline all 
of them according to their names, forms and 
symptoms. The names of the different hells are 
as follows: Tāmisra, Andhatāmisra, Raurava, 
Mahāraurava, Kumbhīpāka, Kālasūtra, 
Asipatravana, Sū karamukha, Andhakūpa, Kṛmibhojana, Sandaṁśa, Taptasūrmi, Va-
jrakaṇṭaka -śālmalī, Vaitaraṇī, Pūyoda, 
Prāṇarodha, Viśasana, Lālābhakṣa, 
Sārameyādana, Avīci, Ayaḥpāna, Kṣārakar-
dama, Rakṣogaṇa -bhojana, Śūlaprota, Dan-
daśūka, Avaṭa -nirodhana, Paryāvartana and 
Sūcīmukha. All these planets are meant for 
punishing the living entities. (7)  
My dear King, a person who appropriates 
another’s legitimate wife, children or money is 
arrested at the time of death by the fierce 
Yamadūtas, who bind him with the rope of time 
and forcibly throw him into the hellish planet 
known as Tāmisra. On this very dark planet, the 
sinful man is chastised by the Yamadūtas, who 
beat and rebuke him. He is starved, and he is 
given no water to drink. Thus the wrathful as-
sistants of Yamarāja cause h im severe suffer-
ing, and sometimes he faints from their chas-
tisement. (8) The destination of a person who 
slyly cheats another man and enjoys his wife 
and children is the hell known as 
Andhatāmisra. There his condition is exactly 
like that of a tree being c hopped at its roots. 
Even before reaching Andhatāmisra, the sinful 
living being is subjected to various extreme 
miseries. These afflictions are so severe that he 
loses his intelligence and sight. It is for this rea-
son that learned sages call this hell 
Andh atāmisra. (9)  
A person who accepts his body as his self 
works very hard day and night for money to 
maintain his own body and the bodies of his 
wife and children. While working to maintain 
himself and his family, he may commit vio-
lence against other living entities. Such a per-
son is forced to give up his body and his family 
at the time of death, when he suffers the reac-
tion for his envy of other creatures by being 
thrown into the hell called Raurava. (10) In this 
life, an envious person commits violent acts 
against many living entities. Therefore after his 
death, when he is taken to hell by Yamarāja, 
those living entities who were hurt by him ap-
pear as animals called rurus to inflict very se-
vere pain upon him. Learned scholars call this 
hell Raurava. Not gener ally seen in this world, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

349 
 the ruru is more envious than a snake. (11) Pun-
ishment in the hell called Mahāraurava is com-
pulsory for a person who maintains his own 
body by hurting others. In this hell, ruru ani-
mals known as kravyāda torment him and eat 
his fles h.(12)  
For the maintenance of their bodies and the 
satisfaction of their tongues, cruel persons cook 
poor animals and birds alive. Such persons are 
condemned even by man -eaters. In their next 
lives they are carried by the Yamadūtas to the 
hell known as Ku mbhīpāka, where they are 
cooked in boiling oil. (13) The killer of a 
brāhmaṇa is put into the hell known as 
Kālasūtra, which has a circumference of eighty 
thousand miles and which is made entirely of 
copper. Heated from below by fire and from 
above by the s corching sun, the copper surface 
of this planet is extremely hot. Thus the mur-
derer of a brāhmaṇa suffers from being burned 
both internally and externally. Internally he is 
burning with hunger and thirst, and externally 
he is burning from the scorching hea t of the sun 
and the fire beneath the copper surface. There-
fore he sometimes lies down, sometimes sits, 
sometimes stands up and sometimes runs here 
and there. He must suffer in this way for as 
many thousands of years as there are hairs on 
the body of an an imal. (14) 
If a person deviates from the path of the Ve-
das in the absence of an emergency, the serv-
ants of Yamarāja put him into the hell called 
Asi-patravana, where they beat him with 
whips. When he runs hither and thither, fleeing 
from the extreme pain, on all side s he runs into 
palm trees with leaves like sharpened swords. 
Thus injured all over his body and fainting at 
every step, he cries out, “Oh, what shall I do 
now! How shall I be saved!” This is how one 
suffers who deviates from the accepted reli-
gious principl es.(15)  
In his next life, a sinful king or governmen-
tal representative who punishes an innocent 
person, or who inflicts corporal punishment 
upon a brāhmaṇa, is taken by the Yamadūtas to 
the hell named Sūkaramukha, where the most 
powerful assistants of Yamarāja cru sh him ex-
actly as one crushes sugarcane to squeeze out the juice. The sinful living entity cries very pit-
iably and faints, just like an innocent man un-
dergoing punishments. This is the result of pun-
ishing a faultless person. (16)  
By the arrangement of the Supreme Lord, 
low-grade living beings like bugs and mosqui-
toes suck the blood of human beings and other 
animals. Such insignificant creatures are una-
ware that their bites are painful to the human 
being. However, first -class human beings-
brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas  and vaiśyasare developed 
in consciousness, and therefore they know how 
painful it is to be killed. A human being en-
dowed with knowledge certainly commits sin if 
he kills or torments insignificant creatures, who 
have no discrimination. The Supreme Lord 
punishes such a man by putting him into the 
hell known as Andhakūpa, where he is attacked 
by all the birds and beasts, reptiles, mosquitoes, 
lice, worms, flies, and any other creatures he 
tormented during his life. They attack him from 
all sides, robbing him of the pleasure of sleep. 
Unable to rest, he constantly wanders about in 
the darkness. Thus in Andhakūpa his suffering 
is just like that of a creature in the lower spe-
cies.(17)  
A person is considered no better than a crow 
if after receiving some food, he does not divide 
it among guests, old men and children, but 
simply eats it himself, or if he eats it without 
performing the five kinds of sacrifice. After 
death he is put into the most abominable hell, 
known as Kṛmibhojana. In that hell is a lake 
100,000 yo janas [800,000 miles] wide and 
filled with worms. He becomes a worm in that 
lake and feeds on the other worms there, who 
also feed on him. Unless he atones for his ac-
tions before his death, such a sinful man re-
mains in the hellish lake of Kṛmibhojana for a s 
many years as there are yojanas in the width of 
the lake. (18) My dear King, a person who in the 
absence of an emergency robs a brāhmaṇaor, 
indeed, anyone elseof his gems and gold is put 
into a hell known as Sandaṁśa. There his skin 
is torn and separated by red -hot iron balls and 
tongs. In this way, his entire body is cut to 
pieces. (19) A man or woman who indulges in 
sexual intercourse with an unworthy member 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

350 
 of the opposite sex is punished after death by 
the assistants of Yamarāja in the hell known as 
Taptasūrmi. There such men and women are 
beaten with whips. The man is forced to em-
brace a red -hot iron form of a woman, and the 
woman is forced to embrace a similar form of a 
man. Such is the punishment for illicit sex. (20) 
A person who indulges in sex indis criminate-
lyeven with animalsis taken after death to the 
hell known as Vajrakaṇṭaka -śālmalī. In this hell 
there is a silk -cotton tree full of thorns as strong 
as thunderbolts. The agents of Yamarāja hang 
the sinful man on that tree and pull him down 
forcibl y so that the thorns very severely tear his 
body. (21) A person who is born into a respon-
sible familysuch as a kṣatriya, a member of roy-
alty or a government servantbut who neglects 
to execute his prescribed duties according to re-
ligious principles, and who thus becomes de-
graded, falls down at the time of death into the 
river of hell known as Vaitaraṇī. This river, 
which is a moat surrounding hell, is full of fe-
rocious aquatic animals. When a sinful man is 
thrown into the river Vaitaraṇī, the aquatic an-
imals there immediately begin to eat him, but 
because of his extremely sinful life, he does not 
leave his body. He constantly remembers his 
sinful activities and suffers terribly in that river, 
which is full of stool, urine, pus, blood, hair, 
nails, bones, marro w, flesh and fat. (22) The 
shameless husband s of lowborn śūdra women 
live exactly like animals, and therefore they 
have no good behavior, cleanliness or regulated 
life. After death, such persons are thrown into 
the hell called Pūyoda, where they are put into 
an ocean filled with pus, stool, urine, m ucus, 
saliva and similar things. Śūdras who could not 
improve themselves fall into that ocean and are 
forced to eat those disgusting things. (23) If in 
this life a man of the higher classes [brāhmaṇa, 
kṣatriya and vaiśya] is very fond of taking his 
pet dogs , mules or asses into the forest to hunt 
and kill animals unnecessarily, he is placed af-
ter death into the hell known as Prāṇarodha. 
There the assistants of Yamarāja make him 
their targets and pierce him with arrows. (24)  
A person who in this life is proud of his em-
inent position, and who heedlessly sacrifices 
animals simply for material prestige, is put into the hell called Viśasana after death. There the 
assistants of Yamarāja kill him after giving him 
unlimited pain. (25) If a foolish member of the 
twice -born classes [brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya and 
vaiśya] forces his wife to drink his semen out 
of a lusty desire to keep her under control, he is 
put after death into the hell known as 
Lālābhakṣa. There he is thrown i nto a flowing 
river of semen, which he is forced to drink. (26) 
In this world, some persons are professional 
plunderers who set fire to others’ houses or ad-
minister poison to them. Also, members of the 
royalty or government officials sometimes 
plunder merca ntile men by forcing them to pay 
income tax and by other methods. After death 
such demons are put into the hell known as 
Sārameyādana. On that planet there are 720 
dogs with teeth as strong as thunderbolts. Un-
der the orders of the agents of Yamarāja, these  
dogs voraciously devour such sinful peo-
ple.(27) A person who in this life bears false 
witness or lies while transacting business or 
giving charity is severely punished after death 
by the agents of Yamarāja. Such a sinful man is 
taken to the top of a mount ain eight hundred 
miles high and thrown headfirst into the hell 
known as Avīcimat. This hell has no shelter and 
is made of strong stone resembling the waves 
of water. There is no water there, however, and 
thus it is called Avīcimat [waterless]. Although 
the sinful man is repeatedly thrown from the 
mountain and his body broken to tiny pieces, he 
still does not die but continuously suffers chas-
tisement. (28)  
Any brāhmaṇa or brāhmaṇa’s wife who 
drinks liquor is taken by the agents of Yamarāja 
to the hell known  as Ayaḥpāna. This hell also 
awaits any kṣatriya, vaiśya, or person under a 
vow who in illusion drinks soma -rasa. In 
Ayaḥpāna the agents of Yamarāja stand on 
their chests and pour hot melted iron into their 
mouths. (29) A lowborn and abominable person 
who i n this life becomes falsely proud, thinking 
“I am great,” and who thus fails to show proper 
respect to one more elevated than he by birth, 
austerity, education, behavior, caste or spiritual 
order, is like a dead man even in this lifetime, 
and after death h e is thrown headfirst into the 
hell known as Kṣārakardama. There he must 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

351 
 suffer great tribulation at the hands of the 
agents of Yamarāja. (30)  
There are men and women in this world who 
sacrifice human beings to Bhairava or Bhadra 
Kālī and then eat their vi ctims’ flesh. Those 
who perform such sacrifices are taken after 
death to the abode of Yamarāja, where their 
victims, having taken the form of Rākṣasas, cut 
them to pieces with sharpened swords. Just as 
in this world the man -eaters drank their vic-
tims’ bloo d, dancing and singing in jubilation, 
their victims now enjoy drinking the blood of 
the sacrificers and celebrating in the same 
way. (31) In this life some people give shelter to 
animals and birds that come to them for protec-
tion in the village or forest, a nd after making 
them believe that they will be protected, such 
people pierce them with lances or threads and 
play with them like toys, giving them great 
pain. After death such people are brought by 
the assistants of Yamarāja to the hell known as 
Śūlaprota, where their bodies are pierced with 
sharp, needlelike lances. They suffer from hun-
ger and thirst, and sharp -beaked birds such as 
vultures and herons come at them from all sides 
to tear at their bodies. Tortured a nd suffering, 
they can then remember the sinful activities 
they committed in the past. (32) Those who in 
this life are like envious serpents, always angry 
and giving pain to other living entities, fall after 
death into the hell known as Dandaśūka. My 
dear K ing, in this hell there are serpents with 
five or seven hoods. These serpents eat such 
sinful persons just as snakes eat mice. (33) 
Those who in this life confine other living enti-
ties in dark wells, granaries or mountain caves 
are put after death into the hell known as Avaṭa -
nirodhana. There they themselves are pushed 
into dark wells, where poisonous fumes and 
smoke suffocate them and they suffer very se-
verely. (34) A householder who receives guests 
or visitors with cruel glances, as if to burn them 
to ashes , is put into the hell called Paryāvartana, 
where he is gazed at by hard -eyed vultures, her-
ons, crows and similar birds, which suddenly 
swoop down and pluck out his eyes with great 
force. (35)  
One who in this world or this life is very proud of his wealth always thinks, “I am so 
rich. Who can equal me?” His vision is twisted, 
and he is always afraid that someone will take 
his wealth. Indeed, he even suspects his superi-
ors. His face and heart dry up at the thought of 
losing his wealth, and therefore he alway s looks 
like a wretched fiend. He is not in any way able 
to obtain actual happiness, and he does not 
know what it is to be free from anxiety. Be-
cause of the sinful things he does to earn 
money, augment his wealth and protect it, he is 
put into the hell cal led Sūcīmukha, where the 
officials of Yamarāja punish him by stitching 
thread through his entire body like weavers 
manufacturing cloth. (36)  
My dear King Parīkṣit, in the province of 
Yamarāja there are hund reds and thousands of 
hellish planets. The impious people I have men-
tionedand also those I have not mentionedmust 
all enter these various planets according to the 
degree of their impiety. Those who are pious, 
however, enter other planetary systems, namely 
the planets of the demigods. Nevertheless, both 
the pious and impious are again brought to 
earth after the results of their pious or impious 
acts are exhausted. (37)  
In the beginning [the second and third Can-
tos of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam] I have already de-
scribed how one can progress on the path of lib-
eration. In the Purāṇas the vast universal exist-
ence, which is like an egg divided into fourteen 
parts, is described. This vast form is considered 
the external body of the Lord, created by His 
energy and qualities. It is generally called the 
virāṭ-rūpa. If one reads the description of this 
external form of the Lord with great faith, or if 
one hears about it or explains it to others to 
propagate bhāgavata -dharma, or Kṛṣṇa  con-
sciousness, his faith and devotion in spiritual 
consciousness, Kṛṣṇa consciousness, will grad-
ually increase. Although developing this con-
sciousness is very difficult, by this process one 
can purify himself and gradually come to an 
awareness of the Supr eme Absolute Truth. (38) 
One who is interested in liberation, who ac-
cepts the path of liberation and is not attracted 
to the path of conditional life, is called yati, or 
a devotee. Such a person should first control his 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

352 
 mind by thinking of the virāṭ -rūpa, t he gigantic 
universal form of the Lord, and then gradually 
think of the spiritual form of Kṛṣṇa [sac -cid-
ānanda -vigraha] after hearing of both forms. 
Thus one’s mind is fixed in samādhi. By devo-
tional service one can then realize the spiritual 
form of the Lord, which is the destination of 
devotees. Thus his life becomes successful. (39) 
My dear King, I have now described for you 
this planet earth, other planetary systems, and 
their lands [varṣas], rivers and mountains. I 
have also described the sky, the ocea ns, the 
lower planetary systems, the directions, the 
hellish planetary systems and the stars. These 
constitute the virāṭ -rūpa, the gigantic material 
form of the Lord, on which all living entities 
repose. Thus I have explained the wonderful 
expanse of the e xternal body of the Lord. (40)  
Canto  6: Prescribed Duties for Mankind  
SB 6.1: The History of the Life of 
Ajāmila  
Mahārāja Parīkṣit said:  O my lord, O 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, you have already de-
scribed [in the Second Canto ] the path of liber-
ation [nivṛtti -mārga].  By following that path, 
one is certainly elevated gradually to the high-
est planetary system, Brahmaloka, from which 
one is promoted to the spiritual world along 
with Lord Brahmā. Thus one’s repetition of 
birth and death in the material world ceases. (1) 
O great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī, unless the liv-
ing entity is freed from the infection of the ma-
terial modes of nature, he receives different 
types of bodies in which to enjoy or suffer, and 
according to the body, he is understood to have 
various inclinations. By following these incli-
nations he traverses the path called pravṛtti -
mārga, by which one may be elevated to the 
heavenly planets, as you have already de-
scribed [in the Third Canto ].(2) You have also 
described [at the end of the Fifth Canto ] the va-
rieties of hellish life that result from impious 
activities, and you have described [in the 
Fourth Canto ] the first manvantara, which was 
presided over by Svāyambhuva Manu, the son 
of Lord Brahmā. (3) My dear lord, you have de-
scribed the dynasties and characteristi cs of King Priyavrata and King Uttānapāda. The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead created this ma-
terial world with various universes, planetary 
systems, planets and stars, with varied lands, 
seas, oceans, mountains, rivers, gardens and 
trees, all with differen t characteristics. These 
are divided among this planet earth, the lumi-
naries in the sky and the lower planetary sys-
tems. You have very clearly described these 
planets and the living entities who live on 
them. (4-5) O greatly fortunate and opulent 
Śukadeva G osvāmī, now kindly tell me how 
human beings may be saved from having to en-
ter hellish conditions in which they suffer terri-
ble pains. (6)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied:  My dear King, 
if before one’s next death whatever impious 
acts one has performed in this lif e with his 
mind, words and body are not counteracted 
through proper atonement according to the de-
scription of the Manu -saṁhitā and other 
dharma -śāstras, one will certainly enter the 
hellish planets after death and undergo terrible 
suffering, as I have prev iously described to 
you.(7) Therefore, before one’s next death 
comes, as long as one’s body is strong enough, 
one should quickly adopt the process of atone-
ment according to śāstra; otherwise one’s time 
will be lost, and the reactions of his sins will 
incre ase. As an expert physician diagnoses and 
treats a disease according to its gravity, one 
should undergo atonement according to the se-
verity of one’s sins. (8) 
Mahārāja Parīkṣit said:  One may know 
that sinful activity is injurious for him because 
he actually  sees that a criminal is punished by 
the government and rebuked by people in gen-
eral and because he hears from scriptures and 
learned scholars that one is thrown into hellish 
conditions in the next life for committing sinful 
acts. Nevertheless, in spite of  such knowledge, 
one is forced to commit sins again and again, 
even after performing acts of atonement. 
Therefore, what is the value of such atone-
ment? (9) Sometimes one who is very alert so as 
not to commit sinful acts is victimized by sinful 
life again. I  therefore consider this process of 
repeated sinning and atoning to be useless. It is 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

353 
 like the bathing of an elephant, for an elephant 
cleanses itself by taking a full bath, but then 
throws dust over its head and body as soon as it 
returns to the land. (10)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Veda-
vyāsa, answered:  My dear King, since acts 
meant to neutralize impious actions are also 
fruitive, they will not release one from the ten-
dency to act fruitively. Persons who subject 
themselves to the rules and regulations of 
atonement are not at all intelligent. Indeed, they 
are in the mode of darkness. Unless one is freed 
from the mode of ignorance, trying to counter-
act one action through another is useless be-
cause this will not uproot one’s desires. Thus 
even though one may superficially seem pious, 
he will undoubtedl y be prone to act impiously. 
Therefore real atonement is enlightenment in 
perfect knowledge, Vedānta, by which one un-
derstands the Supreme Absolute Truth. (11) My 
dear King, if a diseased person eats the pure, 
uncontaminated food prescribed by a physi-
cian, he is gradually cured, and the infection of 
disease can no longer touch him. Similarly, if 
one follows the regulative principles of 
knowledge, he gradually progresses toward lib-
eration from material contamination. (12) To 
concentrate the mind, one must obse rve a life 
of celibacy and not fall down. One must un-
dergo the austerity of voluntarily giving up 
sense enjoyment. One must then control the 
mind and senses, give charity, be truthful, clean 
and nonviolent, follow the regulative principles 
and regularly ch ant the holy name of the Lord. 
Thus a sober and faithful person who knows the 
religious principles is temporarily purified of 
all sins performed with his body, words and 
mind. These sins are like the dried leaves of 
creepers beneath a bamboo tree, which ma y be 
burned by fire although their roots remain to 
grow again at the first opportunity. (13-14) 
Only a rare person who has adopted complete, 
unalloyed devotional service to Kṛṣṇa can up-
root the weeds of sinful actions with no possi-
bility that they will revive. He can do this 
simply by discharging devotional service, just 
as the sun can immediately di ssipate fog by its 
rays. (15) My dear King, if a sinful person en-
gages in the service of a bona fide devotee of the Lord and thus learns how to dedicate his life 
unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, he can be com-
pletely purified. One cannot be purified merely 
by undergoing austerity, penance, brahmacarya 
and the other methods of atonement I have pre-
viously described. (16) The path followed by 
pure devotees, who are well -behaved and fully 
endowed with the best qualifications, is cer-
tainly the most auspicious path in this material 
world. It is free from fear, and it is authorized 
by the śāstras. (17) My dear King, as a pot con-
taining liquor cannot be purified even if washed 
in the waters of many rivers, nondevotees can-
not be purified by processes of atonement even 
if they perform them very well. (18) Although 
not having fully realized Kṛṣṇa, persons who 
have even once surrendered completely unto 
His lotus feet and who have become attracted 
to His name, form, qualities and pastimes are 
completely freed of all sinful reacti ons, for they 
have thus accepted the true method of atone-
ment. Even in dreams, such surrendered souls 
do not see Yamarāja or his order carriers, who 
are equipped with ropes to bind the sinful. (19)  
In this regard, learned scholars and saintly 
persons descr ibe a very old historical incident 
involving a discussion between the order carri-
ers of Lord Viṣṇu and those of Yamarāja. 
Please hear of this from me. (20) In the city 
known as Kānyakubja there was a brāhmaṇa 
named Ajāmila who married a prostitute maid-
serva nt and lost all his brahminical qualities be-
cause of the association of that low -class 
woman. (21) This fallen brāhmaṇa, Ajāmila, 
gave trouble to others by arresting them, by 
cheating them in gambling or by directly plun-
dering them. This was the way he earn ed his 
livelihood and maintained his wife and chil-
dren. (22) My dear King, while he thus spent his 
time in abominable, sinful activities to maintain 
his family of many sons, eighty -eight years of 
his life passed by. (23) That old man Ajāmila 
had ten sons, of  whom the youngest was a baby 
named Nārāyaṇa. Since Nārāyaṇa was the 
youngest of all the sons, he was naturally very 
dear to both his father and his mother. (24) Be-
cause of the child’s broken language and awk-
ward movements, old Ajāmila was very much 
attache d to him. He always took care of the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

354 
 child and enjoyed the child’s activities. (25) 
When Ajāmila chewed food and ate it, he called 
the child to chew and eat, and when he drank 
he called the child to drink also. Always en-
gaged in taking care of the child and  calling his 
name, Nārāyaṇa, Ajāmila could not understand 
that his own time was now exhausted and that 
death was upon him. (26)  
When the time of death arrived for the fool-
ish Ajāmila, he began thinking exclusively of 
his son Nārāyaṇa. (27) Ajāmila then saw three 
awkward persons with deformed bodily fea-
tures, fierce, twisted faces, and hair standing 
erect on their bodies. With ropes in their hands, 
they had come to take him away to the abode of 
Yamarāja. When he saw them he was ex-
tremely bewildered, and becau se of attachment 
to his child, who was playing a short distance 
away, Ajāmila began to call him loudly by his 
name. Thus with tears in his eyes he somehow 
or other chanted the holy name of 
Nārāyaṇa. (28-29) My dear King, the order car-
riers of Viṣṇu, the Viṣ ṇudūtas, immediately ar-
rived when they heard the holy name of their 
master from the mouth of the dying Ajāmila, 
who had certainly chanted without offense be-
cause he had chanted in complete anxiety. (30) 
The order carriers of Yamarāja were snatching 
the soul  from the core of the heart of Ajāmila, 
the husband  of the prostitute, but with resound-
ing voices the messengers of Lord Viṣṇu, the 
Viṣṇudūtas, forbade them to do so. (31) When 
the order carriers of Yamarāja, the son of the 
sun-god, were thus forbidden, the y replied: 
Who are you, sirs, that have the audacity to 
challenge the jurisdiction of Yamarāja? (32) 
Dear sirs, whose servants are you, where have 
you come from, and why are you forbidding us 
to touch the body of Ajāmila? Are you demi-
gods from the heavenly planets, are you sub -
demigods, or are you the best of devotees? (33) 
The order carriers of Yamarāja said: Your eyes 
are just like the petals of lotus flowers. Dressed 
in yellow silken garments, decorated with gar-
lands of lotuses, and wearing very attractive  
helmets on your heads and earrings on your 
ears, you all appear fresh and youthful. Your 
four long arms are decorated with bows and 
quivers of arrows and with swords, clubs, conchshells, discs and lotus flowers. Your ef-
fulgence has dissipated the darkness  of this 
place with extraordinary illumination. Now, 
sirs, why are you obstructing us? (34-36)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Being thus 
addressed by the messengers of Yamarāja, the 
servants of Vāsudeva smiled and spoke the fol-
lowing words in voices as deep as the sound of 
rumbling clouds. (37)  
The blessed messengers of Lord Viṣṇu, 
the Viṣṇudūtas, said : If you are actually serv-
ants of Yamarāja, you must explain to us the 
meaning of religious principles and the symp-
toms of irreligion. (38) What is the process of 
punishing others? Who are the actual candi-
dates for punishment? Are all karmīs engaged 
in frui tive activities punishable, or only some 
of them? (39) The Yamadūtas replied: That 
which is prescribed in the Vedas constitutes 
dharma, the religious principles, and the oppo-
site of that is irreligion. The Vedas are directly 
the Supreme Personality of Godhe ad, 
Nārāyaṇa, and are self -born. This we have 
heard from Yamarāja. (40) The supreme cause 
of all causes, Nārāyaṇa, is situated in His own 
abode in the spiritual world, but nevertheless 
He controls the entire cosmic manifestation ac-
cording to the three modes  of material nature-
sattva -guṇa, rajo -guṇa and tamo -guṇa. In this 
way all living entities are awarded different 
qualities, different names [such as brāhmaṇa, 
kṣatriya and vaiśya], different duties according 
to the varṇāśrama institution, and different 
forms . Thus Nārāyaṇa is the cause of the entire 
cosmic manifestation. (41) The sun, fire, sky, 
air, demigods, moon, evening, day, night, di-
rections, water, land and Supersoul Himself all 
witness the activities of the living entity. (42)  
43The candidates for punishment are those 
who are confirmed by these many witnesses to 
have deviated from their prescribed regulative 
duties. Everyone engaged in fruitive activities 
is suitable to be subjected to punishment ac-
cordin g to his sinful acts. (43) O inhabitants of 
Vaikuṇṭha, you are sinless, but those within this 
material world are all karmīs, whether acting 
piously or impiously. Both kinds of action are 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

355 
 possible for them because they are contami-
nated by the three modes of nature and must act 
accord ingly. One who has accepted a material 
body cannot be inactive, and sinful action is in-
evitable for one acting under the modes of ma-
terial nature. Therefore all the living entities 
within this material world are punishable. (44) 
In proportion to the extent of one’s religious or 
irreligious actions in this life, one must enjoy 
or suffer the corresponding reactions of his 
karma in the next. (45) O best of the demigods, 
we can see three different varieties of life, 
which are due to the contamination of the three  
modes of nature. The living entities are thus 
known as peaceful, restless and foolish; as 
happy, unhappy or in -between; or as religious, 
irreligious and semireligious. We can deduce 
that in the next life these three kinds of material 
nature will similarly  act.(46) Just as springtime 
in the present indicates the nature of spring-
times in the past and future, so this life of hap-
piness, distress or a mixture of both gives evi-
dence concerning the religious and irreligious 
activities of one’s past and future liv es.(47) The 
omnipotent Yamarāja is as good as Lord 
Brahmā, for while situated in his own abode or 
in everyone’s heart like the Paramātmā, he 
mentally observes the past activities of a living 
entity and thus understands how the living en-
tity will act in fut ure lives. (48) As a sleeping 
person acts according to the body manifested in 
his dreams and accepts it to be himself, so one 
identifies with his present body, which he ac-
quired because of his past religious or irreli-
gious actions, and is unable to know his  past or 
future lives. (49) Above the five senses of per-
ception, the five working senses and the five 
objects of the senses is the mind, which is the 
sixteenth element. Above the mind is the sev-
enteenth element, the soul, the living being 
himself, who, in c ooperation with the other six-
teen, enjoys the material world alone. The liv-
ing being enjoys three kinds of situations, 
namely happy, distressful and mixed. (50) The 
subtle body is endowed with sixteen partsthe 
five knowledge -acquiring senses, the five 
worki ng senses, the five objects of sense grati-
fication, and the mind. This subtle body is an 
effect of the three modes of material nature. It is composed of insurmountably strong desires, 
and therefore it causes the living entity to trans-
migrate from one body to another in human 
life, animal life and life as a demigod. When the 
living entity gets the body of a demigod, he is 
certainly very jubilant, when he gets a human 
body he is always in lamentation, and when he 
gets the body of an animal, he is always afrai d. 
In all conditions, however, he is actually miser-
able. His miserable condition is called saṁsṛti, 
or transmigration in material life. (51) The fool-
ish embodied living entity, inept at controlling 
his senses and mind, is forced to act according 
to the infl uence of the modes of material nature, 
against his desires. He is like a silkworm that 
uses its own saliva to create a cocoon and then 
becomes trapped in it, with no possibility of 
getting out. The living entity traps himself in a 
network of his own fruiti ve activities and then 
can find no way to release himself. Thus he is 
always bewildered, and repeatedly he dies. (52) 
Not a single living entity can remain unengaged 
even for a moment. One must act by his natural 
tendency according to the three modes of mat e-
rial nature because this natural tendency forci-
bly make s him work in a particular way.53) 
The fruitive activities a living being performs, 
whether pious or impious, are the unseen cause 
for the fulfillment of his desires. This unseen 
cause is the root for  the living entity’s different 
bodies. Because of his intense desire, the living 
entity takes birth in a particular family and re-
ceives a body which is either like that of his 
mother or like that of his father. The gross and 
subtle bodies are created accor ding to his de-
sire.(54) Since the living entity is associated 
with material nature, he is in an awkward posi-
tion, but if in the human form of life he is taught 
how to associate with the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead or His devotee, this position can be 
overcome. (55) 
 In the beginning this brāhmaṇa named 
Ajāmila studied all the Vedic literatures. He 
was a reservoir of good character, good conduct 
and good qualities. Firmly established in exe-
cuting all the Vedic injunctions, he was very 
mild and gentle, and he kept his m ind and 
senses under control. Furthermore, he was al-
ways truthful, he knew how to chant the Vedic 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

356 
 mantras, and he was also very pure. Ajāmila 
was very respectful to his spiritual master, the 
fire-god, guests, and the elderly members of his 
household. Indee d, he was free from false pres-
tige. He was upright, benevolent to all living 
entities, and well -behaved. He would never 
speak nonsense or envy anyone. (56-57) Once 
this brāhmaṇa Ajāmila, following the order of 
his father, went to the forest to collect fruit , 
flowers and two kinds of grass, called samit and 
kuśa. On the way home, he came upon a śūdra, 
a very lusty, fourth -class man, who was shame-
lessly embracing and kissing a prostitute. The 
śūdra was smiling, singing and enjoying as if 
this were proper behav ior. Both the śūdra and 
the prostitute were drunk. The prostitute’s eyes 
were rolling in intoxication, and her dress had 
become loose. Such was the condition in which 
Ajāmila saw them. (58-60) The śūdra, his arm 
decorated with turmeric powder, was embrac-
ing the prostitute. When Ajāmila saw her, the 
dormant lusty desires in his heart awakened, 
and in illusion he fell under their control. (61) 
As far as possible he patiently tried to remem-
ber the instructions of the śāstras not even to 
see a woman. With the hel p of this knowledge 
and his intellect, he tried to control his lusty de-
sires, but because of the force of Cupid within 
his heart, he failed to control his mind. (62) In 
the same way that the sun and moon are 
eclipsed by a low planet, the brāhmaṇa lost all 
his good sense. Taking advantage of this situa-
tion, he always thought of the prostitute, and 
within a short time he took her as a servant in 
his house and abandoned all the regulative prin-
ciples of a brāhmaṇa. (63) Thus Ajāmila began 
spending whatever money he had inherited 
from his father to satisfy the prostitute with var-
ious material presentations so that she would 
remain pleased with him. He gave up all his 
brahminical activities to satisfy the prosti-
tute.(64) Because his intelligence was pierced 
by the l ustful glance of the prostitute, the vic-
timized brāhmaṇa Ajāmila engaged in sinful 
acts in her association. He even gave up the 
company of his very beautiful young wife, who 
came from a very respectable brāhmaṇa fam-
ily.(65) Although born of a brāhmaṇa fami ly, 
this rascal, bereft of intelligence because of the prostitute’s association, earned money some-
how or other, regardless of whether properly or 
improperly, and used it to maintain the prosti-
tute’s sons and daughters. (66) This brāhmaṇa 
irresponsibly spent  his long lifetime transgress-
ing all the rules and regulations of the holy 
scripture, living extravagantly and eating food 
prepared by a prostitute. Therefore he is full of 
sins. He is unclean and is addicted to forbidden 
activities. (67) This man Ajāmila d id not un-
dergo atonement. Therefore because of his sin-
ful life, we must take him into the presence of 
Yamarāja for punishment. There, according to 
the extent of his sinful acts, he will be punished 
and thus purified. (68)  
SB 6.2: Ajāmila Delivered by the 
Viṣṇudūtas  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  My dear King, 
the servants of Lord Viṣṇu are always very ex-
pert in logic and arguments. After hearing the 
statements of the Yamadūtas, they replied as 
follows. (1)  
The Viṣṇudūtas said: Alas, how painful it is 
that irreligio n is being introduced into an as-
sembly where religion should be maintained. 
Indeed, those in charge of maintaining the reli-
gious principles are needlessly punishing a sin-
less, unpunishable person. (2) A king or govern-
mental official should be so well qualif ied that 
he acts as a father, maintainer and protector of 
the citizens because of affection and love. He 
should give the citizens good advice and in-
structions according to the standard scriptures 
and should be equal to everyone.  Yamarāja 
does this, for he is the supreme master of jus-
tice, and so do those who follow in his foot-
steps. However, if such persons become pol-
luted and exhibit partiality by punishing an in-
nocent, blameless person, where will the citi-
zens go to take shelte r for their maintenance 
and security? (3) The mass of people follow the 
example of a leader in society and imitate his 
behavior. They accept as evidence whatever the 
leader accepts. (4) People in general are not 
very advanced in knowledge by which to dis-
criminate between religion and irreligion. The 
innocent, unenlightened citizen is like an igno-
rant animal sleeping in peace with its head on 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

357 
 the lap of its master, faithfully believing in the 
master’s protection. If a leader is actually 
kindhearted and deserve s to be the object of a 
living entity’s faith, how can he punish or kill a 
foolish person who has fully surrendered in 
good faith and friendship? (5-6)  
Ajāmila has already atoned for all his sinful 
actions. Indeed, he has atoned not only for sins 
performed  in one life but for those performed 
in millions of lives, for in a helpless condition 
he chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa. Even 
though he did not chant purely, he chanted 
without offense, and therefore he is now pure 
and eligible for liberation. (7) The V iṣṇudūtas 
continued: Even previously, while eating and at 
other times, this Ajāmila would call his son, 
saying, “My dear Nārāyaṇa, please come here.” 
Although calling the name of his son, he never-
theless uttered the four syllables nā -rā-ya-ṇa. 
Simply by ch anting the name of Nārāyaṇa in 
this way, he sufficiently atoned for the sinful 
reactions of millions of lives. (8) The chanting 
of the holy name of Lord Viṣṇu is the best pro-
cess of atonement for a thief of gold or other 
valuables, for a drunkard, for one w ho betrays 
a friend or relative, for one who kills a 
brāhmaṇa, or for one who indulges in sex with 
the wife of his guru or another superior. It is 
also the best method of atonement for one who 
murders women, the king or his father, for one 
who slaughters c ows, and for all other sinful 
men. Simply by chanting the holy name of Lord 
Viṣṇu, such sinful persons may attract the at-
tention of the Supreme Lord, who therefore 
considers, “Because this man has chanted My 
holy name, My duty is t o give him protection.(  
9-10) By following the Vedic ritualistic cere-
monies or undergoing atonement, sinful men 
do not become as purified as by chanting once 
the holy name of Lord Hari. Although ritualis-
tic atonement may free one from sinful reac-
tions, it does not awaken devotional service, 
unlike the chanting of the Lord’s names, which 
reminds one of the Lord’s fame, qualities, at-
tributes, pastimes and paraphernalia. (11) The 
ritualistic ceremonies of atonement recom-
mended in the r eligious scriptures are insuffi-
cient to cleanse the heart absolutely because af-
ter atonement one’s mind again runs toward material activities. Consequently, for one who 
wants liberation from the fruitive reactions of 
material activities, the chanting of th e Hare 
Kṛṣṇa mantra, or glorification of the name, 
fame and pastimes of the Lord, is recom-
mended as the most perfect process of atone-
ment because such chanting eradicates the dirt 
from one’s heart completely. (12)  
At the time of death, this Ajāmila helples sly 
and very loudly chanted the holy name of the 
Lord, Nārāyaṇa. That chanting alone has al-
ready freed him from the reactions of all sinful 
life. Therefore, O servants of Yamarāja, do not 
try to take him to your master for punishment 
in hellish conditions. (13)  
One who chants the holy name of the Lord 
is immediately freed from the reactions of un-
limited sins, even if he chants indirectly [to in-
dicate something else], jokingly, for musical 
entertainment, or even neglectfully. This is ac-
cepted by all the lear ned scholars of the scrip-
tures. (14) If one chants the holy name of Hari 
and then dies because of an accidental misfor-
tune, such as falling from the top of a house, 
slipping and suffering broken bones while trav-
eling on the road, being bitten by a serpent, be-
ing afflicted with pain and high fever, or being 
injured by a weapon, one is immediately ab-
solved from having to enter hellish life, even 
though he is sinful. (15) Authorities who are 
learned scholars and sages have carefully ascer-
tained that one should a tone for the heaviest 
sins by undergoing a heavy process of atone-
ment and one should atone for lighter sins by 
undergoing lighter atonement. Chanting the 
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, however, vanquishes all 
the effects of sinful activities, regardless of 
whether hea vy or light. (16) Although one may 
neutralize the reactions of sinful life through 
austerity, charity, vows and other such meth-
ods, these pious activities cannot uproot the 
material desires in one’s heart. However, if one 
serves the lotus feet of the Person ality of God-
head, he is immediately freed from all such 
contaminations. (17) As a fire burns dry grass to 
ashes, so the holy name of the Lord, whether 
chanted knowingly or unknowingly, burns to 
ashes, without fail, all the reactions of one’s 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

358 
 sinful activiti es.(18) If a person unaware of the 
effective potency of a certain medicine takes 
that medicine or is forced to take it, it will act 
even without his knowledge because its po-
tency does not depend on the patient’s under-
standing. Similarly, even though one do es not 
know the value of chanting the holy name of 
the Lord, if one chants knowingly or unknow-
ingly, the chanting will be very effective. (19)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My 
dear King, having thus perfectly judged the 
principles of devotional service with reasoning 
and arguments, the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu 
released the brāhmaṇa Ajāmila from the bond-
age of the Yamadūtas and saved him from  im-
minent death. (20) My dear Mahārāja Parīkṣit, 
O subduer of all enemies, after the servants of 
Yamarāja had been answered by the order car-
riers of Lord Viṣṇu, they went to Yamarāja and 
explained to him ever ything that had hap-
pened. (21)  
Having been released from the nooses of 
Yamarāja’s servants, the brāhmaṇa Ajāmila, 
now free from fear, came to his senses and im-
mediately offered obeisances to the Viṣṇudūtas 
by bowing his head at their lotus feet. He was 
extremely pleased by their presence, for he had 
seen them save his life from the hands of the 
servants of Yamarāja. (22) O sinless Mahārāja 
Parīkṣit, the order carriers of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the Viṣṇudūtas, saw that 
Ajāmila was attempting to s ay something, and 
thus they suddenly disappeared from his pres-
ence. (23) After hearing the discourses between 
the Yamadūtas and the Viṣṇudūtas, Ajāmila 
could understand the religious principles that 
act under the three modes of material nature. 
These princi ples are mentioned in the three Ve-
das. He could also understand the transcenden-
tal religious principles, which are above the 
modes of material nature and which concern 
the relationship between the living being and 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Furthe r-
more, Ajāmila heard glorification of the name, 
fame, qualities and pastimes of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. He thus became a per-
fectly pure devotee. He could then remember his past sinful activities, which he greatly re-
gretted having performed. (24-25) Ajāmila said: 
Alas, being a servant of my senses, how de-
graded I became! I fell down from my position 
as a duly qualified brāhmaṇa and begot chil-
dren in the womb of a prostitute. (26) Alas, all 
condemnation upon me! I acted so sinfully that 
I degraded m y family tradition. Indeed, I gave 
up my chaste and beautiful young wife to have 
sexual intercourse with a fallen prostitute ac-
customed to drinking wine. All condemnation 
upon me! (27) My father and mother were old 
and had no other son or friend to look aft er 
them. Because I did not take care of them, they 
lived with great difficulty. Alas, like an abomi-
nable lower -class man, I ungratefully left them 
in that condition. (28) It is now clear that as a 
consequence of such activities, a sinful person 
like me must  be thrown into hellish conditions 
meant for those who have broken religious 
principles and must there suffer extreme miser-
ies.(29)  
Was this a dream I saw, or was it reality? I 
saw fearsome men with ropes in their hands 
coming to arrest me and drag me awa y. Where 
have they gone? (30) And where have those 
four liberated and very beautiful persons gone 
who released me from arrest and saved me from 
being dragg ed down to the hellish regions?(31) 
I am certainly most abominable and unfortu-
nate to have merged in a n ocean of sinful activ-
ities, but nevertheless, because of my previous 
spiritual activities, I could see those four ex-
alted personalities who came to rescue me. 
Now I feel exceedingly happy because of their 
visit. (32) Were it not for my past devotional 
service, how could I, a most unclean keeper of 
a prostitute, have gotten an opportunity to chant 
the holy na me of Vaikuṇṭhapati when I was just 
ready to die? Certainly it could not have been 
possible. (33) Ajāmila continued: I am a shame-
less cheater who has killed his brahminical cul-
ture. Indeed, I am sin personified. Where am I 
in comparison to the all -auspiciou s chanting of 
the holy name of Lord Nārāyaṇa? (34) I am such 
a sinful person, but since I have now gotten this 
opportunity, I must completely control my 
mind, life and senses and always engage in de-
votional service so that I may not fall again into 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

359 
 the deep  darkness and ignorance of material 
life.(35) Because of identifying oneself with 
the body, one is subjected to desires for sense 
gratification, and thus one engages in many dif-
ferent types of pious and impious action. This 
is what constitutes material bon dage. Now I 
shall disentangle myself from my material 
bondage, which has been caused by the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead’s illusory en-
ergy in the form of a woman. Being a most 
fallen soul, I was victimized by the illusory en-
ergy and have become like a da ncing dog led 
around by a woman’s hand. Now I shall give up 
all lusty desires and free myself from this illu-
sion. I shall become a merciful, well -wishing 
friend to all living entities and always absorb 
myself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. (36-37) Simply 
because I  chanted the holy name of the Lord in 
the association of devotees, my heart is now be-
coming purified. Therefore I shall not fall vic-
tim again to the false lures of material sense 
gratification. Now that I have become fixed in 
the Absolute Truth, henceforwa rd I shall not 
identify myself with the body. I shall give up 
false conceptions of “I” and “mine” and fix my 
mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. (38) 
Because of a moment’s association with 
devotees [the Viṣṇudūtas], Ajāmila detached 
himself from the material c onception of life 
with determination. Thus freed from all mate-
rial attraction, he immediately started for Hard-
war.(39) In Hardwar, Ajāmila took shelter at a 
Viṣṇu temple, where he executed the process of 
bhakti -yoga. He controlled his senses and fully 
applied his mind in the service of the Lord. (40) 
Ajāmila fully engaged in devotional service. 
Thus he detached his mind from the process of 
sense gratification and became fully absorbed 
in thinking of the form of the Lord. (41) When 
his intelligence and mind we re fixed upon the 
form of the Lord, the brāhmaṇa Ajāmila once 
again saw before him four celestial persons. He 
could understand that they were those he had 
seen previously, and thus he offered them his 
obeisances by bowing down before them. (42) 
Upon seeing the Viṣṇudūtas, Ajāmila gave up 
his material body at Hardwar on the bank of the 
Ganges. He regained his original spiritual body, which was a body appropriate for an as-
sociate of the Lord. (43) Accompanied by the 
order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu, Ajāmila boarded  
an airplane made of gold. Passing through the 
airways, he went directly to the abode of Lord 
Viṣṇu, the husband  of the goddess of for-
tune. (44)  
Ajāmila was a brāhmaṇa who because of 
bad association had given up all brahminical 
culture and religious princi ples. Becoming 
most fallen, he stole, drank and performed 
other abominable acts. He even kept a prosti-
tute. Thus he was destined to be carried away 
to hell by the order carriers of Yamarāja, but he 
was immediately rescued simply by a glimpse 
of the chantin g of the holy name Nārāyaṇa. (45) 
Therefore one who desires freedom from mate-
rial bondage should adopt the process of chant-
ing and glorifying the name, fame, form and 
pastimes of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, at whose feet all the holy places stand. 
One cannot derive the proper benefit from other 
methods, such as pious atonement, speculative 
knowledge and meditation in mystic yoga, be-
cause even after following such methods one 
takes to fruitive activities again, unable to con-
trol his mind, which is con taminated by the 
base qualities of nature, namely passion and ig-
norance. (46)  
Because this very confidential historical 
narration has the potency to vanquish all sinful 
reactions, one who hears or describes it with 
faith and devotion is no longer doomed to  hell-
ish life, regardless of his having a material body 
and regardless of how sinful he may have been. 
Indeed, the Yamadūtas, who carry out the or-
ders of Yamarāja, do not approach him even to 
see him. After giving up his body, he returns 
home, back to Godh ead, where he is very re-
spectfully received and worshiped. (47-48) 
While suffering at the time of death, Ajāmila 
chanted the holy name of the Lord, and alt-
hough the chanting was directed toward his 
son, he nevertheless returned home, back to 
Godhead. Theref ore if one faithfully and inof-
fensively chants the holy name of the Lord, 
where is the doubt that he will return to God-
head? (49)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

360 
 SB 6.3: Yamarāja Instructs His Messen-
gers 
King Parīkṣit said:  O my lord, O Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī, Yamarāja is the controller of all  liv-
ing entities in terms of their religious and irre-
ligious activities, but his order had been foiled. 
When his servants, the Yamadūtas, informed 
him of their defeat by the Viṣṇudūtas, who had 
stopped them from arresting Ajāmila, what did 
he reply? (1) O great sage, never before has it 
been heard anywhere that an order from Yama-
rāja has been baffled. Therefore I think that 
people will have doubts about this that no one 
but you can eradicate. Since that is my firm 
conviction, kindly explain the reasons for t hese 
events. (2)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī replied:  My dear 
King, when the order carriers of Yamarāja were 
baffled and defeated by the order carriers of 
Viṣṇu, they approached their master, the con-
troller of Saṁyamanī -purī and master of sinful 
persons, to tell h im of this incident. (3)  
The Yamadūtas said: Our dear lord, how 
many controllers or rulers are there in this ma-
terial world? How many causes are responsible 
for manifesting the various results of activities 
performed under the three modes of material 
natur e [sattva -guṇa, rajo -guṇa and tamo -
guṇa]? (4) If in this universe there are many rul-
ers and justices who disagree about punishment 
and reward, their contradictory actions will 
neutralize each other, and no one will be pun-
ished or rewarded. Otherwise, if the ir contra-
dictory acts fail to neutralize each other, every-
one will have to be both punished and re-
warded. (5) The Yamadūtas continued: Since 
there are many different karmīs, or workers, 
there may be different judges or rulers to give 
them justice, but just as one central emperor 
controls different departmental rulers, there 
must be one supreme controller to guide all the 
judges. (6) The supreme judge must be one, not 
many. It was our understanding that you are 
that supreme judge and that you have jurisdic-
tion even over the demigods. Our impression 
was that you are the master of all living entities, 
the supreme authority who discriminates be-tween the pious and impious activities of all hu-
man beings. (7) But now we see that the punish-
ment ordained under your auth ority is no longer 
effective, since your order has been trans-
gressed by four wonderful and perfect per-
sons. (8) We were bringing the most sinful 
Ajāmila toward the hellish planets, following 
your order, when those beautiful persons from 
Siddhaloka forcibly cut the knots of the ropes 
with which we were arresting him. (9) As soon 
as the sinful Ajāmila uttered the name 
Nārāyaṇa, these four beautiful men immedi-
ately arrived and reassured him, saying, “Do 
not fear. Do not fear.” We wish to know about 
them from You r Lordship. If you think we are 
able to understand them, kindly describe who 
they are. (10)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus having 
been questioned, Lord Yamarāja, the supreme 
controller of the living entities, was very 
pleased with his order carriers becaus e of hear-
ing from them the holy name of Nārāyaṇa. He 
remembered the lotus feet of the Lord and be-
gan to reply. (11)  
Yamarāja said:  My dear servants, you have 
accepted me as the Supreme, but factually I am 
not. Above me, and above all the other demi-
gods, including Indra and Candra, is the one su-
preme master and controller. The partial mani-
festations of His personality are Brahmā, Viṣṇu 
and Śiva, who are in charge of the creation, 
maintenance and annihilation o f this universe. 
He is like the two threads that form the length 
and breadth of a woven cloth. The entire world 
is controlled by Him just as a bull is controlled 
by a rope in its nose. (12) Just as the driver of a 
bullock cart ties ropes through the nostril s of 
his bulls to control them, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead binds all men through the 
ropes of His words in the Vedas, which set forth 
the names and activities of the distinct orders o f 
human society [brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya and 
śūdra]. In fear, the members of these orders all 
worship the Supreme Lord by offering Him 
presentations according to their respective ac-
tivities. (13) I, Yamarāja; Indra, the King of 
heaven; Nirṛti; Varuṇa; Ca ndra, the moon -god; 
Agni; Lord Śiva; Pavana; Lord Brahmā; Sūrya, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

361 
 the sun -god; Viśvāsu; the eight Vasus; the 
Sādhyas; the Maruts; the Rudras; the Siddhas; 
and Marīci and the other great ṛṣis engaged in 
maintaining the departmental affairs of the uni-
verse, a s well as the best of the demigods 
headed by Bṛhaspati, and the great sages 
headed by Bhṛgu are all certainly freed from the 
influence of the two base material modes of na-
ture, namely passion and ignorance. Neverthe-
less, although we are in the mode of good ness, 
we cannot understand the activities of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. What, then, is 
to be said of others, who, under illusion, merely 
speculate to know God? ( 14-15) As the differ-
ent limbs of t he body cannot see the eyes, the 
living entities cannot see the Supreme Lord, 
who is situated as the Supersoul in everyone’s 
heart. Not by the senses, by the mind, by the 
life air, by thoughts within the heart, or by the 
vibration of words can the living e ntities ascer-
tain the real situation of the Supreme Lord. (16) 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is self -
sufficient and fully independent. He is the mas-
ter of everyone and everything, including the 
illusory energy. He has His form, qualities and 
features; and similarly His order carriers, the 
Vaiṣṇavas, who are very beautiful, possess 
bodily features, transcendental qualities and a 
transcendental nature almost like His. They al-
ways wander within this world with full inde-
pendence. (17) The order carriers of L ord 
Viṣṇu, who are worshiped even by the demi-
gods, possess wonderful bodily features ex-
actly like those of Viṣṇu and are very rarely 
seen. The Viṣṇudūtas protect the devotees of 
the Lord from the hands of enemies, from envi-
ous persons and even from my juri sdiction, as 
well as from natural disturbances. (18) 
Real religious principles are enacted by the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although 
fully situated in the mode of goodness, even the 
great ṛṣis who occupy the topmost planets can-
not ascertain the real r eligious principles, nor 
can the demigods or the leaders of Siddhaloka, 
to say nothing of the asuras, ordinary human 
beings, Vidyādharas and Cāraṇas. (19) Lord 
Brahmā, Bhagavān Nārada, Lord Śiva, the four 
Kumāras, Lord Kapila [the son of Devahūti], Svāyambh uva Manu, Prahlāda Mahārāja, Ja-
naka Mahārāja, Grandfather Bhīṣma, Bali 
Mahārāja, Śukadeva Gosvāmī and I myself 
know the real religious principle. My dear serv-
ants, this transcendental religious principle, 
which is known as bhāgavata -dharma, or sur-
render un to the Supreme Lord and love for 
Him, is uncontaminated by the material modes 
of nature. It is very confidential and difficult for 
ordinary human beings to understand, but if by 
chance one fortunately understands it, he is im-
mediately liberated, and thus h e returns home, 
back to Godhead. (20-21) Devotional service, 
beginning with the chanting of the holy name 
of the Lord, is the ultimate religious principle 
for the living entity in human society. (22) My 
dear servants, who are as good as my sons, just 
see how  glorious is the chanting of the holy 
name of the Lord. The greatly sinful Ajāmila 
chanted only to call his son, not knowing that 
he was chanting the Lord’s holy name. Never-
theless, by chanting the holy name of the Lord, 
he remembered Nārāyaṇa, and thus he  was im-
mediately saved from the ropes of death. (23) 
Therefore it should be understood that one is 
easily relieved from all sinful reactions by 
chanting the holy name of the Lord and chant-
ing of His qualities and activities. This is the 
only process recomme nded for relief from sin-
ful reactions. Even if one chants the holy name 
of the Lord with improper pronunciation, he 
will achieve relief from material bondage if he 
chants without offenses. Ajāmila, for example, 
was extremely sinful, but while dying he 
mere ly chanted the holy name, and although 
calling his son, he achieved complete liberation 
because he remembered the name of 
Nārāyaṇa. (24) Because they are bewildered by 
the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Yājñavalkya and Jaimini and ot her 
compilers of the religious scriptures cannot 
know the secret, confidential religious system 
of the twelve mahājanas. They cannot under-
stand the transcendental value of performing 
devotional service or chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa 
mantra. Because their minds  are attracted to the 
ritualistic ceremonies mentioned in the Vedas-
especially the Yajur Veda, Sāma Veda and Ṛg 
Vedatheir intelligence has become dull. Thus 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

362 
 they are busy collecting the ingredients for rit-
ualistic ceremonies that yield only temporary 
benefi ts, such as elevation to Svargaloka for 
material happiness. They are not attracted to the 
saṅkīrtana movement; instead, they are inter-
ested in dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa. (25) 
Considering all these points, therefore, intel-
ligent men decide to solve all p roblems by 
adopting the devotional service of chanting the 
holy name of the Lord, who is situated in eve-
ryone’s heart and who is a mine of all auspi-
cious qualities. Such persons are not within my 
jurisdiction for punishment. Generally they 
never commit sin ful activities, but even if by 
mistake or because of bewilderment or illusion 
they sometimes commit sinful acts, they are 
protected from sinful reactions because they al-
ways chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. (26) My 
dear servants, please do not approach such dev-
otees, for they have fully surrendered to the lo-
tus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
They are equal to everyone, and their narrations 
are sung by the demigods and the inhabitants of 
Siddhaloka. Please do not even go near them. 
They are always pr otected by the club of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore 
Lord Brahmā and I and even the time factor are 
not competent to chastise them. (27) Parama-
haṁsas are exalted persons who have no taste 
for material enjoyment and who drink the 
honey of  the Lord’s lotus feet. My dear serv-
ants, bring to me for punishment only persons 
who are averse to the taste of that honey, who 
do not associate with paramahaṁsas and who 
are attached to family life and worldly enjoy-
ment, which form the path to hell. (28) My dear 
servants, please bring to me only those sinful 
persons who do not use their tongues to chant 
the holy name and qualities of Kṛṣṇa, whose 
hearts do not remember the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa 
even once, and whose heads do not bow down 
even once before Lord  Kṛṣṇa. Send me those 
who do not perform their duties toward Viṣṇu, 
which are the only duties in human life. Please 
bring me all such fools and rascals. (29) [Then 
Yamarāja, considering himself and his servants 
to be offenders, spoke as follows, begging par-
don from the Lord.] O my Lord, my servants have surely committed a great offense by ar-
resting a Vaiṣṇava such as Ajāmila. O 
Nārāyaṇa, O supreme and oldest person, please 
forgive us. Because of our ignorance, we failed 
to recognize Ajāmila as a servant of Y our Lord-
ship, and thus we have certainly committed a 
great offense. Therefore with folded hands we 
beg Your pardon. My Lord, since You are su-
premely merciful and are always full of good 
qualities, please pardon us. We offer our re-
spectful obeisances unto Y ou.(30) 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  My dear 
King, the chanting of the holy name of the Lord 
is able to uproot even the reactions of the great-
est sins. Therefore the chanting of the saṅkīr-
tana movement is the most auspicious activity 
in the entire universe. Please try to understand 
this so that others will take it seriously. (31) One 
who constantly hears and chants the holy name 
of the Lord and hears and chants about His ac-
tivities can very easily attain the platform of 
pure devotional service, which can cleanse the 
dirt from one’s heart. One cannot achieve such 
purification merely by observing vows and per-
forming Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. (32) Dev-
otees who always lick the honey from the lotus 
feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa do not care at all for material 
activities, which are performed under the three 
modes of material nature and which bring only 
misery. Indeed, devotees never give up the lo-
tus feet of Kṛṣṇ a to return to material activities. 
Others, however, who are addicted to Vedic rit-
uals because they have neglected the service of 
the Lord’s lotus feet and are enchanted by lusty 
desires, sometimes perform acts of atonement. 
Nevertheless, being incompletel y purified, they 
return to sinful activities again and again. (33)  
After hearing from the mouth of their master 
about the extraordinary glories of the Lord and 
His name, fame and attributes, the Yamadūtas 
were struck with wonder. Since then, as soon as 
they see a devotee, they fear him and dare not 
look at him again. (34) When the great sage 
Agastya, the son of Kumbha, was residing in 
the Malaya Hills and worshiping the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, I approached him, and 
he explained to me this confidential his-
tory.(35)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

363 
 SB 6.4: The Haṁsa -guhya Prayers Offered 
to the Lord  by Prajāpati Dakṣa  
The blessed King said to Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī: My dear lord, the demigods, demons, 
human beings, Nāgas, beasts and birds were 
created during the reign of Svāyambhuva 
Manu. You have spoken about this creation 
briefly [in the Third Canto]. No w I wish to 
know about it elaborately. I also wish to know 
about the potency of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead by which He brought about the sec-
ondary creation.(1 -2)  
Sūta Gosvāmī said: O great sages [assem-
bled at Naimiṣāraṇya], after the great yogi 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī heard King Parīkṣit’s in-
quiry, he praised it and thus replied. (3)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When the ten sons 
of Prācīnabarhi emerged from the waters, in 
which they were performing austerities, they 
saw that the entire surface of the world wa s 
covered by trees.(4) Because of having under-
gone long austerities in the water, the Pracetās 
were very angry at the trees. Desiring to burn 
them to ashes, they generated wind and fire 
from their mouths.(5) My dear King Parīkṣit, 
when Soma, the king of th e trees and predomi-
nating deity of the moon, saw the fire and wind 
burning all the trees to ashes, he felt great sym-
pathy because he is the maintainer of all herbs 
and trees. To appease the anger of the Pracetās, 
Soma spoke as follows.(6) O greatly fortuna te 
ones, you should not kill these poor trees by 
burning them to ashes. Your duty is to wish the 
citizens [prajās] all prosperity and to act as their 
protectors.(7) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Śrī Hari, is the master of all living 
entities, includi ng all the prajāpatis, such as 
Lord Brahmā. Because He is the all -pervading 
and indestructible master, He has created all 
these trees and vegetables as eatables for other 
living entities.(8) By nature’s arrangement, 
fruits and flowers are considered the fo od of in-
sects and birds; grass and other legless living 
entities are meant to be the food of four -legged 
animals like cows and buffalo; animals that 
cannot use their front legs as hands are meant 
to be the food of animals like tigers, which have 
claws; and  four-legged animals like deer and goats, as well as food grains, are meant to be 
the food of human beings.(9) O pure -hearted 
ones, your father, Prācīnabarhi, and the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead have ordered 
you to generate population. Therefore how can  
you burn to ashes these trees and herbs, which 
are needed for the maintenance of your subjects 
and descendants?(10) The path of goodness 
traversed by your father, grandfather and great -
grandfathers is that of maintaining the subjects 
[prajās], including t he men, animals and trees. 
That is the path you should follow. Unneces-
sary anger is contrary to your duty. Therefore I 
request you to control your anger.(11) As the 
father and mother are the friends and maintain-
ers of their children, as the eyelid is the p rotec-
tor of the eye, as the husband is the maintainer 
and protector of a woman, as the householder 
is the maintainer and protector of beggars, and 
as the learned is the friend of the ignorant, so 
the king is the protector and giver of life to all 
his subje cts. The trees are also subjects of the 
king. Therefore they should be given protec-
tion.(12) The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
is situated as the Supersoul within the cores of 
the hearts of all living entities, whether moving 
or nonmoving, including men, birds, animals, 
trees and, indeed, all living entities. Therefore 
you should consider every body a residence or 
temple of the Lord. By such vision you will sat-
isfy the Lord. You should not angrily kill these 
living entities in the forms of trees.(13) One 
who inquires into self -realization and thus sub-
dues his powerful angerwhich awakens sud-
denly in the body as if falling from the 
skytranscends the influence of the modes of 
material nature.(14) There is no need to burn 
these poor trees any longer. Let whatev er trees 
still remain be happy. Indeed, you should also 
be happy. Now, here is a beautiful, well -quali-
fied girl named Māriṣā, who was raised by the 
trees as their daughter. You may accept this 
beautiful girl as your wife.(15)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: M y dear 
King, after thus pacifying the Pracetās, Soma, 
the king of the moon, gave them the beautiful 
girl born of Pramlocā Apsarā. The Pracetās all 
received Pramlocā’s daughter, who had high, 
very beautiful hips, and married her according 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

364 
 to the religious s ystem.(16) In the womb of that 
girl the Pracetās all begot a son named Dakṣa, 
who filled the three worlds with living enti-
ties.(17) Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Please 
hear from me with great attention how Prajāpati 
Dakṣa, who was very affectionate to his d augh-
ters, created different types of living entities 
through his semen and through his mind.(18)  
With his mind, Prajāpati Dakṣa first created 
all kinds of demigods, demons, human beings, 
birds, beasts, aquatics and so on.(19) But when 
Prajāpati Dakṣa saw that he was not properly 
generating all kinds of living entities, he ap-
proached a mountain near the Vindhya moun-
tain range, and there he executed very difficult 
austerities.(20) Near that mountain was a very 
holy place named Aghamarṣaṇa. There 
Prajāpati Da kṣa executed ritualistic ceremonies 
and satisfied the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Hari, by engaging in great austerities to 
please Him.(21) My dear King, I shall fully ex-
plain to you the Haṁsa -guhya prayers, which 
were offered to the Supreme Personalit y of 
Godhead by Dakṣa, and I shall explain how the 
Lord was pleased with him for those pray-
ers.(22)  
Prajāpati Dakṣa said: The Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead is transcendental to the illu-
sory energy and the physical categories it pro-
duces. He possesses the  potency for unfailing 
knowledge and supreme willpower, and He is 
the controller of the living entities and the illu-
sory energy. The conditioned souls who have 
accepted this material manifestation as every-
thing cannot see Him, for He is above the evi-
dence of experimental knowledge. Self -evident 
and self -sufficient, He is not caused by any su-
perior cause. Let me offer my respectful obei-
sances unto Him.(23) As the sense objects 
[form, taste, touch, smell and sound] cannot un-
derstand how the senses perceive th em, so the 
conditioned soul, although residing in his body 
along with the Supersoul, cannot understand 
how the supreme spiritual person, the master of 
the material creation, directs his senses. Let me 
offer my respectful obeisances unto that Su-
preme Person , who is the supreme control-
ler.(24) Because they are only matter, the body, the life airs, the external and internal senses, the 
five gross elements and the subtle sense objects 
[form, taste, smell, sound and touch] cannot 
know their own nature, the natur e of the other 
senses or the nature of their controllers. But the 
living being, because of his spiritual nature, can 
know his body, the life airs, the senses, the ele-
ments and the sense objects, and he can also 
know the three qualities that form their root s. 
Nevertheless, although the living being is com-
pletely aware of them, he is unable to see the 
Supreme Being, who is omniscient and unlim-
ited. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances 
unto Him.(25) When one’s consciousness is 
completely purified of the contamination of 
material existence, gross and subtle, without 
being agitated as in the working and dreaming 
states, and when the mind is not dissolved as in 
suṣupti, deep sleep, one comes to the platform 
of trance. Then one’s material vision and the 
memor ies of the mind, which manifests names 
and forms, are vanquished. Only in such a 
trance is the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
revealed. Thus let us offer our respectful obei-
sances unto the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is seen in that uncontaminated,  tran-
scendental state.(26) Just as great learned 
brāhmaṇas who are expert in performing ritual-
istic ceremonies and sacrifices can extract the 
fire dormant within wooden fuel by chanting 
the fifteen Sāmidhenī mantras, thus proving the 
efficacy of the Vedic mantras, so those who are 
actually advanced in consciousnessin other 
words, those who are Kṛṣṇa consciouscan find 
the Supersoul, who by His own spiritual po-
tency is situated within the heart. The heart is 
covered by the three modes of material nature 
and t he nine material elements [material nature, 
the total material energy, the ego, the mind and 
the five objects of sense gratification], and also 
by the five material elements and the ten 
senses. These twenty -seven elements constitute 
the external energy of the Lord. Great yogīs 
meditate upon the Lord, who is situated as the 
Supersoul, Paramātmā, within the core of the 
heart. May that Supersoul be pleased with me. 
The Supersoul is realized when one is eager for 
liberation from the unlimited varieties of mate-
rial life. One actually attains such liberation 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

365 
 when he engages in the transcendental loving 
service of the Lord and realizes the Lord be-
cause of his attitude of service. The Lord may 
be addressed by various spiritual names, which 
are inconceivable to the m aterial senses. When 
will that Supreme Personality of Godhead be 
pleased with me?(27 -28) Anything expressed 
by material vibrations, anything ascertained by 
material intelligence and anything experienced 
by the material senses or concocted within the 
materi al mind is but an effect of the modes of 
material nature and therefore has nothing to do 
with the real nature of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. The Supreme Lord is beyond the 
creation of this material world, for He is the 
source of the material qualit ies and creation. As 
the cause of all causes, He exists before the cre-
ation and after the creation. I wish to offer my 
respectful obeisances unto Him.(29) The Su-
preme Brah man, Kṛṣṇa, is the ultimate resting 
place and source of everything. Everything is 
done by Him, everything belongs to Him, and 
everything is offered to Him. He is the ultimate 
objective, and whether acting or causing others 
to act, He is the ultimate doer. There are many 
causes, high and low, but since He is the cause 
of all causes, He is well known as the Supreme 
Brahman who existed before all activities. He 
is one without a second and has no other cause. 
I therefore offer my respects unto Him.(30) Let 
me o ffer my respectful obeisances unto the all -
pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who possesses unlimited transcendental quali-
ties. Acting from within the cores of the hearts 
of all philosophers, who propagate various 
views, He causes them to forget the ir own souls 
while sometimes agreeing and sometimes disa-
greeing among themselves. Thus He creates 
within this material world a situation in which 
they are unable to come to a conclusion. I offer 
my obeisances unto Him.(31) There are two 
partiesnamely, the theists and the atheists. The 
theist, who accepts the Supersoul, finds the 
spiritual cause through mystic yoga. The 
Sāṅkhyite, however, who merely analyzes the 
material elements, comes to a conclusion of im-
personalism and does not accept a supreme 
causewhe ther Bhagavān, Paramātmā or even 
Brahman. Instead, he is preoccupied with the superfluous, external activities of material na-
ture. Ultimately, however, both parties demon-
strate the Absolute Truth because although they 
offer opposing statements, their objec t is the 
same ultimate cause. They are both approach-
ing the same Supreme Brahman, to whom I of-
fer my respectful obeisances.(32) The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is inconceivably 
opulent, who is devoid of all material names, 
forms and pastimes, and w ho is all -pervading, 
is especially merciful to the devotees who wor-
ship His lotus feet. Thus He exhibits transcen-
dental forms and names with His different pas-
times. May that Supreme Personality of God-
head, whose form is eternal and full of 
knowledge and bl iss, be merciful to me.(33) As 
the air carries various characteristics of the 
physical elements, like the aroma of a flower or 
colors resulting from a mixture of dust in the 
air, the Lord appears through lower systems of 
worship according to one’s desires,  although 
He appears as the demigods and not in His orig-
inal form. What is the use of these other forms? 
May the original Supreme Personality of God-
head please fulfill my desires.(34)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Hari, who is extremely 
affectionate to His devotees, was very pleased 
by the prayers offered by Dakṣa, and thus He 
appeared at that holy place known as 
Aghamarṣaṇa. O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of the 
Kuru dynasty, the Lord’s lotus feet rested on 
the shoulders of His carrier, Garuḍa, and He ap-
peared with eight long, mighty, very beautiful 
arms. In His hands He held a disc, conchshell, 
sword, shield, arrow, bow, rope and clubin each 
hand a different weapon, all brilliantly shining. 
His garments were yellow and His bodily hue 
deep bluish. His eyes and face were very cheer-
ful, and from His neck to His feet hung a long 
garland of flowers. His chest was decorated 
with the Kaustubha jewel and the mark of 
Śrīvatsa. On His head was a gorgeous round 
helmet, and His ears were decorated with ear-
rings resembling sharks. All these ornaments 
were uncommonly beautiful. The Lord wore a 
golden belt on His waist, bracelets on His arms, 
rings on His fingers, and ankle b ells on His feet. 
Thus decorated by various ornaments, Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

366 
 Hari, who is attractive to all the living entities 
of the three worlds, is known as Puruṣottama, 
the best personality. He was accompanied by 
great devotees like Nārada, Nanda and all the 
principal  demigods, led by the heavenly king, 
Indra, and the residents of various upper plane-
tary systems such as Siddhaloka, Gandhar-
valoka and Cāraṇaloka. Situated on both sides 
of the Lord and behind Him as well, these dev-
otees offered Him prayers continuously.( 35-
39) Seeing that wonderful and effulgent form 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Prajāpati Dakṣa was first somewhat afraid, but 
then he was very pleased to see the Lord, and 
he fell to the ground li ke a stick to offer his re-
spects to the Lord.(40) As rivers are filled by 
water flowing from a mountain, all of Dakṣa’s 
senses were filled with pleasure. Because of his 
highly elevated happiness, Dakṣa could not say 
anything, but simply remained flat on th e 
ground.(41) Although Prajāpati Dakṣa could 
not say anything, when the Lord, who knows 
everyone’s heart, saw His devotee prostrate in 
that manner and desiring to increase the popu-
lation, He addressed him as follows.(42)  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead  said: 
O most fortunate Prācetasa, because of your 
great faith in Me, you have attained the su-
preme devotional ecstasy. Indeed, because of 
your austerities, combined with exalted devo-
tion, your life is now successful. You have 
achieved complete perfection. (43) My dear 
Prajāpati Dakṣa, you have performed extreme 
austerities for the welfare and growth of the 
world. My desire also is that everyone within 
this world be happy. I am therefore very 
pleased with you because you are endeavoring 
to fulfill My desire for the welfare of the entire 
world.(44) Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, the Ma-
nus, all the other demigods in the higher plane-
tary systems, and you prajāpatis, who are in-
creasing the population, are working for the 
benefit of all living entities. Thus you expan-
sions of My marginal energy are incarnations 
of My various qualities.(45) My dear 
brāhmaṇa, austerity in the form of meditation is 
My heart, Vedic knowledge in the form of 
hymns and mantras constitutes My body, and 
spiritual activities and ecstatic emotions a re My actual form. The ritualistic ceremonies and sac-
rifices, when properly conducted, are the vari-
ous limbs of My body, the unseen good fortune 
proceeding from pious or spiritual activities 
constitutes My mind, and the demigods who 
execute My orders in va rious departments are 
My life and soul.(46) Before the creation of this 
cosmic manifestation, I alone existed with My 
specific spiritual potencies. Consciousness was 
then unmanifested, just as one’s consciousness 
is unmanifested during the time of sleep.(4 7) I 
am the reservoir of unlimited potency, and 
therefore I am known as unlimited or all -per-
vading. From My material energy the cosmic 
manifestation appeared within Me, and in this 
universal manifestation appeared the chief be-
ing, Lord Brahmā, who is your source and is 
not born of a material mother.(48) When the 
chief lord of the universe, Lord Brahmā 
[Svayambhū], having been inspired by My en-
ergy, was attempting to create, he thought him-
self incapable. Therefore I gave him advice, 
and in accordance with My  instructions he un-
derwent extremely difficult austerities. Be-
cause of these austerities, the great Lord 
Brahmā was able to create nine personalities, 
including you, to help him in the functions of 
creation.(49 -50)  
O My dear son Dakṣa, Prajāpati Pañcajana  
has a daughter named Asiknī, whom I offer to 
you so that you may accept her as your 
wife.(51) Now unite in sexual life as man and 
woman, and in this way, by sexual intercourse, 
you will be able to beget hundreds of children 
in the womb of this girl to inc rease the popula-
tion.(52) After you give birth to many hundreds 
and thousands of children, they will also be 
captivated by My illusory energy and will en-
gage, like You, in sexual intercourse. But be-
cause of My mercy to you and them, they will 
also be able to give Me presentations in devo-
tion.(53)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After the cre-
ator of the entire universe, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Hari, had spoken in this way 
in the presence of Prajāpati Dakṣa, He immedi-
ately disappeared as if He were an object expe-
rienced in a dream.(54)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

367 
 SB 6. 5: Nārada Muni Cursed by Prajāpati 
Dakṣa  
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Im-
pelled by the illusory energy of Lord Viṣṇu, 
Prajāpati Dakṣa begot ten thousand sons in the 
womb of Pāñcajanī [Asiknī]. My dear King, 
these sons were called the Haryaśvas.(1) My 
dear King, all the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa were 
alike in being very gentle and obedient to the 
orders of their father. When their father ordered 
them to beget children, they all went in the 
western direction.(2) In the west, where the 
river Sindhu meets the  sea, there is a great place 
of pilgrimage known as Nārāyaṇa -saras. Many 
sages and others advanced in spiritual con-
sciousness live there.(3) In that holy place, the 
Haryaśvas began regularly touching the lake’s 
waters and bathing in them. Gradually becom-
ing very much purified, they became inclined 
toward the activities of paramahaṁsas. Never-
theless, because their father had ordered them 
to increase the population, they performed se-
vere austerities to fulfill his desires. One day, 
when the great sage Nārada saw those boys per-
forming such fine austerities to increase the 
population, Nārada approached them.( 4-5) The 
great sage Nārada said: My dear Haryaśvas, 
you have not seen the extremities of the earth. 
There  is a kingdom where only one man lives 
and where there is a hole from which, having 
entered, no one emerges. A woman there who 
is extremely unchaste adorns herself with vari-
ous attractive dresses, and the man who lives 
there is her husband. In that kingdom , there is a 
river flowing in both directions, a wonderful 
home made of twenty -five materials, a swan 
that vibrates various sounds, and an automati-
cally revolving object made of sharp razors and 
thunderbolts. You have not seen all this, and 
therefore you a re inexperienced boys without 
advanced knowledge. How, then, will you cre-
ate progeny?(6 -8) Alas, your father is omnisci-
ent, but you do not know his actual order. With-
out knowing the actual purpose of your father, 
how will you create progeny?(9)  
ŚrīŚukadev a Gosvāmī said: Hearing these 
enigmatic words of Nārada Muni, the Har-yaśvas considered them with their natural intel-
ligence, without help from others.(10) [The 
Haryaśvas understood the meaning of Nārada’s 
words as follows.] The word “bhūḥ” [“the 
earth”] re fers to the field of activities. The ma-
terial body, which is a result of the living be-
ing’s actions, is his field of activities, and it 
gives him false designations. Since time imme-
morial, he has received various types of mate-
rial bodies, which are the roo ts of bondage to 
the material world. If one foolishly engages in 
temporary fruitive activities and does not look 
toward the cessation of this bondage, what will 
be the benefit of his actions?(11) [Nārada Muni 
had said that there is a kingdom where there is  
only one male. The Haryaśvas realized the pur-
port of this statement.] The only enjoyer is the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who ob-
serves everything, everywhere. He is full of six 
opulences and fully independent of everyone 
else. He is never subject to t he three modes of 
material nature, for He is always transcendental 
to this material creation. If the members of hu-
man society do not understand Him, the Su-
preme, through their advancement in 
knowledge and activities, but simply work very 
hard like cats and  dogs all day and night for 
temporary happiness, what will be the benefit 
of their activities?(12) [Nārada Muni had de-
scribed that there is a bila, or hole, from which, 
having entered, one does not return. The Har-
yaśvas understood the meaning of this alle-
gory.] Hardly once has a pers on who has en-
tered the lower planetary system called Pātāla 
been seen to return. Similarly, if one enters the 
Vaikuṇṭha -dhāma [pratyag -dhāma], he does 
not return to this material world. If there is such 
a place, from which, having gone, one does not 
return  to the miserable material condition of 
life, what is the use of jumping like monkeys in 
the temporary material world and not seeing or 
understanding that place? What will be the 
profit?(13) [Nārada Muni had described a 
woman who is a professional prostitu te. The 
Haryaśvas understood the identity of this 
woman.] Mixed with the mode of passion, the 
unsteady intelligence of every living entity is 
like a prostitute who changes dresses just to at-
tract one’s attention. If one fully engages in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

368 
 temporary fruitive activities, not understanding 
how this is taking place, what does he actually 
gain?(14) [Nārada Muni had also spoken of a 
man who is the husband of the prostitute. The 
Haryaśvas understood this as follows.] If one 
becomes the husband of a prostitute, he lo ses 
all independence. Similarly, if a living entity 
has polluted intelligence, he prolongs his mate-
rialistic life. Frustrated by material nature, he 
must follow the movements of the intelligence, 
which brings various conditions of happiness 
and distress. I f one performs fruitive activities 
under such conditions, what will be the bene-
fit?(15) [Nārada Muni had said that there is a 
river flowing in both directions. The Haryaśvas 
understood the purport of this statement.] Ma-
terial nature functions in two waysby  creation 
and dissolution. Thus the river of material na-
ture flows both ways. A living entity who un-
knowingly falls in this river is submerged in its 
waves, and since the current is swifter near the 
banks of the river, he is unable to get out. What 
will be  the benefit of performing fruitive activ-
ities in that river of māyā?(16) [Nārada Muni 
had said that there is a house made of twenty -
five elements. The Haryaśvas understood this 
analogy.] The Supreme Lord is the reservoir of 
the twenty -five elements, and a s the Supreme 
Being, the conductor of cause and effect, He 
causes their manifestation. If one engages in 
temporary fruitive activities, not knowing that 
Supreme Person, what benefit will he de-
rive?(17) [Nārada Muni had spoken of a swan. 
That swan is explai ned in this verse.] The Ve-
dic literatures [śāstras] vividly describe how to 
understand the Supreme Lord, the source of all 
material and spiritual energy. Indeed, they elab-
orately explain these two energies. The swan 
[haṁsa] is one who discriminates between  mat-
ter and spirit, who accepts the essence of eve-
rything, and who explains the means of bond-
age and the means of liberation. The words of 
scriptures consist of variegated vibrations. If a 
foolish rascal leaves aside the study of these 
śāstras to engage in  temporary activities, what 
will be the result?(18) [Nārada Muni had spo-
ken of a physical object made of sharp blades 
and thunderbolts. The Haryaśvas understood 
this allegory as follows.] Eternal time moves very sharply, as if made of razors and thunder-
bolts. Uninterrupted and fully independent, it 
drives the activities of the entire world. If one 
does not try to study the eternal element of 
time, what benefit can he derive from perform-
ing temporary material activities?(19) [Nārada 
Muni had asked how one co uld ignorantly defy 
one’s own father. The Haryaśvas understood 
the meaning of this question.] One must accept 
the original instructions of the śāstra. Accord-
ing to Vedic civilization, one is offered a sacred 
thread as a sign of second birth. One takes his 
second birth by dint of having received instruc-
tions in the śāstra from a bona fide spiritual 
master. Therefore, śāstra, scripture, is the real 
father. All the śāstras instruct that one should 
end his material way of life. If one does not 
know the purpose of the father’s orders, the 
śāstras, he is ignorant. The words of a material 
father who endeavors to engage his son in ma-
terial activities are not the real instructions of 
the father.(20) Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: 
My dear King, after hearing the instruct ions of 
Nārada, the Haryaśvas, the sons of Prajāpati 
Dakṣa, were firmly convinced. They all be-
lieved in his instructions and reached the same 
conclusion. Having accepted him as their spir-
itual master, they circumambulated that great 
sage and followed the p ath by which one never 
returns to this world.(21)The seven musical 
notesṣa, ṛ, gā, ma, pa, dha and niare used in mu-
sical instruments, but originally they come 
from the Sāma Veda. The great sage Nārada vi-
brates sounds describing the pastimes of the 
Supreme Lord. By such transcendental vibra-
tions, such as Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa 
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, 
Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, he fixes his mind at 
the lotus feet of the Lord. Thus he directly per-
ceives Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of the senses. Aft er 
delivering the Haryaśvas, Nārada Muni contin-
ued traveling throughout the planetary systems, 
his mind always fixed at the lotus feet of the 
Lord.(22)   
The Haryaśvas, the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, 
were very well -behaved, cultured sons, but un-
fortunately, because of the instructions of 
Nārada Muni, they deviated from the order of 
their father. When Dakṣa heard this news, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

369 
 which was brought to him by Nārada Muni, he 
began to lament. Although he was the father of 
such good sons, he had lost them all. Certainly  
this was lamentable.(23) When Prajāpati Dakṣa 
was lamenting for his lost children, Lord 
Brahmā pacified him with instructions, and 
thereafter Dakṣa begot one thousand more chil-
dren in the womb of his wife, Pāñcajanī. This 
time his sons were known as the 
Savalāśvas.(24) In accordance with their fa-
ther’s order to beget children, the second group 
of sons also went to Nārāyaṇa -saras, the same 
place where their brothers had previously at-
tained perfection by following the instructions 
of Nārada. Undertaking grea t vows of austerity, 
the Savalāśvas remained at that holy place.(25) 
At Nārāyaṇa -saras, the second group of sons 
performed penances in the same way as the 
first. They bathed in the holy water, and by its 
touch all the dirty material desires in their 
hearts  were cleansed away. They murmured 
mantras beginning with oṁkāra and underwent 
a severe course of austerities.(26) For a few 
months the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa drank only 
water and ate only air. Thus undergoing great 
austerities, they recited this mantra: “Let us of-
fer our respectful obeisances unto Nārāyaṇa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is al-
ways situated in His transcendental abode. 
Since He is the Supreme Person [parama-
haṁsa], let us offer our respectful obeisances 
unto Him.”( 27-28) O King Parīkṣit, Nārada 
Muni approached these sons of Prajāpati 
Dakṣa, who were engaged in tapasya to beget 
children, and spoke enigmatic words to them 
just as he had spoken to their elder broth-
ers.(29) O sons of Dakṣa, please hear my words 
of instruction attentively. You are all very af-
fectionate to your elder brothers, the Har-
yaśvas. Therefore you should follow their 
path.(30) A brother aware of the principles of 
religion follows in the footsteps of his elder 
brothers. Because of being highly elevated, 
such a pious brother gets the opportunity to as-
sociate and enjoy with demigods like the 
Maruts, who are all affectionate to their broth-
ers.(31) Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O best 
of the advanced Āryans, after saying  this much 
to the sons of Prajāpati Dakṣa, Nārada Muni, whose merciful glance never goes in vain, left 
as he had planned. The sons of Dakṣa followed 
their elder brothers. Not attempting to produce 
children, they engaged themselves in Kṛṣṇa 
consciousness.(3 2) The Savalāśvas took to the 
correct path, which is obtainable by a mode of 
life meant to achieve devotional service, or the 
mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Like nights that have gone to the west, they 
have not returned even until now.(33) At  this 
time, Prajāpati Dakṣa observed many inauspi-
cious signs, and he heard from various sources 
that his second group of sons, the Savalāśvas, 
had followed the path of their elder brothers in 
accordance with the instructions of Nārada.(34) 
When he heard th at the Savalāśvas had also left 
this world to engage in devotional service, 
Dakṣa was angry at Nārada, and he almost 
fainted due to lamentation. When Dakṣa met 
Nārada, Dakṣa’s lips began trembling in anger, 
and he spoke as follows.(35)  
Prajāpati Dakṣa sai d: Alas, Nārada Muni, 
you wear the dress of a saintly person, but you 
are not actually a saint. Indeed, although I am 
now in gṛhastha life, I am a saintly person. By 
showing my sons the path of renunciation, you 
have done me an abominable injustice.(36) 
Prajāpati Dakṣa said: My sons were not at all 
freed from their three debts. Indeed, they did 
not properly consider their obligations. O 
Nārada Muni, O personality of sinful action, 
you have obstructed their progress toward good 
fortune in this world and the next because they 
are still indebted to the saintly persons, the 
demigods and their father.(37) Prajāpati Dakṣa 
continued: Thus committing violence against 
other living entities and yet claiming to be an 
associate of Lord Viṣṇu, you are defaming the 
Suprem e Personality of Godhead. You need-
lessly created a mentality of renunciation in in-
nocent boys, and therefore you are shameless 
and devoid of compassion. How could you 
travel with the personal associates of the Su-
preme Lord?(38) All the devotees of the Lord  
but you are very kind to the conditioned souls 
and are eager to benefit others. Although you 
wear the dress of a devotee, you create enmity 
with people who are not your enemies, or you 
break friendship and create enmity between 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

370 
 friends. Are you not ashame d of posing as a 
devotee while performing these abominable ac-
tions?(39) Prajāpati Dakṣa continued: If you 
think that simply awakening the sense of renun-
ciation will detach one from the material world, 
I must say that unless full knowledge is awak-
ened, simp ly changing dresses as you have 
done cannot possibly bring detachment.(40) 
Material enjoyment is indeed the cause of all 
unhappiness, but one cannot give it up unless 
one has personally experienced how much suf-
fering it is. Therefore one should be allowed to 
remain in so -called material enjoyment while 
simultaneously advancing in knowledge to ex-
perience the misery of this false material hap-
piness. Then, without help from others, one will 
find material enjoyment detestful. Those whose 
minds are changed by ot hers do not become as 
renounced as those who have personal experi-
ence.(41) Although I live in household life with 
my wife and children, I honestly follow the Ve-
dic injunctions by engaging in fruitive activi-
ties to enjoy life without sinful reactions. I hav e 
performed all kinds of yajñas, including the 
deva -yajña, ṛṣi -yajña, pitṛ -yajña and nṛ -yajña. 
Because these yajñas are called vratas [vows], 
I am known as a gṛhavrata. Unfortunately, you 
have given me great displeasure by misguiding 
my sons, for no reason , to the path of renuncia-
tion. This can be tolerated once.(42) You have 
made me lose my sons once, and now you have 
again done the same inauspicious thing. There-
fore you are a rascal who does not know how 
to behave toward others. You may travel all 
over th e universe, but I curse you to have no 
residence anywhere.(43)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear 
King, since Nārada Muni is an approved saintly 
person, when cursed by Prajāpati Dakṣa he re-
plied, “tad bāḍham: Yes, what you have said is 
good. I accept this curse.” He could have cursed 
Prajāpati Dakṣa in return, but  because he is a 
tolerant and merciful sādhu, he took no ac-
tion.(44)  
SB 6.6: The Progeny of the Daughters of 
Dakṣa  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, 
thereafter, at the request of Lord Brahmā, Prajāpati Dakṣa, who is known as Prācetasa, 
begot sixty d aughters in the womb of his wife 
Asiknī. All the daughters were very affection-
ate toward their father.(1) He gave ten daugh-
ters in charity to Dharmarāja [Yamarāja], thir-
teen to Kaśyapa [first twelve and then one 
more], twenty -seven to the moon -god, and two  
each to Aṅgirā, Kṛśāśva and Bhūta. The other 
four daughters were given to Kaśyapa. [Thus 
Kaśyapa received seventeen daughters in 
all.](2) Now please hear from me the names of 
all these daughters and their descendants, who 
filled all the three worlds.(3)  
The ten daughters given to Yamarāja were 
named Bhānu, Lambā, Kakud, Yāmi, Viśvā, 
Sādhyā, Marutvatī, Vasu, Muhūrtā and 
Saṅkalpā. Now hear the names of their sons.(4) 
O King, a son named Deva -ṛṣabha was born 
from the womb of Bhānu, and from him came 
a son na med Indrasena. From the womb of 
Lambā came a son named Vidyota, who gener-
ated all the clouds.(5) From the womb of 
Kakud came the son named Saṅkaṭa, whose son 
was named Kīkaṭa. From Kīkaṭa came the dem-
igods named Durgā. From Yāmi came the son 
named Svarga, whose son was named 
Nandi.(6) The sons of Viśvā were the 
Viśvadevas, who had no progeny. From the 
womb of Sādhyā came the Sādhyas, who had a 
son named Arthasiddhi.(7) The two sons who 
took birth from the womb of Marutvatī were 
Marutvān and Jayanta. Jayanta , who is an ex-
pansion of Lord Vāsudeva, is known as Upen-
dra.(8) The demigods named the Mauhūrtikas 
took birth from the womb of Muhūrtā. These 
demigods deliver the results of actions to the 
living entities of their respective times.(9) The 
son of Saṅkalpā w as known as Saṅkalpa, and 
from him lust was born. The sons of Vasu were 
known as the eight Vasus. Just hear their names 
from me: Droṇa, Prāṇa, Dhruva, Arka, Agni, 
Doṣa, Vāstu and Vibhāvasu. From Abhimati, 
the wife of the Vasu named Droṇa, were gener-
ated th e sons named Harṣa, Śoka, Bhaya and so 
on.(10 -11) Ūrjasvatī, the wife of Prāṇa, gave 
birth to three sons, named Saha, Āyus and 
Purojava. The wife of Dhruva was known as 
Dharaṇi, and from her womb various cities took 
birth.(12) From the womb of Vāsanā, the wife 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

371 
 of Arka, came many sons, headed by Tarṣa. 
Dhārā, the wife of the Vasu named Agni, gave 
birth to many sons, headed by Draviṇaka.(13) 
From Kṛttikā, another wife of Agni, came the 
son named Skanda, Kārttikeya, whose sons 
were headed by Viśākha. From the womb of 
Śarvarī, the wife of the Vasu named Doṣa, 
came the son named Śiśumāra, who was an ex-
pansion of the Supreme Personality of God-
head.(14) From Āṅgirasī, the wife of the Vasu 
named Vāstu, was born the great architect 
Viśvakarmā. Viśvakarmābecame the hu sband 
of Ākṛtī, from whom the Manu named Cākṣuṣa 
was born. The sons of Manu were known as the 
Viśvadevas and Sādhyas.(15) Ūṣā, the wife of 
Vibhāvasu, gave birth to three sonsVyuṣṭa, 
Rociṣa and Ātapa. From Ātapa came 
Pañcayāma, the span of day, who awakens all 
living entities to material activities.(16)  
Sarūpā, the wife of Bhūta, gave birth to the 
ten million Rudras, of whom the eleven princi-
ple Rudras were Raivata, Aja, Bhava, Bhīma, 
Vāma, Ugra, Vṛṣākapi, Ajaikapāt, Ahirbra-
dhna, Bahurūpa and Mahān. Their a ssociates, 
the ghosts and goblins, who are very fearful, 
were born of the other wife of Bhūta.(17 -18) 
The prajāpati Aṅgirā had two wives, named 
Svadhā and Satī. The wife named Svadhā ac-
cepted all the Pitās as her sons, and Satī ac-
cepted the Atharvāṅgirasa Veda as her son.(19) 
Kṛśāśva had two wives, named Arcis and 
Dhiṣaṇā. In the wife named Arcis he begot 
Dhūmaketu and in Dhiṣaṇā he begot four sons, 
named Vedaśirā, Devala, Vayuna and 
Manu.(20) Kaśyapa, who is also named 
Tārkṣya, had four wivesVinatā [Suparṇ ā], 
Kadrū, Pataṅgī and Yāminī. Pataṅgī gave birth 
to many kinds of birds, and Yāminī gave birth 
to locusts. Vinatā [Suparṇā] gave birth to 
Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, and to 
Anūru, or Aruṇa, the chariot driver of the sun -
god. Kadrū gave birth to dif ferent varieties of 
serpents.(21 -22)  
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best of the Bhāratas, 
the constellations named Kṛttikā were all wives 
of the moon -god. However, because Prajāpati 
Dakṣa had cursed him to suffer from a disease 
causing gradual destruction, the moon -god could not beget children in any of his 
wives.(23) Thereafter the King of the moon 
pacified Prajāpati Dakṣa with courteous words 
and thus regained the portions of light he had 
lost during his disease. Nevertheless he could 
not beget children. The moon loses his shining 
power during the dark fortnight, and in the 
bright fortnight it is manifest again. O King 
Parīkṣit, now please hear from me the names of 
Kaśyapa’s wives, from whose wombs the pop-
ulation of the entire universe has come. They 
are the mother s of almost all the population of 
the entire universe, and their names are very 
auspicious to hear. They are Aditi, Diti, Danu, 
Kāṣṭhā, Ariṣṭā, Surasā, Ilā, Muni, Krodhavaśā, 
Tāmrā, Surabhi, Saramā and Timi. From the 
womb of Timi all the aquatics took birt h, and 
from the womb of Saramā the ferocious ani-
mals like the tigers and lions took birth.( 24-26) 
My dear King Parīkṣit, from the womb of Su-
rabhi the buffalo, cow and other animals with 
cloven hooves too k birth, from the womb of 
Tāmrā the eagles, vultures and other large birds 
of prey took birth, and from the womb of Muni 
the angels took birth.(27) The sons born of Kro-
dhavaśā were the serpents known as dan-
daśūka, as well as other serpents and the mos-
quito es. All the various creepers and trees were 
born from the womb of Ilā. The Rākṣasas, bad 
spirits, were born from the womb of Su-
rasā.(28) The Gandharvas were born from the 
womb of Ariṣṭā, and animals whose hooves are 
not split, such as the horse, were born from the 
womb of Kāṣṭhā. O King, from the womb of 
Danu came sixty -one sons, of whom these 
eighteen were very important: Dvimūrdhā, 
Śambara, Ariṣṭa, Hayagrīva, Vibhāvasu, Ayo-
mukha, Śaṅkuśirā, Svarbhānu, Kapila, Aruṇa, 
Pulomā, Vṛṣaparvā, Ekacakra, Anutāpana,  
Dhūmrakeśa, Virūpākṣa, Vipracitti and Dur-
jaya.( 29-31) The daughter of Svarbhānu 
named Suprabhā was married by Namuci. The 
daughter of Vṛṣaparvā named Śarmiṣṭhā was 
given to the powerful King Yayāti, the  son of 
Nahuṣa.(32) Vaiśvānara, the son of Danu, had 
four beautiful daughters, named Upadānavī, 
Hayaśirā, Pulomā and Kālakā. Hiraṇyākṣa mar-
ried Upadānavī, and Kratu married Hayaśirā. 
Thereafter, at the request of Lord Brahmā, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

372 
 Prajāpati Kaśyapa married Pulo mā and Kālakā, 
the other two daughters of Vaiśvānara. From 
the wombs of these two wives of Kaśyapa came 
sixty thousand sons, headed by Nivātakavaca, 
who are known as the Paulomas and the 
Kālakeyas. They were physically very strong 
and expert in fighting, a nd their aim was to dis-
turb the sacrifices performed by the great sages. 
My dear King, when your grandfather Arjuna 
went to the heavenly planets, he alone killed all 
these demons, and thus King Indra became ex-
tremely affectionate toward him.( 33-36) In his 
wife Siṁhikā, Vipracitti begot one hundred and 
one sons, of whom the eldest is Rāhu and the 
others are the one hundred Ketus. All of them 
attained positions in the influential planets.(37)  
Now please hear me as I describe the de-
scendants of Aditi  in chronological order. In 
this dynasty the Supreme Personality of God-
head Nārāyaṇa descended by His plenary ex-
pansion. The names of the sons of Aditi are as 
follows: Vivasvān, Aryamā, Pūṣā, Tvaṣṭā, Sa-
vitā, Bhaga, Dhātā, Vidhātā, Varuṇa, Mitra, 
Śatru and Urukrama.( 38-39) Saṁjñā, the wife 
of Vivasvān, the sun -god, gave birth to the 
Manu named Śrāddhadeva, and the same fortu-
nate wife also gave birth to the twins Yamarāja 
and the river Yamunā. Then Yamī, whi le wan-
dering on the earth in the form of a mare, gave 
birth to the Aśvinī -kumāras.(40) Chāyā, an-
other wife of the sun -god, begot two sons 
named Śanaiścara and Sāvarṇi Manu, and one 
daughter, Tapatī, who married Saṁvaraṇa.(41) 
From the womb of Mātṛkā, the w ife of Aryamā, 
were born many learned scholars. Among them 
Lord Brahmā created the human species, which 
are endowed with an aptitude for self -examina-
tion.(42)  
Pūṣā had no sons. When Lord Śiva was an-
gry at Dakṣa, Pūṣā had laughed at LordŚiva and 
shown his teeth. Therefore he lost his teeth and 
had to live by eating only ground flour.(43) 
Racanā, the daughter of the Daityas, became 
the wife of Prajāpati Tvaṣṭā. By his semen he 
begot in her womb two very powerful sons 
named Sanniveśa and Viśvarūpa.(44) Althou gh 
Viśvarūpa was the son of the daughter of their eternal enemies the demons, the demigods ac-
cepted him as their priest in accordance with 
the order of Brahmā when they were aban-
doned by their spiritual master, Bṛhaspati, 
whom they had disrespected.(45)  
SB 6.7: Indra Offends His Spiritual Master, 
Bṛhaspati.  
Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī: O great sage, why did the spiritual 
master of the demigods, Bṛhaspati, reject the 
demigods, who were his own disciples? What 
offense did the demigods co mmit against their 
spiritual master? Please describe to me this in-
cident.(1)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, once upon 
a time, the King of heaven, Indra, being ex-
tremely proud because of his great opulence of 
the three worlds, transgressed the law of Vedic  
etiquette. Seated on his throne, he was sur-
rounded by the Maruts, Vasus, Rudras, 
Ādityas, Ṛbhus, Viśvadevas, Sādhyas, Aśvinī -
kumāras, Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas 
and by great saintly persons. Also surrounding 
him were the Vidyādharas, Apsarās, Kinnara s, 
Patagas [birds] and Uragas [snakes]. All of 
them were offering Indra their respects and ser-
vices, and the Apsarās and Gandharvas were 
dancing and singing with very sweet musical 
instruments. Over Indra’s head was a white um-
brella as effulgent as the ful l moon. Fanned by 
yak-tail whisks and served with all the para-
phernalia of a great king, Indra was sitting with 
his wife, Śacīdevī, who occupied half the 
throne, when the great sage Bṛhaspati appeared 
in that assembly. Bṛhaspati, the best of the 
sages, was  the spiritual master of Indra and the 
demigods and was respected by the demigods 
and demons alike. Nevertheless, although Indra 
saw his spiritual master before him, he did not 
rise from his own seat or offer a seat to his spir-
itual master, nor did Indra o ffer him a respect-
ful welcome. Indra did nothing to show him re-
spect.( 2-8) Bṛhaspati knew everything that 
would happen in the future. Seeing Indra’s 
transgression of etiquette, he completely under-
stood that Indra was puffed up by his material 
opulence. Although able to curse Indra, he did 
not do so. Instead, he left the assembl y and in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

373 
 silence returned to his home.(9)  
Indra, the King of heaven, could immedi-
ately understand his mistake. Realizing he had 
disrespected his spiritual master, he con-
demned himself in the presence of all the mem-
bers of the assembly.(10) Alas, what a re gretta-
ble deed I have committed because of my lack 
of intelligence and my pride in my material op-
ulences. I failed to show respect to my spiritual 
master when he entered this assembly, and thus 
I have insulted him.(11) Although I am King of 
the demigods, w ho are situated in the mode of 
goodness, I was proud of a little opulence and 
polluted by false ego. Under the circumstances, 
who in this world would accept such riches at 
the risk of falling down? Alas! I condemn my 
wealth and opulence.(12) If a person sa ys, 
“One who is situated on the exalted thr one of a 
king should not stand up to show respect to an-
other king or a brāhmaṇa,” it is to be under-
stood that he does not know the superior reli-
gious principles.(13) Leaders who have fallen 
into ignorance and who mislead people by di-
recting them to the pat h of destruction [as de-
scribed in the previous verse] are, in effect, 
boarding a stone boat, and so too are those who 
blindly follow them. A stone boat would be un-
able to float and would sink in the water with 
its passengers. Similarly, those who mislead 
people go to hell, and their followers go with 
them.(14) King Indra said: Therefore with great 
frankness and without duplicity I shall now 
bow my head at the lotus feet of Bṛhaspati, the 
spiritual master of the demigods. Because he is 
in the mode of goodnes s, he is fully aware of 
all knowledge and is the best of the brāhmaṇas. 
Now I shall touch his lotus feet and offer my 
obeisances unto him to try to satisfy him.(15) 
While Indra, the King of the demigods, thought 
in this way and repented in his own assembly , 
Bṛhaspati, the most powerful spiritual master, 
understood his mind. Thus he became invisible 
to Indra and left home, for Bṛhaspati was spir-
itually more powerful than King Indra.(16) Alt-
hough Indra searched vigorously with the assis-
tance of the other demi gods, he could not find 
Bṛhaspati. Then Indra thought, “Alas, my spir-
itual master has become dissatisfied with me, 
and now I have no means of achieving good fortune.” Although Indra was surrounded by 
demigods, he could not find peace of mind.(17) 
Hearing o f the pitiable condition of King Indra, 
the demons, following the instructions of their 
guru, Śukrācārya, equipped themselves with 
weapons and declared war against the demi-
gods.(18) The demigods’ heads, thighs and 
arms and the other parts of their bodies w ere 
injured by the sharp arrows of the demons. The 
demigods, headed by Indra, saw no other 
course than to immediately approach Lord 
Brahmā with bowed heads for shelter and 
proper instruction.(19) When the most power-
ful Lord Brahmā saw the demigods coming t o-
ward him, their bodies gravely injured by the 
arrows of the demons, he pacified them by his 
great causeless mercy and spoke as fol-
lows.(20)  
Lord Brahmā said: O best of the demigods, 
unfortunately, because of madness resulting 
from your material opulence,  you failed to re-
ceive Bṛhaspati properly when he came to your 
assembly. Because he is aware of the Supreme 
Brahman and fully in control of his senses, he 
is the best of the brāhmaṇas. Therefore it is very 
astonishing that you have acted impudently to-
ward him.(21) Because of your miSBehavior 
toward Bṛhaspati, you have been defeated by 
the demons. My dear demigods, since the de-
mons were weak, having been defeated by you 
several times, how else could you, who were so 
advanced in opulence, be defeated by 
them? (22) O Indra, your enemies, the demons, 
were extremely weak because of their disre-
spect toward Śukrācārya, but since they have 
now worshiped Śukrācārya with great devo-
tion, they have again become powerful. By 
their devotion to Śukrācārya, they have in-
creas ed their strength so much that now they 
are even able to easily seize my abode from 
me.(23) Because of their firm determination to 
follow the instructions of Śukrācārya, his disci-
ples, the demons, are now unconcerned about 
the demigods. In fact, kings or o thers who have 
determined faith in the mercy of brāhmaṇas, 
cows and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa, and who always worship these three are 
always strong in their position.(24) O demi-
gods, I instruct you to approach Viśvarūpa, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

374 
 son of Tvaṣṭā, and accept him as your guru. He 
is a pure and very powerful brāhmaṇa undergo-
ing austerity and penances. Pleased by your 
worship, he will fulfill your desires, provided 
that you tolerate his being inclined to side with 
the demons.(25)  
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvām ī continued: Thus 
advised by Lord Brahmā and relieved of their 
anxiety, all the demigods went to the sage 
Viśvarūpa, the son of Tvaṣṭā. My dear King, 
they embraced him and spoke as follows.(26)  
The demigods said: Beloved Viśvarūpa, 
may there be all good f ortune for you. We, the 
demigods, have come to your āśrama as your 
guests. Please try to fulfill our desires accord-
ing to the time, since we are on the level of your 
parents.(27) O brāhmaṇa, the highest duty of a 
son, even though he has sons of his own, is  to 
serve his parents, and what to speak of a son 
who is a brahmacārī?(28)  
The ācārya, the spiritual master who teaches 
all the Vedic knowledge and gives initiation by 
offering the sacred thread, is the personification 
of all the Vedas. Similarly, a fathe r personifies 
Lord Brahmā; a brother, King Indra; a mother, 
the planet earth; and a sister, mercy. A guest 
personifies religious principles, an invited 
guest personifies the demigod Agni, and all liv-
ing entities personify Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme 
Personalit y of Godhead.(29 -30) Dear son, we 
have been defeated by our enemies, and there-
fore we are very much aggrieved. Please mer-
cifully fulfill our desires by relieving our dis-
tress through the strength of your austerities. 
Please fulfill our prayers.(31) Since y ou are 
completely aware of the Supreme Brahman, 
you are a perfect brāhmaṇa, and therefore you 
are the spiritual master of all orders of life. We 
accept you as our spiritual master and director 
so that by the power of your austerity we may 
easily defeat the  enemies who have conquered 
us.(32) The demigods continued: Do not fear 
criticism for being younger than us. Such eti-
quette does not apply in regard to Vedic man-
tras. Except in relationship to Vedic mantras, 
seniority is determined by age, but one may of-
fer respectful obeisances even to a younger per-son who is advanced in chanting Vedic man-
tras. Therefore although you are junior in rela-
tionship to us, you may become our priest with-
out hesitation.(33)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When all the 
demigods requested the great Viśvarūpa to be 
their priest, Viśvarūpa, who was advanced in 
austerities, was very pleased. He replied to 
them as follows.(34)  
Śrī Viśvarūpa said: O demigods, although 
the acceptance of  priesthood is decried as caus-
ing the loss of previously acquired brahminical 
power, how can someone like me refuse to ac-
cept your personal request? You are all exalted 
commanders of the entire universe. I am your 
disciple and must take many lessons from y ou. 
Therefore I cannot refuse you. I must agree for 
my own benefit.(35) O exalted governors of 
various planets, the true brāhmaṇa, who has no 
material possessions, maintains himself by the 
profession of accepting śiloñchana. In other 
words, he picks up gra ins left in the field and 
on the ground in the wholesale marketplace. By 
this means, householder brāhmaṇas who actu-
ally abide by the principles of austerity and 
penance maintain themselves and their families 
and perform all necessary pious activities. A 
brāhmaṇa who desires to achieve happiness by 
gaining wealth through professional priesthood 
must certainly have a very low mind. How shall 
I accept such priesthood?(36) All of you are my 
superiors. Therefore although accepting priest-
hood is sometimes reproac hable, I cannot re-
fuse even a small request from you. I agree to 
be your priest. I shall fulfill your request by 
dedicating my life and possessions.(37)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King, 
after making this promise to the demigods, the 
exalted Viśvarūp a, surrounded by the demi-
gods, performed the necessary priestly activi-
ties with great enthusiasm and attention.(38) 
The opulence of the demons, who are generally 
known as the enemies of the demigods, was 
protected by the talents and tactics of 
Śukrācārya, but Viśvarūpa, who was most 
powerful, composed a protective prayer known 
as the Nārāyaṇa -kavaca. By this intelligent 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

375 
 mantra, he took away the opulence of the de-
mons and gave it to Mahendra, the King of 
heaven.(39) Viśvarūpa, who was most liberal, 
spoke to King Indra [Sahasrākṣa] the secret 
hymn that protected Indra and conquered the 
military power of the demons.(40)  
SB 6.8: The Nārāyaṇa -kavaca Shield  
King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī: My lord, kindly explain the Viṣṇu 
mantra armor that protected  King Indra and en-
abled him to conquer his enemies, along with 
their carriers, and enjoy the opulence of the 
three worlds. Please explain to me that 
Nārāyaṇa armor, by which King Indra achieved 
success in battle, conquering the enemies who 
were endeavoring  to kill him. ( 1-2)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: King Indra, the 
leader of the demigods, inquired about the ar-
mor known as Nārāyaṇa -kavaca from 
Viśvarūpa, who was engaged by the demigods 
as their priest. Plea se hear Viśvarūpa’s reply 
with great attention.(3)  
Viśvarūpa said: If some form of fear arrives, 
one should first wash his hands and legs clean 
and then perform ācamana by chanting this 
mantra: om apavitraḥ pavitro vā sarvāvasthāṁ 
gato ’pi vā/ yaḥ smaret puṇḍarīkākṣaṁ sa 
bahyābhyantaraḥśuciḥ/ śrī -viṣṇu śrī -viṣṇu śrī -
viṣṇu. Then one should touch kuśa grass and sit 
gravely and silently, facing north. When com-
pletely purified, one should touch the mantra 
composed of eight syllables to the eight parts of 
his b ody and touch the mantra composed of 
twelve syllables to his hands. Thus, in the fol-
lowing manner, he should bind himself with the 
Nārāyaṇa coat of armor. First, while chanting 
the mantra composed of eight syllables [oṁ 
namo nārāyaṇāya], beginning with the  praṇava, 
the syllable om, one should touch his hands to 
eight parts of his body, starting with the two 
feet and progressing systematically to the 
knees, thighs, abdomen, heart, chest, mouth 
and head. Then one should chant the mantra in 
reverse, beginning from the last syllable [ya], 
while touching the parts of his body in the re-
verse order. These two processes are known as 
utpatti -nyāsa and saṁhāra -nyāsa respec-
tively.( 4-6) Then one should chant the mantra composed of twelve syllables [oṁ namo bha-
gavate vāsudevāya]. Preceding each syllable by 
the oṁkāra, one should place the syllables of 
the mantra on the tips of his fingers, beginning 
with the index finger of the right hand and con-
cluding with the index fing er of the left. The 
four remaining syllables should be placed on 
the joints of the thumbs.(7) One must then 
chant the mantra of six syllables [oṁ viṣṇave 
namaḥ]. One should place the syllable om on 
his heart, the syllable vi on the top of his head, 
the syl lable sa between his eyebrows, the sylla-
ble na on his tuft of hair [śikhā], and the sylla-
ble ve between his eyes. The chanter of the 
mantra should then place the syllable na on all 
the joints of his body and meditate on the sylla-
ble ma as being a weapon. H e should thus be-
come the perfect personification of the mantra. 
Thereafter, adding visarga to the final syllable 
ma he should chant the mantra maḥ astrāya phaṭ 
in all directions, beginning from the east. In this 
way, all directions will be bound by the pro tec-
tive armor of the mantra.( 8-10) After finishing 
this chanting, one should think himself qualita-
tively one with the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is full in six opulences and is 
worthy to be medita ted upon. Then one should 
chant the following protective prayer to Lord 
Nārāyaṇa, the Nārāyaṇa -kavaca.( 11) 
The Supreme Lord, who sits on the back of 
the bird Garuḍa, touching him with His lotus 
feet, holds e ight weaponsthe conchshell, disc, 
shield, sword, club, arrows, bow and ropes. 
May that Supreme Personality of Godhead pro-
tect me at all times with His eight arms. He is 
all-powerful because He fully possesses the 
eight mystic powers [aṇimā, laghimā, etc.]. (12) 
May the Lord, who assumes the body of a great 
fish, protect me in the water from the fierce an-
imals that are associates of the demigod Var-
uṇa. By expanding His illusory energy, the 
Lord assumed the form of the dwarf Vāmana. 
May Vāmana protect me on th e land. Since the 
gigantic form of the Lord, Viśvarūpa, conquers 
the three worlds, may He protect me in the 
sky.(13) May Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, who ap-
peared as the enemy of Hiraṇyakaśipu, protect 
me in all directions. His loud laughing vibrated 
in all direction s and caused the pregnant wives 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

376 
 of the asuras to have miscarriages. May that 
Lord be kind enough to protect me in difficult 
places like the forest and battlefront.(14) The 
Supreme indestructible Lord is ascertained 
through the performance of ritualistic sa crifices 
and is therefore known as Yajñeśvara. In His 
incarnation as Lord Boar, He raised the planet 
earth from the water at the bottom of the uni-
verse and kept it on His pointed tusks. May that 
Lord protect me from rogues on the street. May 
Paraśurāma pro tect me on the tops of moun-
tains, and may the elder brother of Bharata, 
Lord Rāmacandra, along with His brother 
Lakṣmaṇa, protect me in foreign countries.(15) 
May Lord Nārāyaṇa protect me from unneces-
sarily following false religious systems and 
falling fro m my duties due to madness. May the 
Lord in His appearance as Nara protect me 
from unnecessary pride. May Lord Dattātreya, 
the master of all mystic power, protect me from 
falling while performing bhakti -yoga, and may 
Lord Kapila, the master of all good qua lities, 
protect me from the material bondage of frui-
tive activities.(16) May Sanat -kumāra protect 
me from lusty desires. As I begin some auspi-
cious activity, may Lord Hayagrīva protect me 
from being an offender by neglecting to offer 
respectful obeisances to the Supreme Lord. 
May Devarṣi Nārada protect me from commit-
ting offenses in worshiping the Deity, and may 
Lord Kūrma, the tortoise, protect me from fall-
ing to the unlimited hellish planets.(17) May 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His in-
carnation a s Dhanvantari relieve me from un-
desirable eatables and protect me from physical 
illness. May Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, who conquered 
His inner and outer senses, protect me from fear 
produced by the duality of heat and cold. May 
Yajña protect me from defamation and harm 
from the populace, and may Lord Balarāma as 
Śeṣa protect me from envious serpents.(18) 
May the Personality of Godhead in His incar-
nation as Vyāsadeva protect me from all kinds 
of ignorance resulting from the absence of Ve-
dic knowledge. May Lord Buddha deva protect 
me from activities opposed to Vedic principles 
and from laziness that causes one to madly for-
get the Vedic principles of knowledge and ritu-
alistic action. May Kalkideva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who appeared as an in-
carnation to pro tect religious principles, protect 
me from the dirt of the Age of Kali.(19) May 
Lord Keśava protect me with His club in the 
first portion of the day, and may Govinda, who 
is always engaged in playing His flute, protect 
me in the second portion of the day. May Lord 
Nārāyaṇa, who is equipped with all potencies, 
protect me in the third part of the day, and may 
Lord Viṣṇu, who carries a disc to kill His ene-
mies, protect me in the fourth part of the 
day.(20) May Lord Madhusūdana, who carries 
a bow very fearful f or the demons, protect me 
during the fifth part of the day. In the evening, 
may Lord Mādhava, appearing as Brahmā, 
Viṣṇu and Maheśvara, protect me, and in the 
beginning of night may Lord Hṛṣīkeśa protect 
me. At the dead of night [in the second and 
third pa rts of night] may Lord Padmanābha 
alone protect me.(21) May the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who bears the Śrīvatsa on 
His chest, protect me after midnight until the 
sky becomes pinkish. May Lord Janārdana, 
who carries a sword in His hand, protect me at  
the end of night [during the last four ghaṭikās 
of night]. May Lord Dāmodara protect me in 
the early morning, and may Lord Viśveśvara 
protect me during the junctions of day and 
night.(22)  
Set into motion by the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead and wanderin g in all the four direc-
tions, the disc of the Supreme Lord has sharp 
edges as destructive as the fire of devastation at 
the end of the millennium. As a blazing fire 
burns dry grass to ashes with the assistance of 
the breeze, may that Sudarśana cakra burn o ur 
enemies to ashes.(23) O club in the hand of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, you produce 
sparks of fire as powerful as thunderbolts, and 
you are extremely dear to the Lord. I am also 
His servant. Therefore kindly help me pound to 
pieces the evil livi ng beings known as 
Kuṣmāṇḍas, Vaināyakas, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, 
Bhūtas and Grahas. Please pulverize them.(24) 
O best of conchshells, O Pāñcajanya in the 
hands of the Lord, you are always filled with 
the breath of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Therefore you create 
a fearful soun d vibration that causes trembling 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

377 
 in the hearts of enemies like the Rākṣasas, pra-
matha ghosts, Pretas, Mātās, Piśācas and 
brāhmaṇa ghosts with fearful eyes.(25) O king 
of sharp -edged swords, you are engaged by the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Please cut  
the soldiers of my enemies to pieces. Please cut 
them to pieces! O shield marked with a hundred 
brilliant moonlike circles, please cover the eyes 
of the sinful enemies. Pluck out their sinful 
eyes.(26)  
May the glorification of the transcendental 
name, fo rm, qualities and paraphernalia of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead protect us 
from the influence of bad planets, meteors, en-
vious human beings, serpents, scorpions, and 
animals like tigers and wolves. May it protect 
us from ghosts and the material eleme nts like 
earth, water, fire and air, and may it also protect 
us from lightning and our past sins. We are al-
ways afraid of these hindrances to our auspi-
cious life. Therefore, may they all be com-
pletely destroyed by the chanting of the Hare 
Kṛṣṇa mahā -mantra .(27-28) Lord Garuḍa, the 
carrier of Lord Viṣṇu, is the most worshipable 
lord, for he is as powerful as the Supreme Lord 
Himself. He is the personified Vedas and is 
worshiped by selected verses. May he pr otect 
us from all dangerous conditions, and may Lord 
Viṣvaksena, the Personality of Godhead, also 
protect us from all dangers by His holy 
names.(29) May the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead’s holy names, His transcendental 
forms, His carriers and all the wea pons deco-
rating Him as personal associates protect our 
intelligence, senses, mind and life air from all 
dangers.(30)  
The subtle and gross cosmic manifestation 
is material, but nevertheless it is nondifferent 
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead be-
cause  He is ultimately the cause of all causes. 
Cause and effect are factually one because the 
cause is present in the effect. Therefore the Ab-
solute Truth, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, can destroy all our dangers by any of His 
potent parts.(31) The Supr eme Personality of 
Godhead, the living entities, the material en-
ergy, the spiritual energy and the entire creation 
are all individual substances. In the ultimate analysis, however, together they constitute the 
supreme one, the Personality of Godhead. 
There fore those who are advanced in spiritual 
knowledge see unity in diversity. For such ad-
vanced persons, the Lord’s bodily decorations, 
His name, His fame, His attributes and forms 
and the weapons in His hand are manifestations 
of the strength of His potency.  According to 
their elevated spiritual understanding, the om-
niscient Lord, who manifests various forms, is 
present everywhere. May He always protect us 
everywhere from all calamities.( 32-33) Prah-
lāda Mahā rāja loudly chanted the holy name of 
Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva. May Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, 
roaring for His devotee Prahlāda Mahārāja, 
protect us from all fear of dangers created by 
stalwart leaders in all directions through poi-
son, weapons, water, fire, air and so on. M ay 
the Lord cover their influence by His own tran-
scendental influence. May Nṛsiṁhadeva pro-
tect us in all directions and in all corners, 
above, below, within and without.(34)  
Viśvarūpa continued: O Indra, this mystic 
armor related to Lord Nārāyaṇa has been  de-
scribed by me to you. By putting on this protec-
tive covering, you will certainly be able to con-
quer the leaders of the demons.(35) If one em-
ploys this armor, whomever he sees with his 
eyes or touches with his feet is immediately 
freed from all the above -mentioned dan-
gers.(36) This prayer, Nārāyaṇa -kavaca, con-
stitutes subtle knowledge transcendentally con-
nected with Nārāyaṇa. One who employs this 
prayer is never disturbed or put in danger by the 
government, by plunderers, by evil demons or 
by any type of disease.(37) O King of heaven, 
a brāhmaṇa named Kauśika formerly used this 
armor when he purposely gave up his body in 
the desert by mystic power.(38) Surrounded by 
many beautiful women, Citraratha, the King of 
Gandharvaloka, was once passing in his air-
plane over the brāhmaṇa’s body at the spot 
where the brāhmaṇa had died.(39) Suddenly 
Citraratha was forced to fall from the sky head-
first with his airplane. Struck with wonder, he 
was ordered by the great sages named the 
Vālikhilyas to throw the brāhmaṇa’s bo nes in 
the nearby river Sarasvatī. He had to do this and 
bathe in the river before returning to his own 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

378 
 abode.(40)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear 
Mahārāja Parīkṣit, one who employs this armor 
or hears about it with faith and veneration when 
afraid beca use of any conditions in the material 
world is immediately freed from all dangers 
and is worshiped by all living entities.(41) King 
Indra, who performed one hundred sacrifices, 
received this prayer of protection from 
Viśvarūpa. After conquering the demons,  he 
enjoyed all the opulences of the three 
worlds.(42)  
SB 6.9: Appearance of the Demon 
Vṛtrāsura  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: 
Viśvarūpa, who was engaged as the priest of 
the demigods, had three heads. He used one to 
drink the beverage soma -rasa, another  to drink 
wine and the third to eat food. O King Parīkṣit, 
thus I have heard from authorities.(1) O 
Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the demigods were related to 
Viśvarūpa from his father’s side, and therefore 
he visibly offered clarified butter in the fire 
while chanti ng mantras such as indrāya idaṁ 
svāhā [“this is meant for King Indra”] and idam 
agnaye [“this is for the demigod of fire”]. He 
loudly chanted these mantras and offered each 
of the demigods his proper share.(2) Although 
offering clarified butter in the sacr ificial fire in 
the name of the demigods, without the 
knowledge of the demigods he also offered ob-
lations to the demons because they were his rel-
atives through his mother.(3) Once upon a time, 
however, the King of heaven, Indra, understood 
that Viśvarūpa w as secretly cheating the demi-
gods by offering oblations on behalf of the de-
mons. He became extremely afraid of being de-
feated by the demons, and in great anger at 
Viśvarūpa he cut Viśvarūpa’s three heads from 
his shoulders.(4) Thereafter, the head meant fo r 
drinking soma -rasa was transformed into a ka-
piñjala [francolin partridge]. Similarly, the 
head meant for drinking wine was transformed 
into a kalaviṅka [sparrow], and the head meant 
for eating food became a tittiri [common par-
tridge].(5) Although Indra w as so powerful that 
he could neutralize the sinful reactions for kill-
ing a brāhmaṇa, he repentantly accepted the burden of these reactions with folded hands. He 
suffered for one year, and then to purify himself 
he distributed the reactions for this sinful kill-
ing among the earth, water, trees and 
women.(6) In return for King Indra’s benedic-
tion that ditches in the earth would be filled au-
tomatically, the land accepted one fourth of the 
sinful reactions for killing a brāhmaṇa. Because 
of those sinful reactio ns, we find many deserts 
on the surface of the earth.(7) In return for In-
dra’s benediction that their branches and twigs 
would grow back when trimmed, the trees ac-
cepted one fourth of the reactions for killing a 
brāhmaṇa. These reactions are visible in the  
flowing of sap from trees. [Therefore one is for-
bidden to drink this sap.](8) In return for Lord 
Indra’s benediction that they would be able to 
enjoy lusty desires continuously, even during 
pregnancy for as long as sex is not injurious to 
the embryo, wome n accepted one fourth of the 
sinful reactions. As a result of those reactions, 
women manifest the signs of menstruation 
every month.(9) And in return for King Indra’s 
benediction that water would increase the vol-
ume of other substances with which it was 
mixed, water accepted one fourth of the sinful 
reactions. Therefore there are bubbles and foam 
in water. When one collects water, these should 
be avoided.(10)  
After Viśvarūpa was killed, his father, 
Tvaṣṭā, performed ritualistic ceremonies to kill 
Indra. He  offered oblations in the sacrificial 
fire, saying, “O enemy of Indra, flourish to kill 
your enemy without delay.”(11) Thereafter, 
from the southern side of the sacrificial fire 
known as Anvāhārya came a fearful personality 
who looked like the destroyer of  the entire cre-
ation at the end of the millennium.(12) Like ar-
rows released in the four directions, the de-
mon’s body grew, day after day. Tall and black-
ish, he appeared like a burnt hill and was as lus-
trous as a bright array of clouds in the evening. 
The h air on the demon’s body and his beard and 
moustache were the color of melted copper, and 
his eyes were piercing like the midday sun. He 
appeared unconquerable, as if holding the three 
worlds on the points of his blazing trident. 
Dancing and shouting with a  loud voice, he 
made the entire surface of the earth tremble as 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

379 
 if from an earthquake. As he yawned again and 
again, he seemed to be trying to swallow the 
whole sky with his mouth, which was as deep 
as a cave. He seemed to be licking up all the 
stars in th e sky with his tongue and eating the 
entire universe with his long, sharp teeth. See-
ing this gigantic demon, everyone, in great fear, 
ran here and there in all directions.( 13-17) That 
very fearful demon, who was actually the son 
of Tvaṣṭā, covered all the planetary systems by 
dint of austerity. Therefore he was named 
Vṛtra, or one who covers everything.(18) The 
demigods, headed by Indra, charged the demon 
with their soldiers, striking him with their own 
transcendental bows and arrows and other 
weapons but Vṛtrāsura swallowed all their 
weapons.(19) Struck with wonder and disap-
pointment upon seeing the strength of the de-
mon, the demigods lost their own strength. 
Therefore they all met together to try to pleas e 
the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Nārāyaṇa, by worshiping Him.(20)  
The demigods said: The three worlds are 
created by the five elementsnamely ether, air, 
fire, water and earthwhich are controlled by 
various demigods, beginning from Lord  
Brahmā. Being very much afraid that the time 
factor will end our existence, we offer presen-
tations unto time by performing our work as 
time dictates. The time factor himself, how-
ever, is afraid of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. Therefore let us now w orship that 
Supreme Lord, who alone can give us full pro-
tection.(21) Free from all material conceptions 
of existence and never wonder -struck by any-
thing, the Lord is always jubilant and fully sat-
isfied by His own spiritual perfection. He has 
no material de signations, and therefore He is 
steady and unattached. That Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead is the only shelter of everyone. 
Anyone desiring to be protected by others is 
certainly a great fool who desires to cross the 
sea by holding the tail of a dog.(22) T he Manu 
named King Satyavrata formerly saved himself 
by tying the small boat of the entire world to 
the horn of the Matsya avatāra, the fish incar-
nation. By the grace of the Matsya avatāra, 
Manu saved himself from the great danger of 
the flood. May that sa me fish incarnation save us from the great and fearful danger caused by 
the son of Tvaṣṭā.(23) In the beginning of crea-
tion, a tremendous wind caused fierce waves of 
inundating water. The great waves made such a 
horrible sound that Lord Brahmā almost fell 
from his seat on the lotus into the water of dev-
astation, but he was saved with the help of the 
Lord. Thus we also expect the Lord to protect 
us from this dangerous condition.(24) The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who created us 
by His external potency a nd by whose mercy 
we expand the creation of the universe, is al-
ways situated before us as the Supersoul, but 
we cannot see His form. We are unable to see 
Him because all of us think that we are separate 
and independent gods.(25) By His inconceiva-
ble intern al potency, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead expands into various transcenden-
tal bodies as Vāmanadeva, the incarnation of 
strength among the demigods; Paraśurāma, the 
incarnation among saints; Nṛsiṁhadeva and 
Varāha, incarnations among animals; and Mat-
sya and Kūrma, incarnations among aquatics. 
He accepts various transcendental bodies 
among all types of living entities, and among 
human beings He especially appears as Lord 
Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāma. By His causeless mercy, 
He protects the demigods, who are alway s har-
assed by the demons. He is the supreme wor-
shipable Deity of all living entities. He is the 
supreme cause, represented as the male and fe-
male creative energies. Although different 
from this universe, He exists in His universal 
form [virāṭ -rūpa]. In our  fearful condition, let 
us take shelter of Him, for we are sure that the 
Supreme Lord, the Supreme Soul, will give us 
His protection.(26 -27)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, 
when all the demigods offered Him their pray-
ers, the Supreme Personality o f Godhead, Lord 
Hari, carrying His weapons, the conchshell, 
disc and club, appeared first within their hearts 
and then before them.(28) Surrounding and 
serving the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāyaṇa, were sixteen personal attendants, 
decorated with o rnaments and appearing ex-
actly like Him but without the mark of Śrīvatsa 
and the Kaustubha jewel. O King, when all the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

380 
 demigods saw the Supreme Lord in that pos-
ture, smiling with eyes like the petals of lotuses 
grown in autumn, they were overwhelmed with 
happiness and immediately fell down like rods, 
offering daṇḍavats. Then they slowly rose and 
pleased the Lord by offering Him prayers.( 29-
30)  
The demigods said: O Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, You are c ompetent to give the re-
sults of sacrifice, and You are also the time fac-
tor that destroys all such results in due course. 
You are the one who releases the cakra to kill 
the demons. O Lord, who possess many varie-
ties of names, we offer our respectful obei-
sances unto You.(31) O supreme controller, 
You control the  three destinations [promotion 
to the heavenly planets, birth as a human being, 
and condemnation in hell], yet Your supreme 
abode is Vaikuṇṭha -dhāma. Since we appeared 
after You created this cosmic manifestation, 
Your activities are impossible for us to un der-
stand. We therefore have nothing to offer You 
but our humble obeisances.(32)  
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O 
Nārāyaṇa, O Vāsudeva, original person! O 
most exalted person, supreme experience, wel-
fare personified! O supreme benediction, su-
premely mer ciful and changeless! O support of 
the cosmic manifestation, sole proprietor of all 
planetary systems, master of everything and 
husband of the goddess of fortune! Your Lord-
ship is realized by the topmost sannyāsīs, who 
wander about the world to preach Kṛṣṇ a con-
sciousness, fully absorbed in samādhi through 
bhakti -yoga. Because their minds are concen-
trated upon You, they can receive the concep-
tion of Your personality in their fully purified 
hearts. When the darkness in their hearts is 
completely eradicated an d You are revealed to 
them, the transcendental bliss they enjoy is the 
transcendental form of Your Lordship. No one 
but such persons can realize You. Therefore we 
simply offer You our respectful obei-
sances.(33) O Lord, You need no support, and 
although You  have no material body, You do 
not need cooperation from us. Since You are 
the cause of the cosmic manifestation and You 
supply its material ingredients without being transformed, You create, maintain and annihi-
late this cosmic manifestation by Yourself. 
Nevertheless, although You appear engaged in 
material activity, You are transcendental to all 
material qualities. Consequently these tran-
scendental activities of Yours are extremely 
difficult to understand.(34) These are our in-
quiries. The ordinary conditio ned soul is sub-
ject to the material laws, and he thus receives 
the fruits of his actions. Does Your Lordship, 
like an ordinary human being, exist within this 
material world in a body produced by the ma-
terial modes? Do You enjoy or suffer the good 
or bad re sults of actions under the influence of 
time, past work and so forth? Or, on the con-
trary, are You present here only as a neutral 
witness who is self -sufficient, free from all ma-
terial desires, and always full of spiritual po-
tency? We certainly cannot unde rstand Your 
actual position.(35) O Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, all contradictions can be reconciled 
in You. O Lord, since You are the Supreme 
Person, the reservoir of unlimited spiritual 
qualities, the supreme controller, Your unlim-
ited glories are inc onceivable to the condi-
tioned souls. Many modern theologians argue 
about right and wrong without knowing what is 
actually right. Their arguments are always false 
and their judgments inconclusive because they 
have no authorized evidence with which to gain 
knowledge of You. Because their minds are ag-
itated by scriptures containing false conclu-
sions, they are unable to understand the truth 
concerning You. Furthermore, because of pol-
luted eagerness to arrive at the right conclusion, 
their theories are incapable  of revealing You, 
who are transcendental to their material con-
ceptions. You are one without a second, and 
therefore in You contradictions like doing and 
not doing, happiness and distress, are not con-
tradictory. Your potency is so great that it can 
do and undo anything as You like. With the 
help of that potency, what is impossible for 
You? Since there is no duality in Your consti-
tutional position, You can do everything by the 
influence of Your energy.(36) A rope causes 
fear for a bewildered person who consi ders it a 
snake, but not for a person with proper intelli-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

381 
 gence who knows it to be only a rope. Simi-
larly, You, as the Supersoul in everyone’s 
heart, inspire fear or fearlessness according to 
one’s intelligence, but in You there is no dual-
ity.(37) With deli beration, one will see that the 
Supreme Soul, although manifested in different 
ways, is actually the basic principle of every-
thing. The total material energy is the cause of 
the material manifestation, but the material en-
ergy is caused by Him. Therefore He  is the 
cause of all causes, the manifester of intelli-
gence and the senses. He is perceived as the Su-
persoul of everything. Without Him, every-
thing would be dead. You, as that Supersoul, 
the supreme controller, are the only one re-
maining.(38) Therefore, O killer of the Madhu 
demon, incessant transcendental bliss flows in 
the minds of those who have even once tasted 
but a drop of the nectar from the ocean of Your 
glories. Such exalted devotees forget the tiny 
reflection of so -called material happiness pro-
duced from the material senses of sight and 
sound. Free from all desires, such devotees are 
the real friends of all living entities. Offering 
their minds unto You and enjoying transcen-
dental bliss, they are expert in achieving the 
real goal of life. O Lord, Y ou are the soul and 
dear friend of such devotees, who never need 
return to this material world. How could they 
give up engagement in Your devotional ser-
vice?(39) O Lord, O personified three worlds, 
father of the three worlds! O strength of the 
three worlds , in the form of the Vāmana incar-
nation! O three -eyed form of Nṛsiṁhadeva! O 
most beautiful person within the three worlds! 
Everything and everyone, including human be-
ings and even the Daitya demons and the Dāna-
vas, is but an expansion of Your energy. O su-
premely powerful one, You have always ap-
peared in Your forms as the various incarna-
tions to punish the demons as soon as they be-
come very powerful. You appear as Lord 
Vāmanadeva, Lord Rāma and Lord Kṛṣṇa. You 
appear sometimes as an animal like Lord Boar, 
sometimes a mixed incarnation like Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva and Lord Hayagrīva, and some-
times an aquatic like Lord Fish and Lord Tor-
toise. Assuming such various forms, You have 
always punished the demons and Dānavas. We therefore pray that Your Lordship appear toda y 
as another incarnation, if You so desire, to kill 
the great demon Vṛtrāsura.(40) O supreme pro-
tector, O grandfather, O supreme pure, O Lord! 
We are all surrendered souls at Your lotus feet. 
Indeed, our minds are bound to Your lotus feet 
in meditation by chains of love. Now please 
manifest Your incarnation. Accepting us as 
Your own eternal servants and devotees, be 
pleased with us and sympathetic toward us. By 
Your love -filled glance, with its cool and pleas-
ing smile of sympathy, and by the sweet, nec-
tarea n words emanating from Your beautiful 
face, free us from the anxiety caused by this 
Vṛtrāsura, who always pains the cores of our 
hearts.(41) O Lord, as the small sparks of a fire 
cannot possibly perform the actions of the 
whole fire, we sparks of Your Lord ship cannot 
inform You of the necessities of our lives. You 
are the complete whole. Therefore, of what do 
we need to inform You? You know everything 
because You are the original cause of the cos-
mic manifestation, the maintainer and the anni-
hilator of the e ntire universal creation. You al-
ways engage in Your pastimes with Your spir-
itual and material energies, for You are the con-
troller of all these varied energies. You exist 
within all living entities, within the cosmic 
manifestation, and also beyond them. Yo u exist 
internally as Parabrahman and externally as the 
ingredients of the material creation. Therefore, 
although manifested in various stages, at differ-
ent times and places, and in various bodies, 
You, the Personality of Godhead, are the origi-
nal cause of  all causes. Indeed, You are the 
original element. You are the witness of all ac-
tivities, but because You are as great as the sky, 
You are never touched by any of them. You are 
the witness of everything as Parabrahman and 
Paramātmā. O Supreme Personality o f God-
head, nothing is unknown to You.(42) Dear 
Lord, You are omniscient, and therefore You 
know very well why we have taken shelter at 
Your lotus feet, which provide shade that gives 
relief from all material disturbances. Since You 
are the supreme spiritua l master and You know 
everything, we have sought shelter of Your lo-
tus feet for instruction. Please give us relief by 
counteracting our present distress. Your lotus 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

382 
 feet are the only shelter for a fully surrendered 
devotee and are the only means for subdui ng all 
the tribulations of this material world.(43) 
Therefore, O Lord, O supreme controller, O 
Lord Kṛṣṇa, please annihilate this dangerous 
demon Vṛtrāsura, Tvaṣṭā’s son, who has al-
ready swallowed all our weapons, our para-
phernalia for fighting, and our st rength and in-
fluence.(44) O Lord, O supreme pure, You live 
within the core of everyone’s heart and observe 
all the desires and activities of the conditioned 
souls. O Supreme Personality of Godhead 
known as Lord Kṛṣṇa, Your reputation is bright 
and illumina ting. You have no beginning, for 
You are the beginning of everything. This is 
understood by pure devotees because You are 
easily accessible to the pure and truthful. When 
the conditioned souls are liberated and shel-
tered at Your lotus feet after roving thr oughout 
the material world for many millions of years, 
they attain the highest success of life. There-
fore, O Lord, O Supreme Personality of God-
head, we offer our respectful obeisances at 
Your lotus feet.(45)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King 
Parīkṣit, when the demigods offered the Lord 
their sincere prayers in this way, the Lord lis-
tened by His causeless mercy. Being pleased, 
He then replied to the demigods.(46)  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
O beloved demigods, you have offered your 
prayers to Me with great knowledge, and I am 
certainly most pleased with you. A person is 
liberated by such knowledge, and thus he re-
members My exalted position, which is above 
the conditions of material life. Such a  devotee 
is fully purified by offering prayers in full 
knowledge. This is the source of devotional ser-
vice to Me.(47) O best of the intelligent demi-
gods, although it is true that nothing is difficult 
for one to obtain when I am pleased with him, 
a pure dev otee, whose mind is exclusively fixed 
upon Me, does not ask Me for anything but the 
opportunity to engage in devotional ser-
vice.(48) Those who think material assets to be 
everything or to be the ultimate goal of life are 
called misers [kṛpaṇas]. They do no t know the 
ultimate necessity of the soul. Moreover, if one awards that which is desired by such fools, he 
must also be considered foolish.(49) A pure 
devotee who is fully accomplished in the sci-
ence of devotional service will never instruct a 
foolish pers on to engage in fruitive activities 
for material enjoyment, not to speak of helping 
him in such activities. Such a devotee is like an 
experienced physician, who never encourages a 
patient to eat food injurious to his health, even 
if the patient desires it. (50) O Maghavan [In-
dra], all good fortune unto you. I advise you to 
approach the exalted saint Dadhyañca 
[Dadhīci]. He has become very accomplished 
in knowledge, vows and austerities, and his 
body is very strong. Go ask him for his body 
without delay.(51) That saintly Dadhyañca, 
who is also known as Dadhīci, personally as-
similated the spiritual science and then deliv-
ered it to the Aśvinī -kumāras. It is said that 
Dadhyañca gave them mantras through the 
head of a horse. Therefore the mantras are 
called Aśvaśi ra. After obtaining the mantras of 
spiritual science from Dadhīci, the Aśvinī -
kumāras became jīvan -mukta, liberated even in 
this life.(52) Dadhyañca’s invincible protective 
covering known as the Nārāyaṇa -kavaca was 
given to Tvaṣṭā, who delivered it to his son 
Viśvarūpa, from whom you have received it. 
Because of this Nārāyaṇa -kavaca, Dadhīci’s 
body is now very strong. You should therefore 
beg him for his body.(53) When the Aśvinī -
kumāras beg for Dadhyañca’s body on your be-
half, he will surely give it becaus e of affection. 
Do not doubt this, for Dadhyañca is very expe-
rienced in religious understanding. When 
Dadhyañca awards you his body, Viśvakarmā 
will prepare a thunderbolt from his bones. This 
thunderbolt will certainly kill Vṛtrāsura be-
cause it will be inv ested with My power.(54) 
When Vṛtrāsura is killed because of My spir-
itual strength, you will regain your strength, 
weapons and wealth. Thus there will be all 
good fortune for all of you. Although Vṛtrāsura 
can destroy all the three worlds, do not fear that  
he will harm you. He is also a devotee and will 
never be envious of you.(55)  
SB 6.10: The Battle Between the Demigods 
and Vṛtrāsura  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

383 
 ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: After instruct-
ing Indra in this way, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Hari, the cause of the cosmic man-
ifestation, then and there disappeared from the 
presence of the onlooking demigods.(1) O King 
Parīkṣit, following the Lord’s instructions, the 
demigods approached Dadhīci, the son of 
Atharvā. He was very liberal, and when they 
begged him to give them his body, he at once 
partially agreed. However, just to hear religious 
instructions from them, he smiled and jokingly 
spoke as follows.(2) O elevated demigods, at 
the time of death, severe, unbearable pain takes 
away the consciousness of all living en tities 
who have accepted material bodies. Don’t you 
know about this pain?(3) In this material world, 
every living entity is very much addicted to his 
material body. Struggling to keep his body for-
ever, everyone tries to protect it by all means, 
even at the  sacrifice of all his possessions. 
Therefore, who would be prepared to deliver 
his body to anyone, even if it were demanded 
by Lord Viṣṇu?(4)  
The demigods replied: O exalted brāhmaṇa, 
pious persons like you, whose activities are 
praiseworthy, are very kin d and affectionate to 
people in general. What can’t such pious souls 
give for the benefit of others? They can give 
everything, including their bodies.(5)  Those 
who are too self -interested beg something from 
others, not knowing of others’ pain. But if the 
beggar knew the difficulty of the giver, he 
would not ask for anything. Similarly, he who 
is able to give charity does not know the beg-
gar’s difficulty, for otherwise he would not re-
fuse to give the beggar anything he might want 
as charity.(6)  
The great s age Dadhīci said: Just to hear 
from you about religious principles, I refused to 
offer my body at your request. Now, although 
my body is extremely dear to me, I must give it 
up for your better purposes since I know that it 
will leave me today or tomorrow.  
O demigods, one who has no compassion for 
humanity in its suffering and does not sacrifice 
his impermanent body for the higher causes of 
religious principles or eternal glory is certainly 
pitied even by the immovable beings.(8) If one is unhappy to see th e distress of other living be-
ings and happy to see their happiness, his reli-
gious principles are appreciated as imperisha-
ble by exalted persons who are considered pi-
ous and benevolent.(9) This body, which is eat-
able by jackals and dogs after death, does no t 
actually do any good for me, the spirit soul. It 
is usable only for a short time and may perish 
at any moment. The body and its possessions, 
its riches and relatives, must all be engaged for 
the benefit of others, or else they will be 
sources of tribulat ion and misery.(10)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: Dadhīci Muni, 
the son of Atharvā, thus resolved to give his 
body to the service of the demigods. He placed 
himself, the spirit soul, at the lotus feet of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead and in this 
way gave up his gross materia l body made of 
five elements.(11) Dadhīci Muni controlled his 
senses, life force, mind and intelligence and be-
came absorbed in trance. Thus he cut all his ma-
terial bonds. He could not perceive how his ma-
terial body became separated from his self.(12) 
There after, King Indra very firmly took up the 
thunderbolt manufactured by Viśvakarmā from 
the bones of Dadhīci. Charged with the exalted 
power of Dadhīci Muni and enlightened by the 
power of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Indra rode on the back of his car rier, Airāvata, 
surrounded by all the demigods, while all the 
great sages offered him praise. Thus he shone 
very beautifully, pleasing the three worlds as he 
rode off to kill Vṛtrāsura.(13 -14) My dear King 
Parīkṣit, as Rudra, being very angry at Antaka 
[Yamarāja] had formerly run toward Antaka to 
kill him, Indra angrily and with great force at-
tacked Vṛtrāsura, who was surrounded by the 
leaders of the demoniac armies.(15) Thereafter, 
at the end of Satya -yuga and the beginning of 
Tretā -yuga, a fierce battle t ook place between 
the demigods and the demons on the bank of 
the Narmadā.(16) O King, when all the asuras 
came onto the battlefield, headed by Vṛtrāsura, 
they saw King Indra carrying the thunderbolt 
and surrounded by the Rudras, Vasus, Ādityas, 
Aśvinī -kumā ras, Pitās, Vahnis, Maruts, Ṛbhus, 
Sādhyas and Viśvadevas. Surrounded by his 
company, Indra shone so brightly that his efful-
gence was intolerable to the demons.(17 -18) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

384 
 Many hundreds and thousands of demons, 
demi -demons, Yakṣas, Rākṣasas [man -eaters] 
and ot hers, headed by Sumāli and Māli, resisted 
the armies of King Indra, which even death per-
sonified cannot easily overcome. Among the 
demons were Namuci, Śambara, Anarvā, 
Dvimūrdhā, Ṛṣabha, Asura, Hayagrīva, 
Śaṅkuśirā, Vipracitti, Ayomukha, Pulomā, 
Vṛṣaparvā,  Praheti, Heti and Utkala. Roaring 
tumultuously and fearlessly like lions, these in-
vincible demons, all dressed in golden orna-
ments, gave pain to the demigods with weapons 
like clubs, bludgeons, arrows, barbed darts, 
mallets and lances.(19 -22) Armed with l ances, 
tridents, axes, swords and other weapons like 
śataghnīs and bhuśuṇḍis, the demons attacked 
from different directions and scattered all the 
chiefs of the demigod armies.(23) As the stars 
in the sky cannot be seen when covered by 
dense clouds, the dem igods, being completely 
covered by networks of arrows falling upon 
them one after another, could not be seen.(24) 
The showers of various weapons and arrows re-
leased to kill the soldiers of the demigods did 
not reach them because the demigods, acting 
quickl y, cut the weapons into thousands of 
pieces in the sky.(25) As their weapons and 
mantras decreased, the demons began shower-
ing mountain peaks, trees and stones upon the 
demigod soldiers, but the demigods were so 
powerful and expert that they nullified all these 
weapons by breaking them to pieces in the sky 
as before.(26)  
When the soldiers of the demons, com-
manded by Vṛtrāsura, saw that the soldiers of 
King Indra were quite well, having not been in-
jured at all by their volleys of weapons, not 
even by the tr ees, stones and mountain peaks, 
the demons were very much afraid.(27) When 
insignificant persons use rough words to cast 
false, angry accusations against saintly persons, 
their fruitless words do not disturb the great 
personalities. Similarly, all the effo rts of the de-
mons against the demigods, who were favora-
bly situated under the protection of Kṛṣṇa, were 
futile.(28) The asuras, who are never devotees 
of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, lost their pride in fighting when they 
found all their  endeavors futile. Leaving aside their leader even in the very beginning of the 
fight, they decided to flee because all their 
prowess had been taken away by the en-
emy.(29) Seeing his army broken and all the 
asuras, even those known as great heroes, flee-
ing the battlefield out of intense fear, Vṛtrāsura, 
who was truly a great -minded hero, smiled and 
spoke the following words. (30) According to 
his position and the time and circumstances, 
Vṛtrāsura, the hero among heroes, spoke words 
that were much to be appr eciated by thoughtful 
men. He called to the heroes of the demons, “O 
Vipracitti! O Namuci! O Pulomā! O Maya, 
Anarvā and Śambara! Please hear me and do 
not flee.”(31) Vṛtrāsura said: All living entities 
who have taken birth in this material world 
must die. Surely, no one in this world has found 
any means to be saved from death. Even provi-
dence has not provided a means to escape it. 
Under the circumstances, death being inevita-
ble, if one can gain promotion to the higher 
planetary systems and be always celebra ted 
here by dying a suitable death, what man will 
not accept such a glorious death?(32) There are 
two ways to meet a glorious death, and both are 
very rare. One is to die after performing mystic 
yoga, especially bhakti -yoga, by which one can 
control the mi nd and living force and die ab-
sorbed in thought of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. The second is to die on the battle-
field, leading the army and never showing 
one’s back. These two kinds of death are rec-
ommended in the śāstra as glorious.(33)  
SB 6.11:  The Transcendental Qualities of 
Vṛtrāsura  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, 
Vṛtrāsura, the commander in chief of the de-
mons, advised his lieutenants in the principles 
of religion, but the cowardly demoniac com-
manders, intent upon fleeing the battlefield, 
were so disturbed by fear that they could not 
accept his words.(1) O King Parīkṣit, the dem-
igods, taking advantage of a favorable oppor-
tunity presented by time, attacked the army of 
the demons from the rear and began driving 
away the demoniac soldiers, sca ttering them 
here and there as if their army had no leader. 
Seeing the pitiable condition of his soldiers, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

385 
 Vṛtrāsura, the best of the asuras, who was 
called Indraśatru, the enemy of Indra, was very 
much aggrieved. Unable to tolerate such re-
verses, he stopp ed and forcefully rebuked the 
demigods, speaking the following words in an 
angry mood.(2 -3) O demigods, these demoniac 
soldiers have taken birth uselessly. Indeed, they 
have come from the bodies of their mothers ex-
actly like stool. What is the benefit of k illing 
such enemies from behind while they are run-
ning in fear? One who considers himself a hero 
should not kill an enemy who is afraid of losing 
his life. Such killing is never glorious, nor can 
it promote one to the heavenly planets.(4) O in-
significant d emigods, if you truly have faith in 
your heroism, if you have patience in the cores 
of your hearts and if you are not ambitious for 
sense gratification, please stand before me for 
a moment.(5)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Vṛtrāsura, the an-
gry and most powerful hero, terrified the dem-
igods with his stout and strongly built body. 
When he roared with a resounding voice, nearly 
all living entities fainted.(6) When all the dem-
igods heard Vṛtrāsura’s tumultuous roar, which 
resembled that of a lion, they fainted and fe ll to 
the ground as if struck by thunderbolts.(7) As 
the demigods closed their eyes in fear, 
Vṛtrāsura, taking up his trident and making the 
earth tremble with his great strength, trampled 
the demigods beneath his feet on the battlefield 
the way a mad elep hant tramples hollow bam-
boos in the forest.(8) Seeing Vṛtrāsura’s dispo-
sition, Indra, the King of heaven, became intol-
erant and threw at him one of his great clubs, 
which are extremely difficult to counteract. 
However, as the club flew toward him, 
Vṛtrāsur a easily caught it with his left hand.(9) 
O King Parīkṣit, the powerful Vṛtrāsura, the en-
emy of King Indra, angrily struck the head of 
Indra’s elephant with that club, making a tu-
multuous sound on the battlefield. For this he-
roic deed, the soldiers on both  sides glorified 
him.(10) Struck with the club by Vṛtrāsura like 
a mountain struck by a thunderbolt, the ele-
phant Airāvata, feeling great pain and spitting 
blood from its broken mouth, was pushed back 
fourteen yards. In great distress, the elephant 
fell, w ith Indra on its back.(11)  When he saw Indra’s carrier elephant thus 
fatigued and injured and when he saw Indra 
morose because his carrier had been harmed in 
that way, the great soul Vṛtrāsura, following re-
ligious principles, refrained from again striking  
Indra with the club. Taking this opportunity, In-
dra touched the elephant with his nectar -pro-
ducing hand, thus relieving the animal’s pain 
and curing its injuries. Then the elephant and 
Indra both stood silently.(12) O King, when the 
great hero Vṛtrāsura s aw Indra, his enemy, the 
killer of his brother, standing before him with a 
thunderbolt in his hand, desiring to fight, 
Vṛtrāsura remembered how Indra had cruelly 
killed his brother. Thinking of Indra’s sinful ac-
tivities, he became mad with lamentation and 
forgetfulness. Laughing sarcastically, he spoke 
as follows.(13)  
Śrī Vṛtrāsura said: He who has killed a 
brāhmaṇa, he who has killed his spiritual mas-
terindeed, he who has killed my brotheris now, 
by good fortune, standing before me face to 
face as my enem y. O most abominable one, 
when I pierce your stonelike heart with my tri-
dent, I shall be freed from my debt to my 
brother.(14) Only for the sake of living in the 
heavenly planets, you killed my elder brothera 
self-realized, sinless, qualified brāhmaṇa who 
had been appointed your chief priest. He was 
your spiritual master, but although you en-
trusted him with the performance of your sacri-
fice, you later mercilessly severed his heads 
from his body the way one butchers an ani-
mal.(15) Indra, you are bereft of al l shame, 
mercy, glory and good fortune. Deprived of 
these good qualities by the reactions of your 
fruitive activities, you are to be condemned 
even by the man -eaters [Rākṣasas]. Now I shall 
pierce your body with my trident, and after you 
die with great pai n, even fire will not touch you; 
only the vultures will eat your body.(16) You 
are naturally cruel. If the other demigods, una-
ware of my prowess, follow you by attacking 
me with raised weapons, I shall sever their 
heads with this sharp trident. With those heads 
I shall perform a sacrifice to Bhairava and the 
other leaders of the ghosts, along with their 
hordes.(17) But if in this battle you cut off my 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

386 
 head with your thunderbolt and kill my sol-
diers, O Indra, O great hero, I shall take great 
pleasure in offe ring my body to other living en-
tities [such as jackals and vultures]. I shall thus 
be relieved of my obligations to the reactions of 
my karma, and my fortune will be to receive the 
dust from the lotus feet of great devotees like 
Nārada Muni.(18) O King of the demigods, 
since I, your enemy, am standing before you, 
why don’t you hurl your thunderbolt at me? 
Although your attack upon me with your club 
was certainly useless, like a request of money 
from a miser, the thunderbolt you carry will not 
be useless. Yo u need have no doubts about 
this.(19) O Indra, King of heaven, the thunder-
bolt you carry to kill me has been empowered 
by the prowess of Lord Viṣṇu and the strength 
of Dadhīci’s austerities. Since you have come 
here to kill me in accordance with Lord Viṣṇu ’s 
order, there is no doubt that I shall be killed by 
the release of your thunderbolt. Lord Viṣṇu has 
sided with you. Therefore your victory, opu-
lence and all good qualities are assured.(20) By 
the force of your thunderbolt, I shall be freed of 
material bo ndage and shall give up this body 
and this world of material desires. Fixing my 
mind upon the lotus feet of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa, I 
shall attain the destination of such great sages 
as Nārada Muni, just as Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa has 
said.(21)  
Persons who fully surrend er at the lotus feet 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and al-
ways think of His lotus feet are accepted and 
recognized by the Lord as His own personal as-
sistants or servants. The Lord never bestows 
upon such servants the brilliant opulences of 
the upper , lower and middle planetary systems 
of this material world. When one possesses ma-
terial opulence in any of these three divisions 
of the universe, his possessions naturally in-
crease his enmity, anxiety, mental agitation, 
pride and belligerence. Thus one go es through 
much endeavor to increase and maintain his 
possessions, and he suffers great unhappiness 
when he loses them.(22) Our Lord, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, forbids His 
devotees to endeavor uselessly for religion, 
economic development and sens e gratification. 
O Indra, one can thus infer how kind the Lord is. Such mercy is obtainable only by unalloyed 
devotees, not by persons who aspire for mate-
rial gains.(23)  
O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of God-
head, will I again be able to be a servant of 
Your eternal servants who find shelter only at 
Your lotus feet? O Lord of my life, may I again 
become their servant so that my mind may al-
ways think of Your transcendental attributes, 
my words always glorify those attributes, and 
my body always engage in th e loving service of 
Your Lordship?(24) O my Lord, source of all 
opportunities, I do not desire to enjoy in Dhru-
valoka, the heavenly planets or the planet 
where Lord Brahmā resides, nor do I want to be 
the supreme ruler of all the earthly planets or 
the low er planetary systems. I do not desire to 
be master of the powers of mystic yoga, nor do 
I want liberation if I have to give up Your lotus 
feet.(25) O lotus -eyed Lord, as baby birds that 
have not yet developed their wings always look 
for their mother to ret urn and feed them, as 
small calves tied with ropes await anxiously the 
time of milking, when they will be allowed to 
drink the milk of their mothers, or as a morose 
wife whose husband is away from home always 
longs for him to return and satisfy her in all re-
spects, I always yearn for the opportunity to 
render direct service unto You.(26) O my Lord, 
my master, I am wandering throughout this ma-
terial world as a result of my fruitive activities. 
Therefore I simply seek friendship in the asso-
ciation of Your pio us and enlightened devotees. 
My attachment to my body, wife, children and 
home is continuing by the spell of Your exter-
nal energy, but I wish to be attached to them no 
longer. Let my mind, my consciousness and 
everything I have be attached only to You.(27)   
SB 6.12: Vṛtrāsura’s Glorious Death  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Desiring to give up 
his body, Vṛtrāsura considered death in the bat-
tle preferable to victory. O King Parīkṣit, he 
vigorously took up his trident and with great 
force attacked Lord Indra, the King  of heaven, 
just as Kaiṭabha had forcefully attacked the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead when the uni-
verse was inundated.(1) Then Vṛtrāsura, the 
great hero of the demons, whirled his trident, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

387 
 which had points like the flames of the blazing 
fire at the end o f the millennium. With great 
force and anger he threw it at Indra, roaring and 
exclaiming loudly, “O sinful one, thus shall I 
kill you!”(2) Flying in the sky, Vṛtrāsura’s tri-
dent resembled a brilliant meteor. Although the 
blazing weapon was difficult to lo ok upon, 
King Indra, unafraid, cut it to pieces with his 
thunderbolt. Simultaneously, he cut off one of 
Vṛtrāsura’s arms, which was as thick as the 
body of Vāsuki, the King of the serpents.(3) 
Although one of his arms was severed from his 
body, Vṛtrāsura a ngrily approached King Indra 
and struck him on the jaw with an iron mace. 
He also struck the elephant that carried Indra. 
Thus Indra dropped the thunderbolt from his 
hand.(4)  
The denizens of various planets, like the 
demigods, demons, Cāraṇas and Siddhas,  
praised Vṛtrāsura’s deed, but when they ob-
served that Indra was in great danger, they la-
mented, “Alas! Alas!”(5) Having dropped the 
thunderbolt from his hand in the presence of his 
enemy, Indra was practically defeated and was 
very much ashamed. He dared not pick up his 
weapon again. Vṛtrāsura, however, encouraged 
him, saying, “Take up your thunderbolt and kill 
your enemy. This is not the time to lament your 
fate.”(6) Vṛtrāsura continued: O Indra, no one 
is guaranteed of being always victorious but the 
original enjoyer, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Bhagavān. He is the cause of crea-
tion, maintenance and annihilation, and He 
knows everything. Being dependent and being 
obliged to accept material bodies, belligerent 
subordinates are sometimes victorious and 
sometimes defeated.(7) All living beings in all 
the planets of this universe, including the pre-
siding deities of all the planets, are fully under 
the control of the Lord. They work like birds 
caught in a net, who cannot move inde-
pendently.(8) Our senso ry prowess, mental 
power, bodily strength, living force, immortal-
ity and mortality are all subject to the superin-
tendence of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Not knowing this, foolish people think 
the dull material body to be the cause of their 
activiti es.(9) O King Indra, as a wooden doll 
that looks like a woman or as an animal made of grass and leaves cannot move or dance inde-
pendently, but depends fully on the person who 
handles it, all of us dance according to the de-
sire of the supreme controller, th e Personality 
of Godhead. No one is independent.(10) The 
three puruṣasKāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, 
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and Kṣīrodakaśāyī -
Viṣṇuthe material nature, the total material en-
ergy, the false ego, the five material elements, 
the material senses, the mind , the intelligence 
and consciousness cannot create the material 
manifestation without the direction of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead.(11) A foolish, 
senseless person cannot understand the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. Although al-
ways dependent, he f alsely thinks himself the 
Supreme. If one thinks, “According to one’s 
previous fruitive actions, one’s material body is 
created by the father and mother, and the same 
body is annihilated by another agent, as another 
animal is devoured by a tiger,” this is not proper 
understanding. The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead Himself creates and devours the liv-
ing beings through other living beings.(12) Just 
as a person not inclined to die must nonetheless 
give up his longevity, opulence, fame and eve-
rything else at t he time of death, so, at the ap-
pointed time of victory, one can gain all these 
when the Supreme Lord awards them by His 
mercy.(13) Since everything is dependent on 
the supreme will of the Personality of Godhead, 
one should be equipoised in fame and defama-
tion, victory and defeat, life and death. In their 
effects, represented as happiness and distress, 
one should maintain oneself in equilibrium, 
without anxiety.(14) One who knows that the 
three qualitiesgoodness, passion and igno-
ranceare not qualities of the  soul but qualities 
of material nature, and who knows that the pure 
soul is simply an observer of the actions and re-
actions of these qualities, should be understood 
to be a liberated person. He is not bound by 
these qualities.(15) O my enemy, just look at 
me. I have already been defeated, for my 
weapon and arm have been cut to pieces. You 
have already overwhelmed me, but nonethe-
less, with a desire to kill you, I am trying my 
best to fight. I am not at all morose, even under 
such adverse conditions. Therefor e you should 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

388 
 give up your moroseness and continue 
fighting.(16) O my enemy, consider this battle 
a gambling match in which our lives are the 
stakes, the arrows are the dice, and the animals 
acting as carriers are the game board. No one 
can understand who w ill be defeated and who 
will be victorious. It all depends on provi-
dence.(17)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Hearing the 
straightforward, instructive words of Vṛtrāsura, 
King Indra praised him and again took the thun-
derbolt in his hand. Without bewilderment or 
duplicity, he then smiled and spoke to Vṛtrāsura 
as follows.(18)  
Indra said: O great demon, I see by your dis-
crimination and endurance in devotional ser-
vice, despite your dangerous position, that you 
are a perfect devotee of the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhe ad, the Supersoul and friend of 
everyone.(19) You have surmounted the illu-
sory energy of Lord Viṣṇu, and because of this 
liberation, you have given up the demoniac 
mentality and have attained the position of an 
exalted devotee.(20) O Vṛtrāsura, demons are 
generally conducted by the mode of passion. 
Therefore, what a great wonder it is that alt-
hough you are a demon, you have adopted the 
mentality of a devotee and have fixed your 
mind on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Vāsudeva, who is always situated in pure good-
ness.(21) A person fixed in the devotional ser-
vice of the Supreme Lord, Hari, the Lord of the 
highest auspiciousness, swims in the ocean of 
nectar. For him what is the use of the water in 
small ditches?(22)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: Vṛtrāsura and  
King Indra spoke about devotional service even 
on the battlefield, and then as a matter of duty 
they again began fighting. My dear King, both 
of them were great fighters and were equally 
powerful.(23) O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Vṛtrāsura, 
who was completely abl e to subdue his enemy, 
took his iron club, whirled it around, aimed it at 
Indra and then threw it at him with his left 
hand.(24) With his thunderbolt named Śatapar-
van, Indra simultaneously cut to pieces 
Vṛtrāsura’s club and his remaining hand.(25) 
Vṛtrāsur a, bleeding profusely, his two arms cut off at their roots, looked very beautiful, like a 
flying mountain whose wings have been cut to 
pieces by Indra.(26) Vṛtrāsura was very power-
ful in physical strength and influence. He 
placed his lower jaw on the groun d and his up-
per jaw in the sky. His mouth became very 
deep, like the sky itself, and his tongue resem-
bled a large serpent. With his fearful, deathlike 
teeth, he seemed to be trying to devour the en-
tire universe. Thus assuming a gigantic body, 
the great dem on Vṛtrāsura shook even the 
mountains and began crushing the surface of 
the earth with his legs, as if he were the 
Himālayas walking about. He came before In-
dra and swallowed him and Airāvata, his car-
rier, just as a big python might swallow an ele-
phant.( 27-29) When the demigods, along with 
Brahmā, other prajāpatis and other great saintly 
persons, saw that Indra had been swallowed by 
the demon, they became very morose. “Alas,” 
they lamented. “What a calam ity! What a ca-
lamity!”(30) The protective armor of 
Nārāyaṇa, which Indra possessed, was identical 
with Nārāyaṇa Himself, the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead. Protected by that armor and by 
his own mystic power, King Indra, although 
swallowed by Vṛtrāsura, d id not die within the 
demon’s belly.(31) With his thunderbolt, King 
Indra, who was also extremely powerful, 
pierced through Vṛtrāsura’s abdomen and came 
out. Indra, the killer of the demon Bala, then 
immediately cut off Vṛtrāsura’s head, which 
was as high as the peak of a mountain.(32) Alt-
hough the thunderbolt revolved around 
Vṛtrāsura’s neck with great speed, separating 
his head from his body took one complete 
year360 days, the time in which the sun, moon 
and other luminaries complete a northern and 
southe rn journey. Then, at the suitable time for 
Vṛtrāsura to be killed, his head fell to the 
ground.(33) When Vṛtrāsura was killed, the 
Gandharvas and Siddhas in the heavenly plan-
ets beat kettledrums in jubilation. With Vedic 
hymns they celebrated the prowess o f Indra, the 
killer of Vṛtrāsura, praising Indra and shower-
ing flowers upon him with great pleasure.(34) 
O King Parīkṣit, subduer of enemies, the living 
spark then came forth from Vṛtrāsura’s body 
and returned home, back to Godhead. While all 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

389 
 the demigods looked on, he entered the tran-
scendental world to become an associate of 
Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa.(35)  
SB 6.13: King Indra Afflicted by Sinful 
Reaction  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, 
who are so charitably disposed, when Vṛtrāsura 
was killed, all the pr esiding deities and every-
one else in the three planetary systems was im-
mediately pleased and free from troubleevery-
one, that is, except Indra.(1) Thereafter, the 
demigods, the great saintly persons, the inhab-
itants of Pitṛloka and Bhūtaloka, the demons, 
the followers of the demigods, and also Lord 
Brahmā, Lord Śiva and the demigods subordi-
nate to Indra all returned to their respective 
homes. While departing, however, no one 
spoke to Indra.(2)  
Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī: O great sage, what was the reason for 
Indra’s unhappiness? I wish to hear about this. 
When he killed Vṛtrāsura, all the demigods 
were extremely happy. Why, then, was Indra 
himself unhappy?(3)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī answered: When all 
the great sages and demigods were dist urbed by 
the extraordinary power of Vṛtrāsura, they had 
assembled to ask Indra to kill him. Indra, how-
ever, being afraid of killing a brāhmaṇa, de-
clined their request.(4)  
King Indra replied: When I killed 
Viśvarūpa, I received extensive sinful reac-
tions, but I was favored by the women, land, 
trees and water, and therefore I was able to di-
vide the sin among them. But now if I kill 
Vṛtrāsura, another brāhmaṇa, how shall I free 
myself from the sinful reactions?(5)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: Hearing this, 
the great sages replied to King Indra, “O King 
of heaven, all good fortune unto you. Do not 
fear. We shall perform an aśvamedha sacrifice 
to release you from any sin you may accrue by 
killing the brāhmaṇa.”(6) The ṛṣis continued: O 
King Indra, by performing an  aśvamedha sacri-
fice and thereby pleasing the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul, Lord 
Nārāyaṇa, the supreme controller, one can be relieved even of the sinful reactions for killing 
the entire world, not to speak of killing a demon 
like V ṛtrāsura.(7) One who has killed a 
brāhmaṇa, one who has killed a cow or one who 
has killed his father, mother or spiritual master 
can be immediately freed from all sinful reac-
tions simply by chanting the holy name of Lord 
Nārāyaṇa. Other sinful persons, su ch as dog -
eaters and caṇḍālas, who are less than śūdras, 
can also be freed in this way. But you are a dev-
otee, and we shall help you by performing the 
great horse sacrifice. If you please Lord 
Nārāyaṇa in that way, why should you be 
afraid? You will be fre ed even if you kill the 
entire universe, including the brāhmaṇas, not to 
speak of killing a disturbing demon like 
Vṛtrāsura.(8 -9)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: Encouraged by 
the words of the sages, Indra killed Vṛtrāsura, 
and when he was killed the sinful rea ction for 
killing a brāhmaṇa [brahma -hatyā] certainly 
took shelter of Indra.(10) Following the advice 
of the demigods, Indra killed Vṛtrāsura, and he 
suffered because of this sinful killing. Although 
the other demigods were happy, he could not 
derive happi ness from the killing of Vṛtrāsura. 
Indra’s other good qualities, such as tolerance 
and opulence, could not help him in his 
grief.(11) Indra saw personified sinful reaction 
chasing him, appearing like a caṇḍāla woman, 
a woman of the lowest class. She seeme d very 
old, and all the limbs of her body trembled. Be-
cause she was afflicted with tuberculosis, her 
body and garments were covered with blood. 
Breathing an unbearable fishy odor that pol-
luted the entire street, she called to Indra, 
“Wait! Wait!”(12 -13) O King, Indra first fled 
to the sky, but there also he saw the woman of 
personified sin chasing him. This witch fol-
lowed him wherever he went. At last he very 
quickly went to the northeast and entered the 
Mānasa -sarovara Lake.(14) Always thinking of 
how he c ould be relieved from the sinful reac-
tion for killing a brāhmaṇa, King Indra, invisi-
ble to everyone, lived in the lake for one thou-
sand years in the subtle fibers of the stem of a 
lotus. The fire -god used to bring him his share 
of all yajñas, but because t he fire -god was 
afraid to enter the water, Indra was practically 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

390 
 starving.(15) As long as King Indra lived in the 
water, wrapped in the stem of the lotus, Nahuṣa 
was equipped with the ability to rule the heav-
enly kingdom, due to his knowledge, austerity 
and mystic power. Nahuṣa, however, blinded 
and maddened by power and opulence, made 
undesirable proposals to Indra’s wife with a de-
sire to enjoy her. Thus Nahuṣa was cursed by a 
brāhmaṇa and later became a snake.(16) In-
dra’s sins were diminished by the influ ence of 
Rudra, the demigod of all directions. Because 
Indra was protected by the goddess of fortune, 
Lord Viṣṇu’s wife, who resides in the lotus 
clusters of Mānasa -sarovara Lake, Indra’s sins 
could not affect him. Indra was ultimately re-
lieved of all the r eactions of his sinful deeds by 
strictly worshiping Lord Viṣṇu. Then he was 
called back to the heavenly planets by the 
brāhmaṇas and reinstated in his position.(17)  
O King, when Lord Indra reached the heav-
enly planets, the saintly brāhmaṇas approached 
him and properly initiated him into a horse sac-
rifice [aśvamedha -yajña] meant to please the 
Supreme Lord.(18) The horse sacrifice per-
formed by the saintly brāhmaṇas relieved Indra 
of the reactions to all his sins because he wor-
shiped the Supreme Personality o f Godhead in 
that sacrifice. O King, although he had commit-
ted a gravely sinful act, it was nullified at once 
by that sacrifice, just as fog is vanquished by 
the brilliant sunrise.( 19-20) King Indra was fa-
vored by Marīci and the other great sages. They 
performed the sacrifice just according to the 
rules and regulations, worshiping the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, the 
original person. Thus Indra regained his exalted 
position and was again  honored by every-
one.(21)  
In this very great narrative there is glorifica-
tion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāyaṇa, there are statements about the exalt-
edness of devotional service, there are descrip-
tions of devotees like Indra and Vṛtrāsura, a nd 
there are statements about King Indra’s release 
from sinful life and about his victory in fighting 
the demons. By understanding this incident, 
one is relieved of all sinful reactions. Therefore the learned are always advised to read this nar-
ration. If o ne does so, one will become expert 
in the activities of the senses, his opulence will 
increase, and his reputation will become wide-
spread. One will also be relieved of all sinful 
reactions, he will conquer all his enemies, and 
the duration of his life will  increase. Because 
this narration is auspicious in all respects, 
learned scholars regularly hear and repeat it on 
every festival day.( 22-23)  
SB 6.14: King Citraketu’s Lamentation  
King Parīkṣit inquired  from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī: O learned brāhmaṇa, demons are 
generally sinful, being obsessed with the modes 
of passion and ignorance. How, then, could 
Vṛtrāsura have attained such exalted love for 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāyaṇa?(1) Demigods situat ed in the mode 
of goodness and great saints cleansed of the dirt 
of material enjoyment hardly ever render pure 
devotional service at the lotus feet of Mukunda. 
[Therefore how could Vṛtrāsura have become 
such a great devotee?](2) In this material world 
there are as many living entities as atoms. 
Among these living entities, a very few are hu-
man beings, and among them, few are inter-
ested in following religious principles.(3) O 
best of the brāhmaṇas, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, out 
of many persons who follow religious p rinci-
ples, only a few desire liberation from the ma-
terial world. Among many thousands who de-
sire liberation, one may actually achieve liber-
ation, giving up material attachment to society, 
friendship, love, country, home, wife and chil-
dren. And among many t housands of such lib-
erated persons, one who can understand the true 
meaning of liberation is very rare.(4) O great 
sage, among many millions who are liberated 
and perfect in knowledge of liberation, one may 
be a devotee of Lord Nārāyaṇa, or Kṛṣṇa. Such 
devotees, who are fully peaceful, are extremely 
rare.(5) Vṛtrāsura was situated in the blazing 
fire of battle and was an infamous, sinful de-
mon, always engaged in giving troubles and 
anxieties to others. How could such a demon 
become so greatly Kṛṣṇa consciou s?(6) My 
dear lord, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, although 
Vṛtrāsura was a sinful demon, he showed the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

391 
 prowess of a most exalted kṣatriya and satisfied 
Lord Indra in battle. How could such a demon 
be a great devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa? These con-
tradictions have caused me g reat doubt, and 
they have made me eager to hear of this from 
you.(7)  
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: After hearing 
Mahārāja Parīkṣit’s very intelligent question, 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the most powerful sage, 
began answering his disciple with great affec-
tion.(8)  
ŚrīŚuk adeva Gosvāmī said: O King, I shall 
speak to you the same history I have heard from 
the mouths of Vyāsadeva, Nārada and Devala. 
Please listen with attention.(9) O King Parīkṣit, 
in the province of Śūrasena there was a king 
named Citraketu, who ruled the en tire earth. 
During his reign, the earth produced all the ne-
cessities for life.(10) This Citraketu had ten 
million wives, but although he was capable of 
producing children, he did not receive a child 
from any of them. By chance, all the wives 
were barren.(1 1) Citraketu, the husband of 
these millions of wives, was endowed with a 
beautiful form, magnanimity and youth. He 
was born in a high family, he had a complete 
education, and he was wealthy and opulent. 
Nevertheless, in spite of being endowed with 
all thes e assets, he was full of anxiety because 
he did not have a son.(12) His queens all had 
beautiful faces and attractive eyes, yet neither 
his opulences, his hundreds and thousands of 
queens, nor the lands of which he was the su-
preme proprietor were sources o f happiness for 
him.(13) Once upon a time, when the powerful 
sage named Aṅgirā was traveling all over the 
universe without engagement, by his sweet will 
he came to the palace of King Citraketu.(14) 
Citraketu immediately stood up from his throne 
and offered  him worship. He offered drinking 
water and eatables and in this way performed 
his duty as a host to a great guest. When the ṛṣi 
was seated very comfortably, the King, re-
straining his mind and senses, sat on the ground 
at the side of the ṛṣi’s feet.(15) O King Parīkṣit, 
when Citraketu, bent low in humility, was 
seated at the lotus feet of the great sage, the 
sage congratulated him for his humility and hospitality. The sage addressed him in the fol-
lowing words.(16)  
The great sage Aṅgirā said: My dear King, I 
hope that your body and mind and your royal 
associates and paraphernalia are well. When 
the seven properties of material nature [the total 
material energy, the ego and the five objects of 
sense gratification] are in proper order, the liv-
ing entity within  the material elements is 
happy. Without these seven elements one can-
not exist. Similarly, a king is always protected 
by seven elementshis instructor (svāmī or 
guru), his ministers, his kingdom, his fort, his 
treasury, his royal order and his friends.(17) O 
King, O lord of humanity, when a king directly 
depends upon his associates and follows their 
instructions, he is happy. Similarly, when his 
associates offer their gifts and activities to the 
king and follow his orders, they are also 
happy.(18) O King, ar e your wives, citizens, 
secretaries and servants and the merchants who 
sell spices and oil under your control? Are you 
also in full control of ministers, the inhabitants 
of your palace, your provincial governors, your 
sons and your other dependents?(19) If  the 
king’s mind is fully controlled, all his family 
members and governmental officers are subor-
dinate to him. His provincial governors present 
taxes on time, without resistance, and what to 
speak of lesser servants?(20) O King Citraketu, 
I can observe tha t your mind is not pleased. 
You seem not to have achieved your desired 
goal. Is this because of you yourself, or has it 
been caused by others? Your pale face reflects 
your deep anxiety.(21)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, 
although the great sage Aṅgirā knew every-
thing, he inquired from the King in this way. 
Thus King Citraketu, desiring a son, bent low 
in great humility and spoke to the great sage as 
follows.(22)  
King Citraketu said:  O great lord Aṅgirā, be-
cause of austerity, knowledge and transcenden-
tal samādhi, you are freed from all the reactions 
of sinful life. Therefore, as a perfect yogī, you 
can understand everything external and internal 
regarding embodied, conditioned souls l ike 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

392 
 us.(23) O great soul, you are aware of every-
thing, yet you are asking me why I am full of 
anxiety. Therefore, in response to your order, 
let me disclose the cause.(24) As a person ag-
grieved by hunger and thirst is not pleased by 
the external gratificat ion of flower garlands or 
sandalwood pulp, I am not pleased with my em-
pire, opulence or possessions, which are desir-
able even for great demigods, because I have 
no son.(25) Therefore, O great sage, please 
save me and my forefathers, who are descend-
ing to t he darkness of hell because I have no 
progeny. Kindly do something so that I may 
have a son to deliver us from hellish condi-
tions.(26)  
In response to the request of Mahārāja 
Citraketu, AṅgirāṚṣi, who was born of Lord 
Brahmā’s mind, was very merciful towar d him. 
Because the sage was a greatly powerful per-
sonality, he performed a sacrifice by offering 
oblations of sweetrice to Tvaṣṭā.(27) O Parīkṣit 
Mahārāja, best of the Bhāratas, the remnants of 
the food offered in the yajña were given by the 
great sage Aṅg irā to the first and most perfect 
among Citraketu’s millions of queens, whose 
name was Kṛtadyuti.(28) Thereafter, the great 
sage told the King, “O great King, now you will 
have a son who will be the cause of both jubi-
lation and lamentation.” The sage then left, 
without waiting for Citraketu’s response.(29) 
As Kṛttikādevī, after receiving the semen of 
Lord Śiva from Agni, conceived a child named 
Skanda [Kārttikeya], Kṛtadyuti, having re-
ceived semen from Citraketu, became pregnant 
after eating remnants of foo d from the yajña 
performed by Aṅgirā.(30) After receiving se-
men from Mahārāja Citraketu, the King of 
Śūrasena, Queen Kṛtadyuti gradually devel-
oped in her pregnancy, O King Parīkṣit, just as 
the moon develops during the bright fort-
night.(31) Thereafter, in due course of time, a 
son was born to the King. Hearing news of this, 
all the inhabitants of the state of Śūrasena were 
extremely pleased.(32) King Citraketu was es-
pecially pleased. After purifying himself by 
bathing and by decorating himself with orna-
ment s, he engaged learned brāhmaṇas in offer-
ing benedictions to the child and performing 
the birth ceremony.(33) Unto the brāhmaṇas who took part in the ritualistic ceremony the 
King gave charity of gold, silver, garments, or-
naments, villages, horses and eleph ants, as well 
as sixty crores of cows [six hundred million 
cows].(34) As a cloud indiscriminately pours 
water on the earth, the beneficent King 
Citraketu, to increase the reputation, opulence 
and longevity of his son, distributed like rain-
fall all desirabl e things to everyone.(35) When 
a poor man gets some money after great diffi-
culty, his affection for the money increases 
daily. Similarly, when King Citraketu, after 
great difficulty, received a son, his affection for 
the son increased day after day.(36) Th e 
mother’s attraction and attention to the son, like 
that of the child’s father, excessively increased. 
The other wives, seeing Kṛtadyuti’s son, were 
very much agitated, as if by high fevers, with a 
desire to have sons.(37) As King Citraketu fos-
tered his s on very carefully, his affection for 
Queen Kṛtadyuti increased, but gradually he 
lost affection for the other wives, who had no 
sons.(38) The other queens were extremely un-
happy due to their being sonless. Because of the 
King’s negligence toward them, they  con-
demned themselves in envy and lamented.(39) 
A wife who has no sons is neglected at home 
by her husband and dishonored by her co -wives 
exactly like a maidservant. Certainly such a 
woman is condemned in every respect because 
of her sinful life.(40) Even maidservants who 
are constantly engaged in rendering service to 
the husband are honored by the husband, and 
thus they have nothing for which to lament. Our 
position, however, is that we are maidservants 
of the maidservant. Therefore we are most un-
fortunate .(41) ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī contin-
ued: Being neglected by their husband and see-
ing Kṛtadyuti’s opulence in possessing a son, 
Kṛtadyuti’s co -wives always burned in envy, 
which became extremely strong.(42) As their 
envy increased, they lost their intelligence.  Be-
ing extremely hardhearted and unable to toler-
ate the King’s neglect, they finally adminis-
tered poison to the son.(43) Unaware of the poi-
son administered by her co -wives, Queen 
Kṛtadyuti walked within the house, thinking 
that her son was sleeping deeply.  She did not 
understand that he was dead.(44) Thinking that 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

393 
 her child had been sleeping for a long time, 
Queen Kṛtadyuti, who was certainly very intel-
ligent, ordered the nurse, “My dear friend, 
please bring my son here.” (45) When the 
mjaidservant approach ed the child, who was ly-
ing down, she saw that his eyes were turned up-
ward. There were no signs of life, all his senses 
having stopped, and she could understand that 
the child was dead. Seeing this, she immedi-
ately cried, “Now I am doomed,” and fell to the  
ground.(46)  
In great agitation, the maidservant struck her 
breast with both hands and cried loudly in re-
gretful words. Hearing her loud voice, the 
Queen immediately came, and when she ap-
proached her son, she saw that he was suddenly 
dead.(47) In great la mentation, her hair and 
dress in disarray, the Queen fell to the ground 
unconscious.(48) O King Parīkṣit, hearing the 
loud crying, all the inhabitants of the palace 
came, both men and women. Being equally ag-
grieved, they also began to cry. The queens 
who h ad administered the poison also cried pre-
tentiously, knowing full well their offense.(49) 
When King Citraketu heard of his son’s death 
from unknown causes, he became almost blind. 
Because of his great affection for his son, his 
lamentation grew like a blaz ing fire, and as he 
went to see the dead child, he kept slipping and 
falling on the ground. Surrounded by his min-
isters and other officers and the learned 
brāhmaṇas present, the King approached and 
fell unconscious at the child’s feet, his hair and 
dress s cattered. When the King, breathing 
heavily, regained consciousness, his eyes were 
tearful, and he could not speak.( 50-51) When 
the Queen saw her husband, King Citraketu, 
merged in great lamentation and s aw the dead 
child, who was the only son in the family, she 
lamented in various ways. This increased the 
pain in the cores of the hearts of all the inhabit-
ants of the palace, the ministers and all the 
brāhmaṇas.(52) The garland of flowers deco-
rating the Que en’s head fell, and her hair scat-
tered. Falling tears melted the collyrium on her 
eyes and moistened her breasts, which were 
covered with kuṅkuma powder. As she la-
mented the loss of her son, her loud crying re-
sembled the sweet sound of a kurarī bird.(53)  Alas, O Providence, O Creator, You are cer-
tainly inexperienced in creation, for during the 
lifetime of a father You have caused the death 
of his son, thus acting in opposition to Your 
creative laws. If You are determined to contra-
dict these laws, You are c ertainly the enemy of 
living entities and are never merciful.(54) My 
Lord, You may say that there is no law that a 
father must die in the lifetime of his son and 
that a son must be born in the lifetime of his 
father, since everyone lives and dies according  
to his own fruitive activity. However, if fruitive 
activity is so strong that birth and death depend 
upon it, there is no need of a controller, or God. 
Again, if You say that a controller is needed be-
cause the material energy does not have the 
power to ac t, one may answer that if the bonds 
of affection You have created are disturbed by 
fruitive action, no one will raise children with 
affection; instead, everyone will cruelly neglect 
his children. Since You have cut the bonds of 
affection that compel a pare nt to raise his child, 
You appear inexperienced and unintelli-
gent.(55) My dear son, I am helpless and very 
much aggrieved. You should not give up my 
company. Just look at your lamenting father. 
We are helpless because without a son we shall 
have to suffer the distress of going to the dark-
est hellish regions. You are the only hope by 
which we can get out of these dark regions. 
Therefore I request you not to go any further 
with the merciless Yama.(56) My dear son, you 
have slept a long time. Now please get up . Your 
playmates are calling you to play. Since you 
must be very hungry, please get up and suck my 
breast and dissipate our lamentation.(57)  
My dear son, I am certainly most unfortu-
nate, for I can no longer see your mild smiling. 
You have closed your eyes  forever. I therefore 
conclude that you have been taken from this 
planet to another, from which you will not re-
turn. My dear son, I can no longer hear your 
pleasing voice.(58)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Accom-
panied by his wife, who was thus lamenting for 
her dead son, King Citraketu began crying 
loudly with an open mouth, being greatly ag-
grieved.(59) As the King and Queen lamented, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

394 
 all their male and female followers joined them 
in crying. Because of the sudden accident, all 
the citizens of the kingdom were almost uncon-
scious.(60) When the great sage Aṅgirāunder-
stood that the King was almost dead in an ocean 
of lamentation, he went there with Nārada 
Ṛṣi.(61)  
SB 6.15: The Sai nts Nārada and Aṅgirā In-
struct King Citraketu  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: While King 
Citraketu, overcome by lamentation, lay like a 
dead body at the side of the dead body of his 
son, the two great sages Nārada and Aṅgirā in-
structed him about spiritual consci ousness as 
follows.(1) O King, what relationship does the 
dead body for which you lament have with you, 
and what relationship do you have with him? 
You may say that you are now related as father 
and son, but do you think this relationship ex-
isted before? D oes it truly exist now? Will it 
continue in the future?(2) O King, as small par-
ticles of sand sometimes come together and are 
sometimes separated due to the force of the 
waves, the living entities who have accepted 
material bodies sometimes come together a nd 
are sometimes separated by the force of 
time.(3) When seeds are sown in the ground, 
they sometimes grow into plants and some-
times do not. Sometimes the ground is not fer-
tile, and the sowing of seeds is unproductive. 
Similarly, sometimes a prospective fa ther, be-
ing impelled by the potency of the Supreme 
Lord, can beget a child, but sometimes concep-
tion does not take place. Therefore one should 
not lament over the artificial relationship of 
parenthood, which is ultimately controlled by 
the Supreme Lord.(4)  O King, both you and 
weyour advisers, wives and ministersas well as 
everything moving and not moving throughout 
the entire cosmos at this time, are in a tempo-
rary situation. Before our birth this situation did 
not exist, and after our death it will exist no 
longer. Therefore our situation now is tempo-
rary, although it is not false.(5) The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, the master and propri-
etor of everything, is certainly not interested in 
the temporary cosmic manifestation. Nonethe-less, just as a boy at the beach creates some-
thing in which he is not interested, the Lord, 
keeping everything under His control, causes 
creation, maintenance and annihilation. He cre-
ates by engaging a father to beget a son, He 
maintains by engaging a government or king to 
see to the public’s welfare, and He annihilates 
through agents for killing, such as snakes. The 
agents for creation, maintenance and annihila-
tion have no independent potency, but because 
of the spell of the illusory energy, one thinks 
himself the creator, maint ainer and annihila-
tor.(6) As from one seed another seed is gener-
ated, O King, so from one body [the body of the 
father], through another body [the body of the 
mother], a third body is generated [the body of 
a son]. As the elements of the material body are 
eternal, the living entity who appears through 
these material elements is also eternal.(7) Divi-
sions of generalization and specification, such 
as nationality and individuality, are the imagi-
nations of persons who are not advanced in 
knowledge.(8)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus en-
lightened by the instructions of Nārada and 
Aṅgirā, King Citraketu became hopeful with 
knowledge. Wiping his shriveled face with his 
hand, the King began to speak.(9)  
King Citraketu said: You have both come 
here dresse d like avadhūtas, liberated persons, 
just to cover your identities, but I see that of all 
men, you are the most elevated in awareness. 
You know everything as it is. Therefore you are 
the greatest of all great personalities.(10) 
Brāhmaṇas who are exalted to  the position of 
Vaiṣṇavas, the most dear servants of Kṛṣṇa, 
sometimes dress like madmen. Just to benefit 
materialists like us, who are always attached to 
sense gratification, and just to dissipate our ig-
norance, these Vaiṣṇavas wander on the surface 
of th e globe according to their desire.(11) O 
great souls, I have heard that among the great 
and perfect persons wandering the surface of 
the earth to instruct knowledge to people cov-
ered by ignorance are Sanat -kumāra, Nārada, 
Ṛbhu, Aṅgirā, Devala, Asita, Apānt aratamā 
[Vyāsadeva], Mārkaṇḍeya, Gautama, Vasiṣṭha, 
Bhagavān Paraśurāma, Kapila, Śukadeva, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

395 
 Durvāsā, Yājñavalkya, Jātukarṇa and Aruṇi. 
Others are Romaśa, Cyavana, Dattātreya, 
Āsuri, Patañjali, the great sage Dhaumya who 
is like the head of the Vedas, the sa ge 
Pañcaśikha, Hiraṇyanābha, Kauśalya, Śru-
tadeva and Ṛtadhvaja. You must certainly be 
among them.(12 -15) Because you are great per-
sonalities, you can give me real knowledge. I 
am as foolish as a village animal like a pig or 
dog because I am merged in the d arkness of ig-
norance. Therefore, please ignite the torch of 
knowledge to save me.(16)  
Aṅgirā said: My dear King, when you de-
sired to have a son, I approached you. Indeed, I 
am the same AṅgirāṚṣi who gave you this son. 
As for this ṛṣi, he is the great sage  Nārada, the 
direct son of Lord Brahmā.(17) My dear King, 
you are an advanced devotee of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. To be absorbed in 
lamentation for the loss of something material 
is unsuitable for a person like you. Therefore 
we have both come t o relieve you from this 
false lamentation, which is due to your being 
merged in the darkness of ignorance. For those 
who are advanced in spiritual knowledge to be 
affected by material loss and gain is not at all 
desirable.( 18-19)  
When I first came to your home, I could 
have given you the supreme transcendental 
knowledge, but when I saw that your mind was 
absorbed in material things, I gave you only a 
son, who caused you jubilation and lamenta-
tion.(20) My  dear King, now you are actually 
experiencing the misery of a person who has 
sons and daughters. O King, owner of the state 
of Śūrasena, one’s wife, his house, the opulence 
of his kingdom, and his various other opulences 
and objects of sense perception are  all the same 
in that they are temporary. One’s kingdom, mil-
itary power, treasury, servants, ministers, 
friends and relatives are all causes of fear, illu-
sion, lamentation and distress. They are like a 
gandharva -nagara, a nonexistent palace that 
one imagin es to exist in the forest. Because 
they are impermanent, they are no better than 
illusions, dreams and mental concoctions.( 21-
23) These visible objects like wife, children and property are like dreams a nd mental concoc-
tions. Actually what we see has no permanent 
existence. It is sometimes seen and sometimes 
not. Only because of our past actions do we cre-
ate such mental concoctions, and because of 
these concoctions, we perform further activi-
ties.(24) The living entity in the bodily concep-
tion of life is absorbed in the body, which is a 
combination of the physical elements, the five 
senses for gathering knowledge, and the five 
senses of action, along with the mind. Through 
the mind the living entity suffers  three k inds of 
tribulationsadhibhautika, adhidaivika and 
adhyātmika. Therefore this body is a source of 
all miseries.(25) Therefore, O King Citraketu, 
carefully consider the position of the ātmā. In 
other words, try to understand who you are-
whether body, mind or soul. Consider where 
you have come from, where you are going after 
giving up this body, and why you are under the 
control of material lamentation. Try to under-
stand your real position in this way, and then 
you will be able to give up your unnecessary 
attac hment. You will also be able to give up the 
belief that this material world, or anything not 
directly in touch with service to Kṛṣṇa, is eter-
nal. Thus you will obtain peace.(26)  
The great sage Nārada continued: My dear 
King, attentively receive from me a mantra, 
which is most auspicious. After accepting it 
from me, in seven nights you will be able to see 
the Lord face to face.(27) My dear King, in for-
mer days Lord Śiva and other demigods took 
shelter of the lotus feet of Saṅkarṣaṇa. Thus 
they immediately g ot free from the illusion of 
duality and achieved unequaled and unsur-
passed glories in spiritual life. You will very 
soon attain that very same position.(28)  
SB 6.16: King Citraketu Meets the Su-
preme Lord  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King 
Parīkṣit, b y his mystic power the great sage 
Nārada brought the dead son into the vision of 
all the lamenting relatives and then spoke as 
follows.(1)  
Śrī Nārada Muni said: O living entity, all 
good fortune unto you. Just see your father and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

396 
 mother. All your friends and relatives are over-
whelmed with grief because of your passing 
away.(2) Because you died untimely, the bal-
ance of your lifetime still remains. Therefore 
you may reenter your body and enjoy the re-
mainder of your life, surrounded by your 
friends and relati ves. Accept the royal throne 
and all the opulences given by your father.(3)  
By the mystic power of Nārada Muni, the 
living entity reentered his dead body for a short 
time and spoke in reply to Nārada Muni’s re-
quest. He said: According to the results of my 
fruitive activities, I, the living being, transmi-
grate from one body to anot her, sometimes go-
ing to the species of the demigods, sometimes 
to the species of lower animals, sometimes 
among the vegetables, and sometimes to the hu-
man species. Therefore, in which birth were 
these my mother and father? No one is actually 
my mother and father. How can I accept these 
two people as my parents?(4) In this material 
world, which advances like a river that carries 
away the living entity, all people become 
friends, relatives and enemies in due course of 
time. They also act neutrally, they media te, 
they despise one another, and they act in many 
other relationships. Nonetheless, despite these 
various transactions, no one is permanently re-
lated.(5) Just as gold and other commodities are 
continually transferred from one place to an-
other in due cours e of purchase and sale, so the 
living entity, as a result of his fruitive activities, 
wanders throughout the entire universe, being 
injected into various bodies in different species 
of life by one kind of father after another.(6) A 
few living entities are born in the human spe-
cies, and others are born as animals. Although 
both are living entities, their relationships are 
impermanent. An animal may remain in the 
custody of a human being for some time, and 
then the same animal may be transferred to the 
posses sion of other human beings. As soon as 
the animal goes away, the former proprietor no 
longer has a sense of ownership. As long as the 
animal is in his possession he certainly has an 
affinity for it, but as soon as the animal is sold, 
the affinity is lost.( 7) Even though one living 
entity becomes connected with another because of a relationship based on bodies that are per-
ishable, the living entity is eternal. Actually it 
is the body that is born or lost, not the living 
entity. One should not accept that the  living en-
tity takes birth or dies. The living being actually 
has no relationship with so -called fathers and 
mothers. As long as he appears as the son of a 
certain father and mother as a result of his past 
fruitive activities, he has a connection with the 
body given by that father and mother. Thus he 
falsely accepts himself as their son and acts af-
fectionately. After he dies, however, the rela-
tionship is finished. Under these circumstances, 
one should not be falsely involved with jubila-
tion and lamentation. (8) The living entity is 
eternal and imperishable because he actually 
has no beginning and no end. He never takes 
birth or dies. He is the basic principle of all 
types of bodies, yet he does not belong to the 
bodily category. The living being is so sublime  
that he is equal in quality to the Supreme Lord. 
Nonetheless, because he is extremely small, he 
is prone to be illusioned by the external energy, 
and thus he creates various bodies for himself 
according to his different desires.(9) For this 
living entity,  no one is dear, nor is anyone un-
favorable. He makes no distinction between 
that which is his own and that which belongs to 
anyone else. He is one without a second; in 
other words, he is not affected by friends and 
enemies, well -wishers or mischief -mongers . 
He is only an observer, a witness, of the differ-
ent qualities of men.(10) The Supreme Lord 
[ātmā], the creator of cause and effect, does not 
accept the happiness and distress that result 
from fruitive actions. He is completely inde-
pendent of having to ac cept a material body, 
and because He has no material body, He is al-
ways neutral. The living entities, being part and 
parcel of the Lord, possess His qualities in a 
minute quantity. Therefore one should not be 
affected by lamentation. (11)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī continued: When the 
conditioned soul [jīva] in the form of Mahārāja 
Citraketu’s son had spoken in this way and then 
left, Citraketu and the other relatives of the 
dead son were all astonished. Thus they cut off 
the shackles of their affection, which wa s due 
to their relationship with him, and gave up their 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

397 
 lamentation.(12) After the relatives had dis-
charged their duties by performing the proper 
funeral ceremonies and burning the dead 
child’s body, they gave up the affection that 
leads to illusion, lamen tation, fear and pain. 
Such affection is undoubtedly difficult to give 
up, but they gave it up very easily.(13) Queen 
Kṛtyadyuti’s co -wives, who had poisoned the 
child, were very much ashamed, and they lost 
all their bodily luster. While lamenting, O 
King,  they remembered the instructions of 
Aṅgirā and gave up their ambition to bear chil-
dren. Following the directions of the 
brāhmaṇas, they went to the bank of the Ya-
munā, where they bathed and atoned for their 
sinful activities.(14) Thus enlightened by the 
instructions of the brāhmaṇas Aṅgirā and 
Nārada, King Citraketu became fully aware of 
spiritual knowledge. As an elephant becomes 
free from a muddy reservoir of water, King 
Citraketu came out of the dark well of family 
life.(15) The King bathed in the water  of the 
Yamunā, and according to prescribed duties, he 
offered oblations of water to the forefathers and 
demigods. Very gravely controlling his senses 
and mind, he then offered his respects and obei-
sances to the sons of Lord Brahmā [Aṅgirā and 
Nārada].(16)  Thereafter, being very much 
pleased with Citraketu, who was a self -con-
trolled devotee and surrendered soul, Nārada, 
the most powerful sage, spoke to him the fol-
lowing transcendental instructions.(17)  
[Nārada gave Citraketu the following man-
tra.] O Lord, O Supreme Personality of God-
head, who are addressed by the oṁkāra 
[praṇava], I offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You. O Lord Vāsudeva, I meditate upon 
You. O Lord Pradyumna, Lord Aniruddha and 
Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa, I offer You my respectful 
obeisances. O rese rvoir of spiritual potency, O 
supreme bliss, I offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You, who are self -sufficient and most 
peaceful. O ultimate truth, one without a sec-
ond, You are realized as Brahman, Paramātmā 
and Bhagavān and are therefore the reservoir o f 
all knowledge. I offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You. ( 18-19) Perceiving Your personal 
bliss, You are always transcendental to the 
waves of material nature. Therefore, my Lord, I offer my respectfu l obeisances unto You. You 
are the supreme controller of the senses, and 
Your expansions of form are unlimited. You 
are the greatest, and therefore I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You. (20) The words 
and mind of the conditioned soul cannot ap-
proach t he Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
for material names and forms are not applicable 
to the Lord, who is entirely spiritual, beyond 
the conception of gross and subtle forms. The 
impersonal Brahman is another of His forms. 
May He, by His pleasure, protect us. (21) As 
pots made completely of earth are situated on 
earth after being created and are transformed 
into earth again when broken, this cosmic man-
ifestation is caused by the Supreme Brahman, 
situated in the Supreme Brahman, and annihi-
lated in the same Supre me Brahman. Therefore, 
since the Supreme Lord is the cause of Brah-
man, let us offer Him our respectful obei-
sances.(22) The Supreme Brahman emanates 
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead and 
expands like the sky. Although untouched by 
anything material, i t exists within and without. 
Nonetheless, the mind, intelligence, senses and 
living force can neither touch Him nor know 
Him. I offer unto Him my respectful obei-
sances.(23) As iron has the power to burn when 
made red -hot in the association of fire, so the 
body, senses, living force, mind and intelli-
gence, although merely lumps of matter, can 
function in their activities when infused with a 
particle of consciousness by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. As iron cannot burn un-
less heated by fire, the bodily senses cannot act 
unless favored by the Supreme Brahman.(24) O 
transcendental Lord, who are situated in the 
topmost planet of the spiritual world, Your two 
lotus feet are always massaged by a multitude 
of the best devotees with their lotus -bud hands. 
You a re the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
complete in six opulences. You are the supreme 
person mentioned in the Puruṣa -sūkta prayers. 
You are the most perfect, self -realized master 
of all mystic power. Let me offer my respectful 
obeisances unto You. (25)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Nārada, 
having become the spiritual master of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

398 
 Citraketu, instructed him fully in this prayer be-
cause Citraketu was fully surrendered. O King 
Parīkṣit, Nārada then left with the great sage 
Aṅgirā for the topmost planet, known as  Brah-
maloka.(26) Fasting and drinking only water, 
Citraketu for one week continuously chanted 
with great care and attention the mantra given 
by Nārada Muni.(27) O King Parīkṣit, after 
only one week of repeatedly practicing the 
mantra received from the spir itual master, 
Citraketu achieved the rule of the planet of the 
Vidyādharas as an intermediate product of his 
spiritual advancement in knowledge.(28) 
Thereafter, within a very few days, by the in-
fluence of the mantra that Citraketu had prac-
ticed, his mind b ecame increasingly enlight-
ened in spiritual progress, and he attained shel-
ter at the lotus feet of Anantadeva.(29) Upon 
reaching the shelter of Lord Śeṣa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Citraketu saw that He 
was as white as the white fibers of a lotus  
flower. He was dressed in bluish garments and 
adorned with a brilliantly glittering helmet, 
armlets, belt and bangles. His face was smiling, 
and His eyes were reddish. He was surrounded 
by such exalted liberated persons as Sanat -
kumāra.(30) As soon as Mah ārāja Citraketu 
saw the Supreme Lord, he was cleansed of all 
material contamination and situated in his orig-
inal Kṛṣṇa consciousness, being completely pu-
rified. He became silent and grave, and because 
of love for the Lord, tears fell from his eyes, 
and his  hairs stood on end. With great devotion 
and love, he offered his respectful obeisances 
unto the original Personality of Godhead.(31) 
With tears of love and affection, Citraketu re-
peatedly moistened the resting place of the Su-
preme Lord’s lotus feet. Becau se his voice was 
choked in ecstasy, for a considerable time he 
was unable to utter any of the letters of the al-
phabet to offer the Lord suitable prayers.(32) 
Thereafter, by controlling his mind with his in-
telligence and thus restricting his senses from 
external engagements, he recovered suitable 
words with which to express his feelings. Thus 
he began offering prayers to the Lord, who is 
the personification of the holy scriptures [the 
sātvata -saṁhitās like the Brahma -saṁhitā and 
the Nārada -pañcarātra] and wh o is the spiritual master of all. He offered his prayers as fol-
lows.(33)  
Citraketu said: O unconquerable Lord, alt-
hough You cannot be conquered by anyone, 
You are certainly conquered by devotees who 
have control of the mind and senses. They can 
keep You un der their control because You are 
causelessly merciful to devotees who desire no 
material profit from You. Indeed, You give 
Yourself to them, and because of this You also 
have full control over Your devotees.(34) My 
dear Lord, this cosmic manifestation and  its 
creation, maintenance and annihilation are all 
but Your opulences. Since Lord Brahmā and 
the other creators are nothing but small portions 
of a portion of You, their partial power to create 
does not make them God [īśvara]. Their con-
sciousness of thems elves as separate Lords is 
therefore merely false prestige. It is not 
valid.(35) You exist in the beginning, middle 
and end of everything, from the most minute 
particle of the cosmic manifestationthe atomto 
the gigantic universes and total material en-
ergy.  Nonetheless, You are eternal, having no 
beginning, end or middle. You are perceived to 
exist in these three phases, and thus You are 
permanent. When the cosmic manifestation 
does not exist, You exist as the original po-
tency.(36) Every universe is covered by seven 
layersearth, water, fire, air, sky, the total energy 
and false egoeach ten times greater than the 
previous one. There are innumerable universes 
besides this one, and although they are unlimit-
edly large, they move about like atoms in You. 
Therefore  You are called unlimited 
[ananta].(37) O Lord, O Supreme, unintelligent 
persons who thirst for sense enjoyment and 
who worship various demigods are no better 
than animals in the human form of life. Because 
of their animalistic propensities, they fail to 
worship Your Lordship, and instead they wor-
ship the insignificant demigods, who are but 
small sparks of Your glory. With the destruc-
tion of the entire universe, including the demi-
gods, the benedictions received from the demi-
gods also vanish, just like the n obility when a 
king is no longer in power.(38) O Supreme 
Lord, if persons obsessed with material desires 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

399 
 for sense gratification through material opu-
lence worship You, who are the source of all 
knowledge and are transcendental to material 
qualities, they a re not subject to material re-
birth, just as sterilized or fried seeds do not pro-
duce plants. Living entities are subjected to the 
repetition of birth and death because they are 
conditioned by material nature, but since You 
are transcendental, one who is in clined to asso-
ciate with You in transcendence escapes the 
conditions of material nature.(39) O uncon-
querable one, when You spoke about 
bhāgavata -dharma, which is the uncontami-
nated religious system for achieving the shelter 
of Your lotus feet, that was You r victory. Per-
sons who have no material desires, like the 
Kumāras, who are self -satisfied sages, worship 
You to be liberated from material contamina-
tion. In other words, they accept the process of 
bhāgavata -dharma to achieve shelter at Your 
lotus feet.(40)  Being full of contradictions, all 
forms of religion but bhāgavata -dharma work 
under conceptions of fruitive results and dis-
tinctions of “you and I” and “yours and mine.” 
The followers of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam have no 
such consciousness. They are all Kṛṣṇa con-
scious, thinking that they are Kṛṣṇa’s and Kṛṣṇa 
is theirs. There are other, low -class religious 
systems, which are contemplated for the killing 
of enemies or the gain of mystic power, but 
such religious systems, being full of passion 
and envy, are impure and temporary. Because 
they are full of envy, they are full of irreli-
gion.(41) How can a religious system that pro-
duces envy of one’s self and of others be bene-
ficial for oneself and for them? What is auspi-
cious about following such a system? What is 
actua lly to be gained? By causing pain to one’s 
own self due to self -envy and by causing pain 
to others, one arouses Your anger and pr actices 
irreligion.(42) My dear Lord, one’s occupa-
tional duty is instructed in Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam 
and Bhagavad -gītā according to Your point of 
view, which never deviates from the highest 
goal of life. Those who follow their occupa-
tional duties under Your su pervision, being 
equal to all living entities, moving and non-
moving, and not considering high and low, are 
called Āryans. Such Āryans worship You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.(43) My 
Lord, it is not impossible for one to be immedi-
ately freed from al l material contamination by 
seeing You. Not to speak of seeing You person-
ally, merely by hearing the holy name of Your 
Lordship only once, even caṇḍālas, men of the 
lowest class, are freed from all material con-
tamination. Under the circumstances, who will 
not be freed from material contamination 
simply by seeing You?(44) Therefore, my dear 
Lord, simply seeing You has now wiped away 
all the contamination of sinful activities and 
their results of material attachment and lusty 
desires, which always filled my m ind and the 
core of my heart. Whatever is predicted by the 
great sage Nārada Muni cannot be otherwise. In 
other words, I have obtained Your audience as 
a result of being trained by Nārada Muni.(45) 
O unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
whatever a liv ing entity does in this material 
world is well known to You because You are 
the Supersoul. In the presence of the sun there 
is nothing to be revealed by the light of a glow-
worm. Similarly, because You know every-
thing, in Your presence there is nothing for me 
to make known.(46) My dear Lord, You are the 
creator, maintainer and annihilator of this cos-
mic manifestation, but persons who are too ma-
terialistic and who always see separateness do 
not have eyes with which to see You. They can-
not understand Your real  position, and there-
fore they conclude that the cosmic manifesta-
tion is independent of Your opulence. My Lord, 
You are the supreme pure, and You are full in 
all six opulences. Therefore I offer my respect-
ful obeisances unto You.(47) My dear Lord, it 
is aft er You endeavor that Lord Brahmā, Indra 
and the other directors of the cosmic manifes-
tation become occupied with their activities. It 
is after You perceive the material energy, My 
Lord, that the senses begin to perceive. The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead holds all the uni-
verses on His heads like seeds of mustard. I of-
fer my respectful obeisances unto You, that Su-
preme Personality, who has thousands of 
hoods.(48)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The Lord, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Anan-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

400 
 tadeva, being ver y much pleased with the pray-
ers offered by Citraketu, the King of the 
Vidyādharas, replied to him as follows, O best 
of the Kuru dynasty, Mahārāja Parīkṣit.(49)  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Anantadeva, replied as follows: O King, as a 
result of you r having accepted the instructions 
spoken about Me by the great sages Nārada and 
Aṅgirā, you have become completely aware of 
transcendental knowledge. Because you are 
now educated in the spiritual science, you have 
seen Me face to face. Therefore you are n ow 
completely perfect.(50) All living entities, 
moving and nonmoving, are My expansions 
and are separate from Me. I am the Supersoul 
of all living beings, who exist because I mani-
fest them. I am the form of the transcendental 
vibrations like oṁkāra and Har e Kṛṣṇa Hare 
Rāma, and I am the Supreme Absolute Truth. 
These two forms of Minenamely, the transcen-
dental sound and the eternally blissful spiritual 
form of the Deity, are My eternal forms; they 
are not material.(51) In this world of matter, 
which the cond itioned soul accepts as consist-
ing of enjoyable resources, the conditioned soul 
expands, thinking that he is the enjoyer of the 
material world. Similarly, the material world 
expands in the living entity as a source of en-
joyment. In this way they both expan d, but be-
cause they are My energies, they are both per-
vaded by Me. As the Supreme Lord, I am the 
cause of these effects, and one should know 
that both of them rest in Me.(52) When a person 
is in deep sleep, he dreams and sees in himself 
many other objects,  such as great mountains 
and rivers or perhaps even the entire universe, 
although they are far away. Sometimes when 
one awakens from a dream he sees that he is in 
a human form, lying in his bed in one place. 
Then he sees himself, in terms of various con-
ditions, as belonging to a particular nationality, 
family and so on. All the conditions of deep 
sleep, dreaming and wakefulness are but ener-
gies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
One should always remember the original cre-
ator of these conditions, the Su preme Lord, 
who is unaffected by them. ( 53-54)  
Know Me to be the Supreme Brahman, the all-pervading Supersoul through whom the 
sleeping living entity can understand his 
dreaming condition and his happin ess beyond 
the activities of the material senses. That is to 
say, I am the cause of the activities of the sleep-
ing living being.(55) If one’s dreams during 
sleep are merely subject matters witnessed by 
the Supersoul, how can the living entity, who is 
diffe rent from the Supersoul, remember the ac-
tivities of dreams? The experiences of one per-
son cannot be understood by another. Therefore 
the knower of the facts, the living entity who 
inquires into the incidents manifested in 
dreams and wakefulness, is differe nt from the 
circumstantial activities. That knowing factor 
is Brahman. In other words, the quality of 
knowing belongs to the living entities and to the 
Supreme Soul. Thus the living entity can also 
experience the activities of dreams and wake-
fulness. In bo th stages the knower is un-
changed, but is qualitatively one with the Su-
preme Brahman.(56) When a living entity, 
thinking himself different from Me, forgets his 
spiritual identity of qualitative oneness with 
Me in eternity, knowledge and bliss, his mate-
rial, conditional life begins. In other words, in-
stead of identifying his interest with Mine, he 
becomes interested in his bodily expansions 
like his wife, children and material possessions. 
In this way, by the influence of his actions, one 
body comes from ano ther, and after one death, 
another death takes place.(57) A human being 
can attain perfection in life by self -realization 
through the Vedic literature and its practical ap-
plication. This is possible especially for a hu-
man being born in India, the land of p iety. A 
man who obtains birth in such a convenient po-
sition but does not understand his self is unable 
to achieve the highest perfection, even if he is 
exalted to life in the higher planetary sys-
tems.(58) Remembering the great trouble 
found in the field of  activities performed for 
fruitive results, and remembering how one re-
ceives the reverse of the results one de-
sireswhether from material actions or from the 
fruitive activities recommended in the Vedic 
literaturesan intelligent man should cease from 
the de sire for fruitive actions, for by such en-
deavors one cannot achieve the ultimate goal of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

401 
 life. On the other hand, if one acts without de-
sires for fruitive resultsin other words, if one 
engages in devotional activitieshe can achieve 
the highest goal of life  with freedom from mis-
erable conditions. Considering this, one should 
cease from material desires.(59) As husband 
and wife, a man and woman plan together to at-
tain happiness and decrease unhappiness, 
working jointly in many ways, but because 
their activiti es are full of desires, these activi-
ties are never a source of happiness, and they 
never diminish distress. On the contrary, they 
are a cause of great unhappiness.(60) One 
should understand that the activities of persons 
who are proud of their material exp erience 
bring only results contradictory to those such 
persons conceive while awake, sleeping and 
deeply sleeping. One should further understand 
that the spirit soul, although very difficult for 
the materialist to perceive, is above all these 
conditions, a nd by the strength of one’s dis-
crimination, one should give up the desire for 
fruitive results in the present life and in the 
next. Thus becoming experienced in transcen-
dental knowledge, one should become My dev-
otee.( 61-62) Persons who try to reach the ulti-
mate goal of life must expertly observe the Su-
preme Absolute Person and the living entity, 
who are one in quality in their relationship as 
part and whole. This is the ultimate understand-
ing of life. The re is no better truth than this.(63) 
O King, if you accept this conclusion of Mine, 
being unattached to material enjoyment, adher-
ing to Me with great faith and thus becoming 
proficient and fully aware of knowledge and its 
practical application in life, you  will achieve 
the highest perfection by attaining Me.(64)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After thus 
instructing Citraketu and assuring him of per-
fection in this way, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is the supreme spiritual master, 
the supreme soul , Saṅkarṣaṇa, disappeared 
from that place as Citraketu looked on.(65)  
SB 6.17: Mother Pārvatī Curses Citraketu  
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After offering 
obeisances to the direction from which Ananta, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, had dis-
appeared, Citraketu began traveling in outer space as the head of the Vidyādharas.(1) Being 
praised by great sages and saints and by the in-
habitants of Siddhaloka and Cāraṇaloka, 
Citraketu, the most powerful mystic yogī, wan-
dered about enjoying life for millions of years. 
With bodily strength and senses free from dete-
rioration, he traveled within the valleys of Su-
meru Mountain, which is the place of perfec-
tion for various kinds of mystic power. In those 
valleys he enjoyed life with the women of 
Vidyādhara -loka by cha nting the glories of the 
Supreme Lord, Hari.( 2-3) One time while King 
Citraketu was traveling in outer space on a bril-
liantly effulgent airplane given to him by Lord 
Viṣṇu, he saw Lord Śiva, surrounded by Sid-
dhas and Cāraṇas. Lord Śiva was sitting in an 
assembly of great saintly persons and embrac-
ing Pārvatī on his lap with his arm. Citraketu 
laughed loudly and spoke, within the hearing of 
Pārvatī. ( 4-5)  
Citraketu said: Lord Śiva, the spiritual mas-
ter of the general populace, is the best of all liv-
ing entities who have accepted material bodies. 
He enunciates the system of religion. Yet how 
wonderful it is that he is embracing his wife, 
Pārvatī, in the midst  of an assembly of great 
saintly persons.(6) Lord Śiva, whose hair is 
matted on his head, has certainly undergone 
great austerities and penances. Indeed, he is the 
president in the assembly of strict followers of 
Vedic principles. Nonetheless, he is seated  with 
his wife on his lap in the midst of saintly per-
sons and is embracing her as if he were a 
shameless, ordinary human being.(7) Ordinary 
conditioned persons generally embrace their 
wives and enjoy their company in solitary 
places. How wonderful it is th at Lord 
Mahādeva, although a great master of austerity, 
is embracing his wife openly in the midst of an 
assembly of great saints.(8)  
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My 
dear King, after hearing Citraketu’s statement, 
Lord Śiva, the most powerful personal ity, 
whose knowledge is fathomless, simply smiled 
and remained silent, and all the members of the 
assembly followed the lord by not saying any-
thing.(9) Not knowing the prowess of Lord 
Śiva and Pārvatī, Citraketu strongly criticized 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

402 
 them. His statements wer e not at all pleasing, 
and therefore the goddess Pārvatī, being very 
angry, spoke as follows to Citraketu, who 
thought himself better than Lord Śiva in con-
trolling the senses.(10)  
The goddess Pārvatī said: Alas, has this up-
start now received a post from w hich to punish 
shameless persons like us? Has he been ap-
pointed ruler, carrier of the rod of punishment? 
Is he now the only master of everything?(11) 
Alas, Lord Brahmā, who has taken his birth 
from the lotus flower, does not know the prin-
ciples of religion , nor do the great saints like 
Bhṛgu and Nārada, nor the four Kumāras, 
headed by Sanat -kumāra. Manu and Kapila 
have also forgotten the religious principles. I 
suppose it to be because of this that they have 
not tried to stop Lord Śiva from behaving im-
prope rly.(12) This Citraketu is the lowest of 
kṣatriyas, for he has impudently overridden 
Brahmā and the other demigods by insulting 
Lord Śiva, upon whose lotus feet they always 
meditate. Lord Śiva is personified religion and 
the spiritual master of the entire world, and 
therefore Citraketu must be punished.(13) This 
person is puffed up because of his achieve-
ments, thinking, “I am the best.” He does not 
deserve to approach the shelter of Lord Viṣṇu’s 
lotus feet, which are worshiped by all saintly 
persons, for he  is impudent, thinking himself 
greatly important.(14) O impudent one, my 
dear son, now take birth in a low, sinful family 
of demons so that you will not commit such an 
offense again toward exalted, saintly persons in 
this world.(15)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī co ntinued: My dear 
King Parīkṣit, when Citraketu was cursed by 
Pārvatī, he descended from his airplane, bowed 
before her with great humility and pleased her 
completely.(16)  
Citraketu said: My dear mother, with my 
own hands folded together I accept the curse  
upon me. I do not mind the curse, for happiness 
and distress are given by the demigods as a re-
sult of one’s past deeds.(17) Deluded by igno-
rance, the living entity wanders in the forest of 
this material world, enjoying the happiness and distress resulting  from his past deeds, every-
where and at all times. [Therefore, my dear 
mother, neither you nor I am to be blamed for 
this incident.]( 18)  
In this material world, neither the living en-
tity himself nor others  [friends and enemies] 
are the cause of material happiness and distress. 
But because of gross ignorance, the living en-
tity thinks that he and others are the cause.(19)  
This material world resembles the waves of 
a constantly flowing river. Therefore, what is a 
curse and what is a favor? What are the heav-
enly planets, and what are the hellish planets? 
What is actually happiness, and what is actually 
distress? Because the waves flow constantly, 
none of them has an eternal effect.(20)  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one. 
Unaffected by the conditions of the material 
world, He creates all the conditioned souls by 
His own personal potency. Because of being 
contaminated by the material energy, the living 
entity is put into ignorance and thus into differ-
ent c onditions of bondage. Sometimes, by 
knowledge, the living entity is given liberation. 
In sattva -guṇa and rajo -guṇa, he is subjected to 
happiness and distress.(21)  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is 
equally disposed toward all living entities. 
Therefore  no one is very dear to Him, and no 
one is a great enemy for Him; no one is His 
friend, and no one is His relative. Being unat-
tached to the material world, He has no affec-
tion for so -called happiness or hatred for so -
called distress. The two terms happines s and 
distress are relative. Since the Lord is always 
happy, for Him there is no question of dis-
tress.(22)  
Although the Supreme Lord is unattached to 
our happiness and distress according to karma, 
and although no one is His enemy or favorite, 
He creates p ious and impious activities through 
the agency of His material potency. Thus for 
the continuation of the materialistic way of life 
He creates happiness and distress, good fortune 
and bad, bondage and liberation, birth and 
death.(23) O mother, you are now u nneces-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

403 
 sarily angry, but since all my happiness and dis-
tress are destined by my past activities, I do not 
plead to be excused or relieved from your 
curse. Although what I have said is not wrong, 
please let whatever you think is wrong be par-
doned.(24)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King 
Parīkṣit, subduer of the enemy, after Citraketu 
satisfied Lord Śiva and his wife, Pārvatī, he 
boarded his airplane and left as they looked on. 
When Lord Śiva and Pārvatī saw that Citraketu, 
although informed of the cur se, was unafraid, 
they smiled, being fully astonished by his be-
havior.(25) Thereafter, in the presence of the 
great sage Nārada, the demons, the inhabitants 
of Siddhaloka, and his personal associates, 
Lord Śiva, who is most powerful, spoke to his 
wife, Pār vatī, while they all listened.(26)  
Lord Śiva said: My dear beautiful Pārvatī, 
have you seen the greatness of the Vaiṣṇavas? 
Being servants of the servants of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Hari, they are great 
souls and are not interested in any kind  of ma-
terial happiness.(27) Devotees solely engaged 
in the devotional service of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, never fear any 
condition of life. For them the heavenly plan-
ets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the 
same, for such de votees are interested only in 
the service of the Lord. (28) Because of the ac-
tions of the Supreme Lord’s external energy, 
the living entities are conditioned in contact 
with material bodies. The dualities of happiness 
and distress, birth and death, curses and favors, 
are natural by -products of this contact in the 
material world.(29)  
As one mistakenly considers a flower gar-
land to be a snake or experiences happiness and 
distress in a dream, so, in the material world, by 
a lack of careful consideration, we d ifferentiate 
between happiness and distress, considering 
one good and the other bad.(30) Persons en-
gaged in devotional service to Lord Vāsudeva, 
Kṛṣṇa, have naturally perfect knowledge and 
detachment from this material world. Therefore 
such devotees are no t interested in the so -called 
happiness or so -called distress of this 
world.(31) Neither I [Lord Śiva], nor Brahmā, nor the Aśvinī -kumāras, nor Nārada or the 
other great sages who are Brahmā’s sons, nor 
even the demigods can understand the pastimes 
and per sonality of the Supreme Lord. Although 
we are part of the Supreme Lord, we consider 
ourselves independent, separate controllers, 
and thus we cannot understand His iden-
tity.(32) He holds no one as very dear and no 
one as inimical. He has no one for His own rel-
ative, and no one is alien to Him. He is actually 
the soul of the soul of all living entities. Thus 
He is the auspicious friend of all living beings 
and is very near and dear to all of them.(33)  
This magnanimous Citraketu is a dear devo-
tee of the Lord.  He is equal to all living entities 
and is free from attachment and hatred. Simi-
larly, I am also very dear to Lord Nārāyaṇa. 
Therefore, no one should be astonished to see 
the activities of the most exalted devotees of 
Nārāyaṇa, for they are free from attac hment 
and envy. They are always peaceful, and they 
are equal to everyone.( 34-35)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, after 
hearing this speech by her husband, the demi-
goddess [Umā, the wife of Lord Śiva] gave up 
her astonishment at the behavior of King 
Citraketu and became steady in intelli-
gence.(36) The great devotee Citraketu was so 
powerful that he was quite competent to curse 
mother Pārvatī in retaliation, but instead of do-
ing so he very humbly accepte d the curse and 
bowed his head before Lord Śiva and his wife. 
This is very much to be appreciated as the 
standard behavior of a Vaiṣṇava.(37) Being 
cursed by mother Durgā [Bhavānī, the wife of 
Lord Śiva], that same Citraketu accepted birth 
in a demoniac sp ecies of life. Although still 
fully equipped with transcendental knowledge 
and practical application of that knowledge in 
life, he appeared as a demon at the fire sacrifice 
performed by Tvaṣṭā, and thus he became fa-
mous as Vṛtrāsura.(38) My dear King Parīk ṣit, 
you inquired from me how Vṛtrāsura, a great 
devotee, took birth in a demoniac family. Thus 
I have tried to explain to you everything about 
this.(39) Citraketu was a great devotee 
[mahātmā]. If one hears this history of 
Citraketu from a pure devotee, t he listener also 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

404 
 is freed from the conditional life of material ex-
istence.(40) One who rises from bed early in 
the morning and recites this history of 
Citraketu, controlling his words and mind and 
remembering the Supreme Personality of God-
head, will return  home, back to Godhead, with-
out difficulty.(41)  
SB 6.18: Diti Vows to Kill King Indra  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: Pṛśni, who was 
the wife of Savitā, the fifth of the twelve sons 
of Aditi, gave birth to three daughtersSāvitrī, 
Vyāhṛti and Trayīand the sons n amed Ag-
nihotra, Paśu, Soma, Cāturmāsya and the five 
Mahāyajñas.(1) O King, Siddhi, who was the 
wife of Bhaga, the sixth son of Aditi, bore three 
sons, named Mahimā, Vibhu and Prabhu, and 
one extremely beautiful daughter, whose name 
was Āśī.(2) Dhātā, the s eventh son of Aditi, had 
four wives, named Kuhū, Sinīvālī, Rākā and 
Anumati. These wives begot four sons, named 
Sāyam, Darśa, Prātaḥ and Pūrṇamāsa respec-
tively. The wife of Vidhātā, the eighth son of 
Aditi, was named Kriyā. In her Vidhātā begot 
the five fi re-gods named the Purīṣyas. The wife 
of Varuṇa, the ninth son of Aditi, was named 
Carṣaṇī. Bhṛgu, the son of Brahmā, took birth 
again in her womb.( 3-4) By the semen of Var-
uṇa, the great mystic Vālmīki took  birth from 
an anthill. Bhṛgu and Vālmīki were specific 
sons of Varuṇa, whereas Agastya and Vasiṣṭha 
Ṛṣis were the common sons of Varuṇa and Mi-
tra, the tenth son of Aditi.(5) Upon seeing Ur-
vaśī, the celestial society girl, both Mitra and 
Varuṇa discharged semen, which they pre-
served in an earthen pot. The two sons Agastya 
and Vasiṣṭha later appeared from that pot, and 
they are therefore the common sons of Mitra 
and Varuṇa. Mitra begot three sons in the 
womb of his wife, whose name was Revatī. 
Their names we re Utsarga, Ariṣṭa and Pip-
pala.(6) O King Parīkṣit, Indra, the King of the 
heavenly planets and eleventh son of Aditi, be-
got three sons, named Jayanta, Ṛṣabha and 
Mīḍhuṣa, in the womb of his wife, Paulomī. 
Thus we have heard.(7) By His own potency, 
the Sup reme Personality of Godhead, who has 
multifarious potencies, appeared in the form of 
a dwarf as Urukrama, the twelfth son of Aditi. In the womb of His wife, whose name was 
Kīrti, He begot one son, named Bṛhatśloka, 
who had many sons, headed by Saubhaga.(8)  
Later [in the Eighth Canto of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam] I shall describe how Urukrama, 
Lord Vāmanadeva, appeared as the son of the 
great sage Kaśyapa and how He covered the 
three worlds with three steps. I shall describe 
the uncommon activities He performed, His  
qualities, His power and how He took birth 
from the womb of Aditi.(9)  
Now let me describe the sons of Diti, who 
were begotten by Kaśyapa but who became de-
mons. In this demoniac family the great devo-
tee Prahlāda Mahārāja appeared, and Bali 
Mahārāja also a ppeared in that family. The de-
mons are technically known as Daityas because 
they proceeded from the womb of Diti.(10) 
First the two sons named Hiraṇyakaśipu and 
Hiraṇyākṣa took birth from Diti’s womb. Both 
of them were very powerful and were wor-
shiped by t he Daityas and Dānavas.(11) The 
wife of Hiraṇyakaśipu was known as Kayādhu. 
She was the daughter of Jambha and a descend-
ant of Danu. She gave birth to four consecutive 
sons, known as Saṁhlāda, Anuhlāda, Hlāda 
and Prahlāda. The sister of these four sons was  
known as Siṁhikā. She married the demon 
named Vipracit and gave birth to another de-
mon, named Rāhu.( 12-13)  
While Rāhu, in disguise, was drinking nec-
tar among the demigods, the Supreme Person-
ality of G odhead severed his head. The wife of 
Saṁhlāda was named Kṛti. By union with 
Saṁhlāda, Kṛti gave birth to a son named 
Pañcajana.(14) The wife of Hlāda was named 
Dhamani. She gave birth to two sons, named 
Vātāpi and Ilvala. When Agastya Muni became 
Ilvala’s guest, Ilvala served him a feast by 
cooking Vātāpi, who was in the shape of a 
ram.(15) The wife of Anuhlāda was named 
Sūryā. She gave birth to two sons, named 
Bāṣkala and Mahiṣa. Prahlāda had one son, Vi-
rocana, whose wife gave birth to Bali 
Mahārāja.(16) T hereafter, Bali Mahārāja begot 
one hundred sons in the womb of Aśanā. Of 
these one hundred sons, King Bāṇa was the eld-
est. The activities of Bali Mahārāja, which are 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

405 
 very laudable, will be described later [in the 
Eighth Canto].(17) Since King Bāṇa was a 
great worshiper of Lord Śiva, he became one of 
Lord Śiva’s most celebrated associates. Even 
now, Lord Śiva protects King Bāṇa’s capital 
and always stands beside him.(18) The forty -
nine Marut demigods were also born from the 
womb of Diti. None of them had son s. Alt-
hough they were born of Diti, King Indra gave 
them a position as demigods.(19)  
King Parīkṣit inquired: My dear lord, due to 
their birth, the forty -nine Maruts must have 
been obsessed with a demoniac mentality. Why 
did Indra, the King of heaven, conv ert them 
into demigods? Did they perform any rituals or 
pious activities?(20) My dear brāhmaṇa, I and 
all the sages present with me are eager to know 
about this. Therefore, O great soul, kindly ex-
plain to us the reason.(21)  
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: O great sage Śau-
naka, after hearing Mahārāja Parīkṣit speak re-
spectfully and briefly on topics essential to 
hear, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who was well aware 
of everything, praised his endeavor with great 
pleasure and replied. (22)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: Just to help In-
dra, Lord Viṣṇu killed the two brothers 
Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu. Because of 
their being killed, their mother, Diti, over-
whelmed with lamentation and anger, contem-
plated as follows.(23) Lord Indra, who is very 
much fond of sense gratification, has ki lled the 
two brothers Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu by 
means of Lord Viṣṇu. Therefore Indra is cruel, 
hardhearted and sinful. When will I, having 
killed him, rest with a pacified mind? (24) 
When dead, the bodies of all the rulers known 
as kings and great le aders will be transformed 
into worms, stool or ashes. If one enviously 
kills others for the protection of such a body, 
does he actually know the true interest of life? 
Certainly he does not, for if one is envious of 
other entities, he surely goes to hell.( 25) Diti 
thought: Indra considers his body eternal, and 
thus he has become unrestrained. I therefore 
wish to have a son who can remove Indra’s 
madness. Let me adopt some means to help me 
in this.(26) Thinking in this way [with a desire for a son to kill In dra], Diti began constantly 
acting to satisfy Kaśyapa by her pleasing be-
havior. O King, Diti always carried out 
Kaśyapa’s orders very faithfully, as he desired. 
With service, love, humility and control, with 
words spoken very sweetly to satisfy her hus-
band , and with smiles and glances at him, Diti 
attracted his mind and brought it under her con-
trol.( 27-28) Although Kaśyapa Muni was a 
learned scholar, he was captivated by Diti’s ar-
tificial behavior, which brought him under her 
control. Therefore he assured his wife that he 
would fulfill her desires. Such a promise by a 
husband is not at all astonishing.(29) In the be-
ginning of creation, Lord Brahmā, the father of 
the living entities of the universe, saw tha t all 
the living entities were unattached. To increase 
population, he then created woman from the 
better half of man’s body, for woman’s behav-
ior carries away a man’s mind.(30) O my dear 
one, the most powerful sage Kaśyapa, being ex-
tremely pleased by the m ild behavior of his 
wife Diti, smiled and spoke to her as fol-
lows.(31)  
Kaśyapa Muni said: O beautiful woman, O 
irreproachable lady, since I am very much 
pleased by your behavior, you may ask me for 
any benediction you want. If a husband is 
pleased, what d esires are difficult for his wife 
to obtain, either in this world or in the next?(32)  
A husband is the supreme demigod for a 
woman. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Lord Vāsudeva, the husband of the goddess of 
fortune, is situated in everyone’s heart a nd is 
worshiped through the various names and 
forms of the demigods by fruitive workers. 
Similarly, a husband represents the Lord as the 
object of worship for a woman.(33 -34) My dear 
wife, whose body is so beautiful, your waist be-
ing thin, a conscientious wife should be chaste 
and should abide by the orders of her husband. 
She should very devoutly worship her husband 
as a representative of Vāsudeva.(35) My dear 
gentle wife, because you have worshiped me 
with great devotion, considering me a repre-
sentative o f the Supreme Personality of God-
head, I shall reward you by fulfilling your de-
sires, which are unobtainable for an unchaste 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

406 
 wife.(36)  
Diti replied: O my husband, O great soul, I 
have now lost my sons. If you want to give me 
a benediction, I ask you for an  immortal son 
who can kill Indra. I pray for this because Indra, 
with the help of Viṣṇu, has killed my two sons 
Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu.(37)  
Upon hearing Diti’s request, Kaśyapa Muni 
was very much aggrieved. “Alas,” he lamented, 
“now I face the dange r of the impious act of 
killing Indra.”(38) Kaśyapa Muni thought: 
Alas, I have now become too attached to mate-
rial enjoyment. Taking advantage of this, my 
mind has been attracted by the illusory energy 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the 
form of a  woman [my wife]. Therefore I am 
surely a wretched person who will glide down 
toward hell.(39) This woman, my wife, has 
adopted a means that follows her nature, and 
therefore she is not to be blamed. But I am a 
man. Therefore, all condemnation upon me! I 
am not at all conversant with what is good for 
me, since I could not control my senses.(40) A 
woman’s face is as attractive and beautiful as a 
blossoming lotus flower during autumn. Her 
words are very sweet, and they give pleasure to 
the ear, but if we stud y a woman’s heart, we can 
understand it to be extremely sharp, like the 
blade of a razor. In these circumstances, who 
could understand the dealings of a woman?(41) 
To satisfy their own interests, women deal with 
men as if the men were most dear to them, bu t 
no one is actually dear to them. Women are 
supposed to be very saintly, but for their own 
interests they can kill even their husbands, sons 
or brothers, or cause them to be killed by oth-
ers.(42) I promised to give her a benediction, 
and this promise cann ot be violated, but Indra 
does not deserve to be killed. In these circum-
stances, the solution I have is quite suita-
ble.(43) ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said: Kaśyapa 
Muni, thinking in this way, became somewhat 
angry. Condemning himself, O Mahārāja 
Parīkṣit, descen dant of Kuru, he spoke to Diti 
as follows.(44)  
Kaśyapa Muni said: My dear gentle wife, if 
you follow my instructions regarding this vow 
for at least one year, you will surely get a son who will be able to kill Indra. However, if you 
deviate from this vow of following the 
Vaiṣṇava principles, you will get a son who 
will be favorable to Indra.(45)  
Diti replied: My dear brāhmaṇa, I must ac-
cept your advice and follow the vow. Now let 
me understand what I have to do, what is for-
bidden and what will not break t he vow. Please 
clearly state all this to me.(46)  
Kaśyapa Muni said: My dear wife, to follow 
this vow, do not be violent or cause harm to an-
yone. Do not curse anyone, and do not speak 
lies. Do not cut your nails and hair, and do not 
touch impure things lik e skulls and bones.(47) 
Kaśyapa Muni continued: My dear gentle wife, 
never enter the water while bathing, never be 
angry, and do not even speak or associate with 
wicked people. Never wear clothes that have 
not been properly washed, and do not put on a 
garland that has already been worn.(48) Never 
eat leftover food, never eat prasāda offered to 
the goddess Kālī [Durgā], and do not eat any-
thing contaminated by flesh or fish. Do not eat 
anything brought or touched by a śūdra nor an-
ything seen by a woman in her  menstrual pe-
riod. Do not drink water by joining your 
palms.(49) After eating, you should not go out 
to the street without having washed your 
mouth, hands and feet. You should not go out 
in the evening or with your hair loose, nor 
should you go out unless you are properly dec-
orated with ornaments. You should not leave 
the house unless you are very grave and are suf-
ficiently covered. (50) You should not lie down 
without having washed both of your feet or 
without being purified, nor with wet feet or 
with your  head pointed west or north. You 
should not lie naked, or with other women, or 
during the sunrise or sunset.(51) Putting on 
washed clothing, being always pure and being 
adorned with turmeric, sandalwood pulp and 
other auspicious items, before breakfast one  
should worship the cows, the brāhmaṇas, the 
goddess of fortune and the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead.(52) With flower garlands, san-
dalwood pulp, ornaments and other parapher-
nalia, a woman following this vow should wor-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

407 
 ship women who have sons and whose hu s-
bands are living. The pregnant wife should 
worship her husband and offer him prayers. She 
should meditate upon him, thinking that he is 
situated in her womb.(53) Kaśyapa Muni con-
tinued: If you perform this ceremony called 
puṁsavana, adhering to the vow wi th faith for 
at least one year, you will give birth to a son 
destined to kill Indra. But if there is any dis-
crepancy in the discharge of this vow, the son 
will be a friend to Indra.(54) O King Parīkṣit, 
Diti, the wife of Kaśyapa, agreed to undergo the 
purificatory process known as puṁsavana. 
“Yes,” she said, “I shall do everything accord-
ing to your instructions.” With great jubilation 
she became pregnant, having taken semen from 
Kaśyapa, and faithfully began discharging the 
vow.(55) O King, who are respectf ul to every-
one, Indra understood Diti’s purpose, and thus 
he contrived to fulfill his own interests. Follow-
ing the logic that self -preservation is the first 
law of nature, he wanted to break Diti’s prom-
ise. Thus he engaged himself in the service of 
Diti, h is aunt, who was residing in an 
āśrama.(56) Indra served his aunt daily by 
bringing flowers, fruits, roots and wood for yaj-
ñas from the forest. He also brought kuśa grass, 
leaves, sprouts, earth and water exactly at the 
proper time.(57) O King Parīkṣit, as  the hunter 
of a deer becomes like a deer by covering his 
body with deerskin and serving the deer, so In-
dra, although at heart the enemy of the sons of 
Diti, became outwardly friendly and served 
Diti in a faithful way. Indra’s purpose was to 
cheat Diti as soon as he could find some fault 
in the way she discharged the vows of the ritu-
alistic ceremony. However, he wanted to be un-
detected, and therefore he served her very care-
fully.(58) O master of the entire world, when 
Indra could find no faults, he thought,  “How 
will there be good fortune for me?” Thus he 
was full of deep anxiety.(59)  
Having grown weak and thin because of 
strictly following the principles of the vow, Diti 
once unfortunately neglected to wash her 
mouth, hands and feet after eating and went t o 
sleep during the evening twilight.(60) Finding 
this fault, Indra, who has all the mystic powers 
[the yoga -siddhis such as aṇimā and laghimā], entered Diti’s womb while she was uncon-
scious, being fast asleep.(61) After entering 
Diti’s womb, Indra, with th e help of his thun-
derbolt, cut into seven pieces her embryo, 
which appeared like glowing gold. In seven 
places, seven different living beings began cry-
ing. Indra told them, “Do not cry,” and then he 
cut each of them into seven pieces again.(62) O 
King, bei ng very much aggrieved, they pleaded 
to Indra with folded hands, saying, “Dear Indra, 
we are the Maruts, your brothers. Why are you 
trying to kill us?”(63) When Indra saw that ac-
tually they were his devoted followers, he said 
to them: If you are all my bro thers, you have 
nothing more to fear  from me.(64) Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī said: My dear King Parīkṣit, you were 
burned by the brahmāstra of Aśvatthāmā, but 
when Lord Kṛṣṇa entered the womb of your 
mother, you were saved. Similarly, although 
the one embryo was cut into forty -nine pieces 
by the thund erbolt of Indra, they were all saved 
by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.(65) If one worships the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, the original person, 
even once, he receives the benefit of being pro-
moted to the spiritual world and possessing  the 
same bodily features as Viṣṇu. Diti worshiped 
Lord Viṣṇu for almost one year, adhering to a 
great vow. Because of such strength in spiritual 
life, the forty -nine Maruts were born. How, 
then, is it wonderful that the Maruts, although 
born from the womb  of Diti, became equal to 
the demigods by the mercy of the Supreme 
Lord?( 66-67)  
Because of worshiping the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Diti was completely purified. 
When she got up from bed, she saw her forty -
nine sons along with Indra. These forty -nine 
sons were all as brilliant as fire and were in 
friendship with Indra, and therefore she was 
very pleased.(68) Thereafter, Diti said to Indra: 
My dear son, I adhered to this difficult vow just 
to get a son to kill you twelve Ādityas.(69) I 
prayed for only one son, but now I see that there 
are forty -nine. How has this happened? My 
dear son Indra, if you know, please tell me the 
truth. Do not try to speak lies.(70)  
Indra replied: My dear mother, because I 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

408 
 was grossly blinded by selfish interests, I lost 
sight of religion. When I understood that you 
were observing a great vow in spiritual life, I 
wanted to find some fault in you. When I found 
such a fault, I entered your womb and cut the 
embryo to pieces.(71 ) First I cut the child in the 
womb into seven pieces, which became seven 
children. Then I cut each of the children into 
seven pieces again. By the grace of the Su-
preme Lord, however, none of them died.(72) 
My dear mother, when I saw that all forty -nine 
sons were alive, I was certainly struck with 
wonder. I decided that this was a secondary re-
sult of your having regularly executed devo-
tional service in worship of Lord Viṣṇu.(73) 
Although those who are interested only in wor-
shiping the Supreme Personality of  Godhead 
do not desire anything material from the Lord 
and do not even want liberation, Lord Kṛṣṇa 
fulfills all their desires.(74) The ultimate goal 
of all ambitions is to become a servant of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. If an intelli-
gent man serves  the most dear Lord, who gives 
Himself to His devotees, how can he desire ma-
terial happiness, which is available even in 
hell? (75) O my mother, O best of all women, I 
am a fool. Kindly excuse me for whatever of-
fenses I have committed. Your forty -nine sons  
have been born unhurt because of your devo-
tional service. As an enemy, I cut them to 
pieces, but because of your great devotional 
service they did not die.(76)  
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Diti was 
extremely satisfied by Indra’s good behavior. 
Then Indra offered his respects to his aunt with 
profuse obeisances, and with her permission he 
went away to the heavenly planets with his 
brothers the Maruts.(77) My dea r King 
Parīkṣit, I have replied as far as possible to the 
questions you have asked me, especially in re-
gard to this pure, auspicious narration about the 
Maruts. Now you may inquire further, and I 
shall explain more.(78)  
SB 6.19: Performing the Puṁsavana R itu-
alistic Ceremony  
Mahārāja Parīkṣit said: My dear lord, you 
have already spoken about the puṁsavana vow. Now I want to hear about it in detail, for I un-
derstand that by observing this vow one can 
please the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu.(1)  
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: On the first day of 
the bright fortnight of the month of Agrahāyaṇa 
[November -December], following the instruc-
tions of her husband, a woman should begin 
this regulative devotional service with a vow of 
penance, for it can fulfill all one’s desires. Be-
fore beginning the worship of Lord Viṣṇu, the 
woman should hear the story of how the Maruts 
were born. Under the instructions of qualified 
brāhmaṇas, in the morning she should wash her 
teeth, bathe, and dress herself with white cloth 
and ornaments, and before t aking breakfast she 
should worship Lord Viṣṇu and Lakṣmī.(2 -3) 
[She should then pray to the Lord as follows.] 
My dear Lord, You are full in all opulences, but 
I do not beg You for opulence. I simply offer 
my respectful obeisances unto You. You are the 
husb and and master of Lakṣmīdevī, the god-
dess of fortune, who has all opulences. There-
fore You are the master of all mystic yoga. I 
simply offer my obeisances unto You.(4) O my 
Lord, because You are endowed with causeless 
mercy, all opulences, all prowess and all glo-
ries, strength and transcendental qualities, You 
are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
master of everyone.(5) [After profusely offer-
ing obeisances unto Lord Viṣṇu, the devotee 
should offer respectful obeisances unto mother 
Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, and pray as fol-
lows.] O wife of Lord Viṣṇu, O internal energy 
of Lord Viṣṇu, you are as good as Lord Viṣṇu 
Himself, for you have all of His qualities and 
opulences. O goddess of fortune, please be kind 
to me. O mother of the entire world, I off er my 
respectful obeisances unto you.(6)  
 “My Lord Viṣṇu, full in six opulences, You 
are the best of all enjoyers and the most power-
ful. O husband of mother Lakṣmī, I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto You, who are ac-
companied by many associates, such as  
Viśvaksena. I offer all the paraphernalia for 
worshiping You.” One should chant this mantra 
every day with great attention while worship-
ing Lord Viṣṇu with all paraphernalia, such as 
water for washing His feet, hands and mouth 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

409 
 and water for His bath. One must offer Him 
various presentations for His worship, such as 
garments, a sacred thread, ornaments, scents, 
flowers, incense and lamps.(7) Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī continued: After worshiping the Lord 
with all the paraphernalia mentioned above, 
one should chant th e following mantra while 
offering twelve oblations of ghee on the sacred 
fire: oṁ namo bhagavate mahā -puruṣāya 
mahāvibhūti -pataye svāhā.(8) If one desires all 
opulences, his duty is to daily worship Lord 
Viṣṇu with His wife, Lakṣmī. With great devo-
tion one  should worship Him according to the 
above -mentioned process. Lord Viṣṇu and the 
goddess of fortune are an immensely powerful 
combination. They are the bestowers of all ben-
edictions and the sources of all good fortune. 
Therefore the duty of everyone is to worship 
Lakṣmī -Nārāyaṇa.(9) One should offer obei-
sances unto the Lord with a mind humbled 
through devotion. While offering daṇḍavats by 
falling on the ground like a rod, one should 
chant the above mantra ten times. Then one 
should chant the following praye r.(10)  
My Lord Viṣṇu and mother Lakṣmī, god-
dess of fortune, you are the proprietors of the 
entire creation. Indeed, you are the cause of the 
creation. Mother Lakṣmī is extremely difficult 
to understand because she is so powerful that 
the jurisdiction of h er power is difficult to over-
come. Mother Lakṣmī is represented in the ma-
terial world as the external energy, but actually 
she is always the internal energy of the 
Lord.(11) My Lord, You are the master of en-
ergy, and therefore You are the Supreme Per-
son. Y ou are sacrifice [yajña] personified. 
Lakṣmī, the embodiment of spiritual activities, 
is the original form of worship offered unto 
You, whereas You are the enjoyer of all sacri-
fices.(12) Mother Lakṣmī, who is here, is the 
reservoir of all spiritual qualiti es, whereas You 
manifest and enjoy all these qualities. Indeed, 
You are actually the enjoyer of everything. You 
live as the Supersoul of all living entities, and 
the goddess of fortune is the form of their bod-
ies, senses and minds. She also has a holy name  
and form, whereas You are the support of all 
such names and forms and the cause for their 
manifestation.(13) You are both the supreme rulers and benedictors of the three worlds. 
Therefore, my Lord, Uttamaśloka, may my am-
bitions be fulfilled by Your grace. (14) 
ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus one 
should worship Lord Viṣṇu, who is known as 
Śrīnivāsa, along with mother Lakṣmī, the god-
dess of fortune, by offering prayers according 
to the process mentioned above. After remov-
ing all the paraphernalia of worsh ip, one should 
offer them water to wash their hands and 
mouths, and then one should worship them 
again.(15) Thereafter, with devotion and hu-
mility, one should offer prayers to the Lord and 
mother Lakṣmī. Then one should smell the 
remnants of the food offer ed and then again 
worship the Lord and Lakṣmījī.(16) Accepting 
her husband as the representative of the Su-
preme Person, a wife should worship him with 
unalloyed devotion by offering him prasāda. 
The husband, being very pleased with his wife, 
should engage himself in the affairs of his fam-
ily.(17) Between the husband and wife, one 
person is sufficient to execute this devotional 
service. Because of their good relationship, 
both of them will enjoy the result. Therefore if 
the wife is unable to execute this pro cess, the 
husband should carefully do so, and the faithful 
wife will share the result.(18) One should ac-
cept this viṣṇu -vrata, which is a vow in devo-
tional service, and should not deviate from its 
execution to engage in anything else. By offer-
ing the remna nts of prasāda, flower garlands, 
sandalwood pulp and ornaments, one should 
daily worship the brāhmaṇas and worship 
women who peacefully live with their hus-
bands and children. Every day the wife must 
continue following the regulative principles to 
worship L ord Viṣṇu with great devotion. 
Thereafter, Lord Viṣṇu should be laid in His 
bed, and then one should take prasāda. In this 
way, husband and wife will be purified and will 
have all their desires fulfilled.(19 -20) The 
chaste wife must perform such devotional  ser-
vice continuously for one year. After one year 
passes, she should fast on the full -moon day in 
the month of Kārttika [October -Novem-
ber].(21) On the morning of the next day, one 
should wash oneself, and after worshiping Lord 
Kṛṣṇa as before, one should cook as one cooks 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

410 
 for festivals as stated in the Gṛhya -sūtras. 
Sweetrice should be cooked with ghee, and 
with this preparation the husband should offer 
oblations to the fire twelve times. (22) Thereaf-
ter, he should satisfy the brāhmaṇas. When the 
satisfied  brāhmaṇas bestow their blessings, he 
should devotedly offer them respectful obei-
sances with his head, and with their permission 
he should take prasāda.(23) Before taking his 
meal, the husband must first seat the ācārya 
comfortably, and, along with his rel atives and 
friends, should control his speech and offer 
prasāda to the guru. Then the wife should eat 
the remnants of the oblation of sweetrice 
cooked with ghee. Eating the remnants insures 
a learned, devoted son and all good fortune.(24) 
If this vow or ri tualistic ceremony is observed 
according to the description of śāstra, even in 
this life a man will be able to achieve all the 
benedictions he desires from the Lord. A wife 
who performs this ritualistic ceremony will 
surely receive good fortune, opulence, sons, a 
long-living husband, a good reputation and a 
good home.(25) If an unmarried girl observes 
this vrata, she will be able to get a very good 
husband. If a woman who is avīrāwho has no 
husband or sonexecutes this ritualistic cere-
mony, she can be promot ed to the spiritual 
world. A woman whose children have died af-
ter birth can get a child with a long duration of 
life and also become very fortunate in pos-
sessing wealth. If a woman is unfortunate she 
will become fortunate, and if ugly she will be-
come beaut iful. By observing this vrata, a dis-
eased man can gain relief from his disease and 
have an able body with which to work. If one 
recites this narration while offering oblations to 
the pitās and demigods, especially during the 
śrāddha ceremony, the demigods and inhabit-
ants of Pitṛloka will be extremely pleased with 
him and bestow upon him the fulfillment of all 
desires. After one performs this ritualistic cere-
mony, Lord Viṣṇu and His wife, mother 
Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, are very 
pleased with him. O Ki ng Parīkṣit, now I have 
completely described how Diti performed this 
ceremony and had good childrenthe Marutsand 
a happy life. I have tried to explain this to you 
as elaborately as possible.( 26-28)  Canto 7: The Science of God  
SB 7.1: The Supreme Lord Is Equal to 
Everyone  
SB 7.1: The Supreme Lord Is Equal to Eve-
ryone  

King Par īkṣit inquired: My dear br āhmaṇa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, 
being everyone’s well -wisher, is equal and ex-
tremely dear to everyone. How, then, did He 
become partial like a common man for the sake 
of Indra and thus kill Indra’s enemies? How can 
a person equal to everyone be partial to some 
and inimical toward others?  (1) Lord Vi ṣṇu 
Himself, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
is the reservoir of all pleasure. Therefore, what 
benefit would He derive from siding with the 
demigods? What interest would He fulfill in 
this way? Since the Lord is transcendental, why 
should He fear the asuras, and how could He be 
envious of th em?  (2) O greatly fortunate and 
learned br āhmaṇa, whether N ārāyaṇa is partial 
or impartial has become a subject of great 
doubt. Kindly dispel my doubt with positive ev-
idence that N ārāyaṇa is always neutral and 
equal to everyone.  (3)  

The great sage Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: My 
dear King, you have p ut before me an excellent 
question. Discourses concerning the activities 
of the Lord, in which the glories of His devo-
tees are also found, are extremely pleasing to 
devotees. Such wonderful topics always coun-
teract the miseries of the materialistic way of 
life. Therefore, great sages like N ārada always 
speak upon Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam because it 
gives one the facility to hear and chant about 
the wonderful activities of the Lord. Let me of-
fer my respectful obeisances unto Śrīla 
Vyāsadeva and then begin describing topics 
concerning the activities of Lord Hari.  (4 -5) 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, is 
always transcendental to material qualities, and 
therefore He is called nirgu ṇa, or without qual-
ities. Because He is unborn, He does not have a 
material body to be subjected to attachment a nd 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

411 
 hatred. Although the Lord is always above ma-
terial existence, through His spiritual potency 
He appeared and acted like an ordinary human 
being, accepting duties and obligations, appar-
ently like a conditioned soul.  (6) My dear King 
Parīkṣit, the materia l qualitiessattva -guṇa, rajo -
guṇa and tamo -guṇaall belong to the material 
world and do not even touch the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. These three gu ṇas cannot 
act by increasing or decreasing simultaneously.  
(7) When the quality of goodness is prominen t, 
the sages and demigods flourish with the help 
of that quality, with which they are infused and 
surcharged by the Supreme Lord. Similarly, 
when the mode of passion is prominent the de-
mons flourish, and when ignorance is promi-
nent the Yak ṣas and R ākṣasas flourish. The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead is present in 
everyone’s heart, fostering the reactions of 
sattva -guṇa, rajo -guṇa and tamo -guṇa.  (8) The 
all-pervading Personality of Godhead exists 
within the heart of every living being, and an 
expert thinker  can perceive how He is present 
there to a large or small extent. Just as one can 
understand the supply of fire in wood, the water 
in a waterpot, or the sky within a pot, one can 
understand whether a living entity is a demon 
or a demigod by understanding t hat living en-
tity’s devotional performances. A thoughtful 
man can understand how much a person is fa-
vored by the Supreme Lord by seeing his ac-
tions.  (9) When the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead creates different types of bodies, of-
fering a particular body to each living entity ac-
cording to his character and fruitive actions, the 
Lord revives all the qualities of material nature-
sattva -guṇa, rajo -guṇa and tamo -guṇa. Then, as 
the Supersoul, He enters each body and influ-
ences the qualities of creation, maintena nce and 
annihilation, using sattva -guṇa for mainte-
nance, rajo -guṇa for creation and tamo -guṇa 
for annihilation.  (10) O great King, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the controller of 
the material and spiritual energies, who is cer-
tainly the creator of t he entire cosmos, creates 
the time factor to allow the material energy and 
the living entity to act within the limits of time. 
Thus the Supreme Personality is never under 
the time factor nor under the material energy.  (11)  

O King, this time factor enhan ces the sattva -
guṇa. Thus although the Supreme Lord is the 
controller, He favors the demigods, who are 
mostly situated in sattva -guṇa. Then the de-
mons, who are influenced by tamo -guṇa, are 
annihilated. The Supreme Lord induces the 
time factor to act in dif ferent ways, but He is 
never partial. Rather, His activities are glori-
ous, and therefore He is called Uru śravā.  (12) 
Formerly, O King, when Mah ārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira 
was performing the R ājasūya sacrifice, the 
great sage N ārada, responding to his inquiry, 
recited historical facts showing how the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead is always impar-
tial, even when killing demons. In this regard 
he gave a vivid example.  (13) O King, at the 
Rājasūya sacrifice, Mah ārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, the 
son of Mah ārāja P āṇḍu, personally s aw 
Śiśupāla merge into the body of the Supreme 
Lord, K ṛṣṇa. Therefore, struck with wonder, he 
inquired about the reason for this from the great 
sage N ārada, who was seated there. While he 
inquired, all the sages present also heard him 
ask his question.  (1 4-15)  

Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira inquired: It is very 
wonderful that the demon Śiśupāla merged into 
the body of the Supreme Personality of God-
head even though extremely envious. This 
sāyujya -mukti is impossible to attain even for 
great transcendentalists. How then did the en-
emy of the Lord attain it?  (16) O great sage, we 
are all eager to know the cause for this mercy 
of the Lord. I have heard that formerly a king 
named Vena blasphemed the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead and that all the br āhmaṇas 
consequently obliged him to go to hell. 
Śiśupāla should also have been sent to hell. 
How then did he merge into the Lord’s exist-
ence?  (17) From the very beginning of his 
childhood, when he could not even speak 
properly, Śiśupāla, the most sinful son of 
Damagho ṣa, bega n blaspheming the Lord, and 
he continued to be envious of Śrī Kṛṣṇa until 
death. Similarly, his brother Dantavakra con-
tinued the same habits.  (18) Although these 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

412 
 two men Śiśupāla and Dantavakrarepeatedly 
blasphemed the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Lord Viṣṇu [K ṛṣṇa], the Supreme Brah-
man, they were quite healthy. Indeed, their 
tongues were not attacked by white leprosy, nor 
did they enter the darkest region of hellish life. 
We are certainly most surprised by this.  (19) 
How was it possible for Śiśupāla an d Danta-
vakra, in the presence of many exalted persons, 
to enter very easily into the body of K ṛṣṇa, 
whose nature is difficult to attain?  (20)  

This matter is undoubtedly very wonderful. 
Indeed, my intelligence has become disturbed, 
just as the flame of a  candle is disturbed by a 
blowing wind. O N ārada Muni, you know eve-
rything. Kindly let me know the cause of this 
wonderful event.  (21)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī said: After hearing 
the request of Mah ārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, N ārada 
Muni, the most powerful spiritual master, who 
knew everything, was very pleased. Thus he re-
plied in the presence of everyone taking part in 
the yajña.  (22)  

The great sage Śrī Nāradaj ī said: O King, 
blasphemy and praise, chastisement and re-
spect, are experienced because of ignorance. 
The body of the conditioned soul is planned by 
the Lord for suffering in the material world 
through the agency of the external energy.  (23) 
My dear King, the conditioned soul, being in 
the bodily conception of life, considers his 
body to be his self and cons iders everything in 
relationship with the body to be his. Because he 
has this wrong conception of life, he is sub-
jected to dualities like praise and chastisement.  
(24) Because of the bodily conception of life, 
the conditioned soul thinks that when the bod y 
is annihilated the living being is annihilated. 
Lord Vi ṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, is the supreme controller, the Supersoul 
of all living entities. Because He has no mate-
rial body, He has no false conception of “I and 
mine.” It is therefore incorrect to think that He feels pleasure or pain when blasphemed or of-
fered prayers. This is impossible for Him. Thus 
He has no enemy and no friend. When He chas-
tises the demons it is for their good, and when 
He accepts the prayers of the devotees it is f or 
their good. He is affected neither by prayers nor 
by blasphemy.  (25) Therefore by enmity or by 
devotional service, by fear, by affection or by 
lusty desireby all of these or any one of themif 
a conditioned soul somehow or other concen-
trates his mind up on the Lord, the result is the 
same, for the Lord, because of His blissful po-
sition, is never affected by enmity or friend-
ship.  (26) N ārada Muni continued: By devo-
tional service one cannot achieve such intense 
absorption in thought of the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead as one can through enmity to-
ward Him. That is my opinion.  (27) A grass-
worm confined in a hole of a wall by a bee al-
ways thinks of the bee in fear and enmity and 
later becomes a bee simply because of such re-
membrance. Similarly, if the condi tioned souls 
somehow or other think of K ṛṣṇa, who is sac -
cid-ānanda -vigraha, they will become free 
from their sins. Whether thinking of Him as 
their worshipable Lord or an enemy, because of 
constantly thinking of Him they will regain 
their spiritual bodies .  (28 -29) Many, many per-
sons have attained liberation simply by think-
ing of K ṛṣṇa with great attention and giving up 
sinful activities. This great attention may be 
due to lusty desires, inimical feelings, fear, af-
fection or devotional service. I shall now  ex-
plain how one receives K ṛṣṇa’s mercy simply 
by concentrating one’s mind upon Him.  (30) 
My dear King Yudhi ṣṭhira, the gop īs by their 
lusty desires, Ka ṁsa by his fear, Śiśupāla and 
other kings by envy, the Yadus by their familial 
relationship with K ṛṣṇa, you P āṇḍavas by your 
great affection for K ṛṣṇa, and we, the general 
devotees, by our devotional service, have ob-
tained the mercy of K ṛṣṇa.  (31) Somehow or 
other, one must consider the form of K ṛṣṇa very 
seriously. Then, by one of the five different 
proce sses mentioned above, one can return 
home, back to Godhead. Atheists like King 
Vena, however, being unable to think of 
Kṛṣṇa’s form in any of these five ways, cannot 
attain salvation. Therefore, one must somehow 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

413 
 think of K ṛṣṇa, whether in a friendly way or  in-
imically.  (32)  

Nārada Muni continued: O best of the 
Pāṇḍavas, your two cousins Śiśupāla and Dan-
tavakra, the sons of your maternal aunt, were 
formerly associates of Lord Vi ṣṇu, but because 
they were cursed by br āhmaṇas, they fell from 
Vaiku ṇṭha to thi s material world.  (33)  

Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira inquired: What kind 
of great curse could affect even liberated vi ṣṇu-
bhaktas, and what sort of person could curse 
even the Lord’s associates? For unflinching 
devotees of the Lord to fall again to this mate-
rial world is impossible. I cannot believe this.  
(34) The bodies of the inhabitants of Vaiku ṇṭha 
are completely spiritual, having nothing to do 
with the material body, senses or life air. There-
fore, kindly explain how associates of the Per-
sonality of Godhead were cursed to descend in 
material bodies like ordinary persons.  (35)  

The great saint N ārada said: Once upon a 
time when the four sons of Lord Brahm ā named 
Sanaka, Sanandana, San ātana and Sanat -
kumāra were wandering throughout the three 
worlds, they cam e by chance to Vi ṣṇuloka.  
(36) Although these four great sages were older 
than Brahm ā’s other sons like Mar īci, they 
appeared like small naked children only five or 
six years old. When Jaya and Vijaya saw them 
trying to enter Vaiku ṇṭhaloka, these two gate-
keepers, thinking them ordinary children, for-
bade them to enter.  (37) Thus checked by the 
doorkeepers Jaya and Vijaya, Sanandana and 
the other great sages very angrily cursed them. 
“You two foolish doorkeepers,” they said. “Be-
ing agitated by the material qualities of passion 
and ignorance, you are unfit to live at the shel-
ter of Madhudvi ṣa’s lotus feet, which are free 
from such modes. It would be better for you to 
go immediately to the material world and take 
your birth in a family of most sinful asuras.”  
(38)  
 While Jaya and Vijaya, thus cursed by the 
sages, were falling to the material world, they 
were addressed as follows by the same sages, 
who were very kind to them. “O doorkeepers, 
after three births you will be able to return to 
your positions in Va ikuṇṭha, for then the dura-
tion of the curse will have ended.”  (39) These 
two associates of the LordJaya and Vijayalater 
descended to the material world, taking birth as 
the two sons of Diti, Hira ṇyaka śipu being the 
elder and Hira ṇyākṣa the younger. They w ere 
very much respected by the Daityas and D āna-
vas [demoniac species].  (40) Appearing as 
Nṛsiṁhadeva, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Śrī Hari, killed Hira ṇyaka śipu. When the 
Lord delivered the planet earth, which had 
fallen in the Garbhodaka Ocean, H iraṇyākṣa 
tried to hinder Him, and then the Lord, as 
Varāha, killed Hira ṇyākṣa.  (41) Desiring to kill 
his son Prahl āda, who was a great devotee of 
Lord Vi ṣṇu, Hira ṇyaka śipu tortured him in 
many ways.  (42)  

The Lord, the Supersoul of all living enti-
ties, is sober, peaceful and equal to everyone. 
Since the great devotee Prahl āda was protected 
by the Lord’s potency, Hira ṇyaka śipu was un-
able to kill him, in spite of endeavoring to do so 
in various ways.  (43) Thereafter the same Jaya 
and Vijaya, the two door keepers of Lord Vi ṣṇu, 
took birth as R āvaṇa and Kumbhakar ṇa, begot-
ten by Vi śravā in the womb of Ke śinī. They 
were extremely troublesome to all the people of 
the universe.  (44) N ārada Muni continued: My 
dear King, just to relieve Jaya and Vijaya of the 
brāhmaṇas’ curse, Lord R āmacandra appeared 
in order to kill R āvaṇa and Kumbhakar ṇa. It 
will be better for you to hear narrations about 
Lord R āmacandra’s activities from 
Mārkaṇḍeya.  (45) In their third birth, the same 
Jaya and Vijaya appeared in a family of k ṣatri-
yas as your cousins, the sons of your aunt. Be-
cause Lord K ṛṣṇa has struck them with His 
disc, all their sinful reactions have been de-
stroyed, and now they are free from the curse.  
(46) These two associates of Lord Vi ṣṇuJaya 
and Vijayamaintained a fee ling of enmity for a 
very long time. Because of always thinking of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

414 
 Kṛṣṇa in this way, they regained the shelter of 
the Lord, having returned home, back to God-
head.  (47)  

Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira inquired: O my lord, 
Nārada Muni, why was there such enmity be-
tween Hira ṇyaka śipu and his beloved son Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja? How did Prahl āda Mah ārāja be-
come such a great devotee of Lord K ṛṣṇa? 
Kindly explain this to me.  (48)  

SB 7.2: Hira ṇyaka śipu, King of the Demons  

Śrī Nārada Muni said: My dear King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, whe n Lord Vi ṣṇu, in the form of 
Varāha, the boar, killed Hira ṇyākṣa, 
Hiraṇyākṣa’s brother Hira ṇyaka śipu was ex-
tremely angry and began to lament.  (1) Filled 
with rage and biting his lips, Hira ṇyaka śipu 
gazed at the sky with eyes that blazed in anger, 
making t he whole sky smoky. Thus he began to 
speak.  (2) Exhibiting his terrible teeth, fierce 
glance and frowning eyebrows, terrible to see, 
he took up his weapon, a trident, and thus began 
speaking to his associates, the assembled de-
mons.  (3) O D ānavas and Dait yas! O 
Dvim ūrdha, Tryak ṣa, Śambara and Śatabāhu! 
O Hayagr īva, Namuci, P āka and Ilvala! O 
Vipracitti, Puloman, Śakuna and other demons! 
All of you, kindly hear me attentively and then 
act according to my words without delay.  (4 -
5) My insignificant enemies the demigods have 
combined to kill my very dear and obedient 
well-wisher, my brother Hira ṇyākṣa. Although 
the Supreme Lord, Vi ṣṇu, is always equal to 
both of usnamely, the demigods and the 
demonsthis time, being devoutly worshiped by 
the demigods, He has t aken their side and 
helped them kill Hira ṇyākṣa.  (6) The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead has given up His natu-
ral tendency of equality toward the demons and 
demigods. Although He is the Supreme Person, 
now, influenced by m āyā, He has assumed the 
form of a boar to please His devotees, the dem-
igods, just as a restless child leans toward 
someone. I shall therefore sever Lord Vi ṣṇu’s 
head from His trunk by my trident, and with the profuse blood from His body I shall please my 
brother Hira ṇyākṣa, who was so fond  of suck-
ing blood. Thus shall I too be peaceful.  (7 -8) 
When the root of a tree is cut and the tree falls 
down, its branches and twigs automatically dry 
up. Similarly, when I have killed this diplo-
matic Vi ṣṇu, the demigods, for whom Lord 
Viṣṇu is the life and soul, will lose the source 
of their life and wither away.  (9) While I am 
engaged in the business of killing Lord Vi ṣṇu, 
go down to the planet earth, which is flourish-
ing due to brahminical culture and a k ṣatriya 
government. These people engage in aust erity, 
sacrifice, Vedic study, regulative vows, and 
charity. Destroy all the people thus engaged!  
(10) The basic principle of brahminical culture 
is to satisfy Lord Vi ṣṇu, the personification of 
sacrificial and ritualistic ceremonies. Lord 
Viṣṇu is the pe rsonified reservoir of all reli-
gious principles, and He is the shelter of all the 
demigods, the great pit ās, and the people in 
general. When the br āhmaṇas are killed, no one 
will exist to encourage the k ṣatriyas to perform 
yajñas, and thus the demigods, no t being ap-
peased by yajña, will automatically die.  (11) 
Immediately go wherever there is good protec-
tion for the cows and br āhmaṇas and wherever 
the Vedas are studied in terms of the 
varṇāśrama principles. Set fire to those places 
and cut from the roots t he trees there, which are 
the source of life.  (12)  

Thus the demons, being fond of disastrous 
activities, took Hira ṇyaka śipu’s instructions on 
their heads with great respect and offered him 
obeisances. According to his directions, they 
engaged in envious  activities directed against 
all living beings.  (13) The demons set fire to 
the cities, villages, pasturing grounds, 
cowpens, gardens, agricultural fields and natu-
ral forests. They burned the hermitages of the 
saintly persons, the important mines that pro-
duced valuable metals, the residential quarters 
of the agriculturalists, the mountain villages, 
and the villages of the cow protectors, the cow-
herd men. They also burned the government 
capitals.  (14) Some of the demons took digging 
instruments and broke d own the bridges, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

415 
 protective walls and the gates [gopuras] of the 
cities. Some took axes and began cutting the 
important trees that produced mango, jackfruit 
and other sources of food. Some of the demons 
took firebrands and set fire to the residential 
quarters of the citizens.  ( 15) Thus disturbed 
again and again by the unnatural occurrences 
caused by the followers of Hira ṇyaka śipu, all 
the people had to cease the activities of Vedic 
culture. Not receiving the results of yajña, the 
demigods also became disturbed. They left 
their r esidential quarters in the heavenly plan-
ets and, unobserved by the demons, began wan-
dering on the planet earth to see the disasters.  
(16)  

After performing the ritualistic observances 
for the death of his brother, Hira ṇyaka śipu, be-
ing extremely unhappy, tried to pacify his 
nephews.  (17) O King, Hira ṇyaka śipu was ex-
tremely angry, but since he was a great politi-
cian, he knew how to act according to the time 
and situation. With sweet words he began pac-
ifying his nephews, whose names were Śakuni, 
Śambara, Dh ṛṣṭi, Bh ūtasant āpana, V ṛka, 
Kālanābha, Mah ānābha, Hari śmaśru and Ut-
kaca. He also consoled their mother, his sister -
in-law, Ru ṣābhānu, as well as his own mother, 
Diti. He spoke to them all as follows.  (18 -19)  

Hiraṇyaka śipu said: My dear mother, sister -
in-law and nephews, you should not lament for 
the death of the great hero, for a hero’s death in 
front of his enemy is glorious and desirable.  
(20) My dear mother, in a restaurant or place 
for drinking cold water, many travelers are 
brought together, and af ter drinking water they 
continue to their respective destinations. Simi-
larly, living entities join together in a family, 
and later, as a result of their own actions, they 
are led apart to their destinations.  (21) The 
spirit soul, the living entity, has no  death, for he 
is eternal and inexhaustible. Being free from 
material contamination, he can go anywhere in 
the material or spiritual worlds. He is fully 
aware and completely different from the mate-
rial body, but because of being misled by mis-
use of his sli ght independence, he is obliged to accept subtle and gross bodies created by the 
material energy and thus be subjected to so -
called material happiness and distress. There-
fore, no one should lament for the passing of 
the spirit soul from the body.  (22) Bec ause of 
the movements of the water, the trees on the 
bank of a river, when reflected on the water, 
seem to move. Similarly, when the eyes move 
because of some mental derangement, the land 
appears to move also.  (23) In the same way, O 
my gentle mother, whe n the mind is agitated by 
the movements of the modes of material nature, 
the living entity, although freed from all the dif-
ferent phases of the subtle and gross bodies, 
thinks that he has changed from one condition 
to another.  (24) In his bewildered state , the liv-
ing entity, accepting the body and mind to be 
the self, considers some people to be his kins-
men and others to be outsiders. Because of this 
misconception, he suffers. Indeed, the accumu-
lation of such concocted material ideas is the 
cause of suffer ing and so -called happiness in 
the material world. The conditioned soul thus 
situated must take birth in different species and 
work in various types of consciousness, thus 
creating new bodies. This continued material 
life is called sa ṁsāra. Birth, death, l amentation, 
foolishness and anxiety are due to such material 
considerations. Thus we sometimes come to a 
proper understanding and sometimes fall again 
to a wrong conception of life.  (25 -26) In this 
regard, an example is given from an old history. 
This inv olves a discourse between Yamar āja 
and the friends of a dead person. Please hear it 
attentively.  (27)  

In the state known as U śīnara there was a 
celebrated king named Suyajña. When the King 
was killed in battle by his enemies, his kinsmen 
sat down around the dead body and began to 
lament the death of their friend.  (28) His 
golden, bejeweled armor smashed, his orna-
ments and garlands fallen from their places, his 
hair scattered and his eyes lusterless, the slain 
King lay on the battlefield, his entire body 
smeared with blood, his heart pierced by the ar-
rows of the enemy. When he died he had 
wanted to show his prowess, and thus he had 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

416 
 bitten his lips, and his teeth remained in that po-
sition. His beautiful lotuslike face was now 
black and covered with dust from the battle-
field. His arms, w ith his sword and other weap-
ons, were cut and broken. When the queens of 
the King of U śīnara saw their husband lying in 
that position, they began crying, “O lord, now 
that you have been killed, we also have been 
killed.” Repeating these words again and aga in, 
they fell down, pounding their breasts, at the 
feet of the dead King.  (29 -31)  

As the queens loudly cried, their tears glided 
down their breasts, becoming reddened by 
kuṅkuma powder, and fell upon the lotus feet 
of their husband. Their hair became di sarrayed, 
their ornaments fell, and in a way that evoked 
sympathy from the hearts of others, the queens 
began lamenting their husband’s death.  (32) O 
lord, you have now been removed by cruel 
providence to a state beyond our sight. You had 
previously susta ined the livelihood of the in-
habitants of U śīnara, and thus they were happy, 
but your condition now is the cause of their un-
happiness.  (33) O King, O hero, you were a 
very grateful husband and the most sincere 
friend of all of us. How shall we exist without 
you? O hero, wherever you are going, ple ase 
direct us there so that we may follow in your 
footsteps and engage again in your service. Let 
us go along with you!  (34) The time was ap-
propriate for the body to be burned, but the 
queens, not allowing it to be taken away, con-
tinued lamenting for the dead body, which they 
kept on their laps. In the meantime, the sun 
completed its movements for setting in the 
west.  (35) While the queens were lamenting 
for the dead body of the King, their loud cries 
were heard even from the abode of Yamar āja. 
Assuming the body of a boy, Yamar āja person-
ally approached the relatives of the dead body 
and advised them as follows.  (36)  

Śrī Yamar āja said: Alas, how amazing it is! 
These persons, who are older than me, have full 
experience that hundreds and tho usands of liv-
ing entities have taken birth and died. Thus they 
should understand that they also are apt to die, yet still they are bewildered. The conditioned 
soul comes from an unknown place and returns 
after death to that same unknown place. There 
is no exception to this rule, which is conducted 
by material nature. Knowing this, why do they 
uselessly lament?  (37) It is wonderful that 
these elderly women do not have a higher sense 
of life than we do. Indeed, we are most fortu-
nate, for although we are chil dren and have 
been left to struggle in material life, unpro-
tected by father and mother, and although we 
are very weak, we have not been vanquished or 
eaten by ferocious animals. Thus we have a 
firm belief that the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who has gi ven us protection even in 
the womb of the mother, will protect us every-
where.  (38) The boy addressed the women: O 
weak women! Only by the will of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is never dimin-
ished, is the entire world created, maintained 
and agai n annihilated. This is the verdict of the 
Vedic knowledge. This material creation, con-
sisting of the moving and nonmoving, is ex-
actly like His plaything. Being the Supreme 
Lord, He is completely competent to destroy 
and protect.  (39) Sometimes one loses h is 
money on a public street, where everyone can 
see it, and yet his money is protected by destiny 
and not seen by others. Thus the man who lost 
it gets it back. On the other hand, if the Lord 
does not give protection, even money main-
tained very securely at  home is lost. If the Su-
preme Lord gives one protection, even though 
one has no protector and is in the jungle, one 
remains alive, whereas a person well protected 
at home by relatives and others sometimes dies, 
no one being able to protect him.  (40)  

Every conditioned soul receives a different 
type of body according to his work, and when 
the engagement is finished the body is finished. 
Although the spirit soul is situated in subtle and 
gross material bodies in different forms of life, 
he is not bound by t hem, for he is always un-
derstood to be completely different from the 
manifested body.  (41) Just as a householder, 
although different from the identity of his 
house, thinks his house to be identical with him, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

417 
 so the conditioned soul, due to ignorance, ac-
cepts the body to be himself, although the body 
is actually different from the soul. This body is 
obtained through a combination of portions of 
earth, water and fire, and when the earth, water 
and fire are transformed in the course of time, 
the body is vanqu ished. The soul has nothing to 
do with this creation and dissolution of the 
body.  (42) As fire, although situated in wood, 
is perceived to be different from the wood, as 
air, although situated within the mouth and nos-
trils, is perceived to be separate, an d as the sky, 
although all -pervading, never mixes with any-
thing, so the living entity, although now en-
caged within the material body, of which it is 
the source, is separate from it.  (43)  

Yamar āja continued: O lamenters, you are 
all fools! The person named Suyajña, for whom 
you lament, is still lying before you and has not 
gone anywhere. Then what is the cause for your 
lamentation? Previously he heard you and re-
plied to you, but now, not finding  him, you are 
lamenting. This is contradictory behavior, for 
you have never actually seen the person within 
the body who heard you and replied. There is 
no need for your lamentation, for the body you 
have always seen is lying here.  (44) In the body 
the mo st important substance is the life air, but 
that also is neither the listener nor the speaker. 
Beyond even the life air, the soul also can do 
nothing, for the Supersoul is actually the direc-
tor, in cooperation with the individual soul. The 
Supersoul conduc ting the activities of the body 
is different from the body and living force.  (45) 
The five material elements, the ten senses and 
the mind all combine to form the various parts 
of the gross and subtle bodies. The living entity 
comes in contact with his mat erial bodies, 
whether high or low, and later gives them up by 
his personal prowess. This strength can be per-
ceived in a living entity’s personal power to 
possess different types of bodies.  (46) As long 
as the spirit soul is covered by the subtle body, 
consisting of the mind, intelligence and false 
ego, he is bound to the results of his fruitive ac-
tivities. Because of this covering, the spirit soul 
is connected with the material energy and must accordingly suffer material conditions and re-
versals, continual ly, life after life.  (47) It is 
fruitless to see and talk of the material modes 
of nature and their resultant so -called happiness 
and distress as if they were factual. When the 
mind wanders during the day and a man begins 
to think himself extremely import ant, or when 
he dreams at night and sees a beautiful woman 
enjoying with him, these are merely false 
dreams. Similarly, the happiness and distress 
caused by the material senses should be under-
stood to be meaningless.  (48) Those who have 
full knowledge of self-realization, who know 
very well that the spirit soul is eternal whereas 
the body is perishable, are not overwhelmed by 
lamentation. But persons who lack knowledge 
of self -realization certainly lament. Therefore it 
is difficult to educate a person in i llusion.  (49)  

There was once a hunter who lured birds 
with food and captured them after spreading a 
net. He lived as if appointed by death personi-
fied as the killer of the birds.  (50) While wan-
dering in the forest, the hunter saw a pair of 
kuliṅga bird s. Of the two, the female was cap-
tivated by the hunter’s lure.  (51) O queens of 
Suyajña, the male kuli ṅga bird, seeing his wife 
put into the greatest danger in the grip of Prov-
idence, became very unhappy. Because of af-
fection, the poor bird, being unable to release 
her, began to lament for his wife.  (52) Alas, 
how merciless is Providence! My wife, unable 
to be helped by anyone, is in such an awkward 
position and lamenting for me. What will Prov-
idence gain by taking away this poor bird? 
What will be the pr ofit?  (53) If unkind Provi-
dence takes away my wife, who is half my 
body, why should He not take me also? What is 
the use of my living with half of my body, be-
reaved by loss of my wife? What shall I gain in 
this way?  (54) The unfortunate baby birds, be-
reft of their mother, are waiting in the nest for 
her to feed them. They are still very small and 
have not yet grown their wings. How shall I be 
able to maintain them?  (55) Because of the loss 
of his wife, the kuli ṅga bird lamented with tears 
in his eyes. Me anwhile, following the dicta-
tions of mature time, the hunter, who was very 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

418 
 carefully hidden in the distance, released his ar-
row, which pierced the body of the kuli ṅga bird 
and killed him.  (56) Thus Yamar āja, in the 
guise of a small boy, told all the queen s: You 
are all so foolish that you lament but do not see 
your own death. Afflicted by a poor fund of 
knowledge, you do not know that even if you 
lament for your dead husband for hundreds of 
years, you will never get him back alive, and in 
the meantime your  lives will be finished.  (57)  

Hiraṇyaka śipu said: While Yamar āja, in the 
form of a small boy, was instructing all the rel-
atives surrounding the dead body of Suyajña, 
everyone was struck with wonder by his philo-
sophical words. They could understand that 
everything material is temporary,  not continu-
ing to exist.  (58) After instructing all the fool-
ish relatives of Suyajña, Yamar āja, in the form 
of a boy, disappeared from their vision. Then 
the relatives of King Suyajña performed the rit-
ualistic funeral ceremonies.  (59) Therefore 
none of you should be aggrieved for the loss of 
the bodywhether your own or those of others. 
Only in ignorance does one make bodily dis-
tinctions, thinking “Who am I? Who are the 
others? What is mine? What is for others?”  
(60)  

Śrī Nārada Muni continued: Diti, th e mother 
of Hira ṇyaka śipu and Hira ṇyākṣa, heard the in-
structions of Hira ṇyaka śipu along with her 
daughter -in-law, Ru ṣābhānu, Hira ṇyākṣa’s 
wife. She then forgot her grief over her son’s 
death and thus engaged her mind and attention 
in understanding the real  philosophy of life.  
(61)  

SB 7.3: Hira ṇyaka śipu’s Plan to Become 
Immortal  

Nārada Muni said to Mah ārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira: 
The demoniac king Hira ṇyaka śipu wanted to be 
unconquerable and free from old age and dwin-
dling of the body. He wanted to gain all the yo-
gic perfections like a ṇimā and laghim ā, to be deathless, and to be the only king of the entire 
universe, including Brahmaloka.  (1) In the val-
ley of Mandara Hill, Hira ṇyaka śipu began per-
forming his austerities by standing with his toes 
on the ground, keepi ng his arms upward and 
looking toward the sky. This position was ex-
tremely difficult, but he accepted it as a means 
to attain perfection.  (2) From the hair on 
Hiraṇyaka śipu’s head there emanated an efful-
gent light as brilliant and intolerable as the rays 
of the sun at the time of dissolution. Seeing the 
performance of such austere penances, the 
demigods, who had been wandering throughout 
the planets, now returned to their respective 
homes.  (3) Because of Hira ṇyaka śipu’s severe 
austerities, fire came from his head, and this 
fire and its smoke spread throughout the sky, 
encompassing the upper and lower planets, 
which all became extremely hot.  (4) Because 
of the power of his severe austerities, all the riv-
ers and oceans were agitated, the surface of the 
globe, with its mountains and islands, began 
trembling, and the stars and planets fell. All di-
rections were ablaze.  (5)  

Scorched and extremely disturbed because 
of Hira ṇyaka śipu’s severe penances, all the 
demigods left the planets where they reside and 
went to the planet of Lord Brahm ā, where they 
informed the creator as follows: O lord of the 
demigods, O master of the univ erse, because of 
the fire emanating from Hira ṇyaka śipu’s head 
as a result of his severe austerities, we have be-
come so disturbed that we could not stay in our 
planets but have come to you.  (6) O great per-
son, chief of the universe, if you think it proper,  
kindly stop these disturbances, meant to de-
stroy everything, before all your obedient sub-
jects are annihilated.  (7) Hira ṇyaka śipu has un-
dertaken a most severe type of austerity. Alt-
hough his plan is not unknown to you, kindly 
listen as we submit his inte ntions.  (8) “The su-
preme person within this universe, Lord 
Brahm ā, has gotten his exalted post by dint of 
severe austerities, mystic power and trance. 
Consequently, after creating the universe, he 
has become the most worshipable demigod 
within it. Since I  am eternal and time is eternal, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

419 
 I shall endeavor for such austerity, mystic 
power and trance for many, many births, and 
thus I shall occupy the same post occupied by 
Lord Brahm ā.  (9-10) “By dint of my severe 
austerities, I shall reverse the results of pi ous 
and impious activities. I shall overturn all the 
established practices within this world. Even 
Dhruvaloka will be vanquished at the end of the 
millennium. Therefore, what is the use of it? I 
shall prefer to remain in the position of 
Brahm ā.”  (11) O lo rd, we have heard from re-
liable sources that in order to obtain your post, 
Hiraṇyaka śipu is now engaged in severe auster-
ity. You are the master of the three worlds. 
Please, without delay, take whatever steps you 
deem appropriate.  (12) O Lord Brahm ā, your 
position within this universe is certainly most 
auspicious for everyone, especially the cows 
and br āhmaṇas. Brahminical culture and the 
protection of cows can be increasingly glori-
fied, and thus all kinds of material happiness, 
opulence and good fortune wi ll automatically 
increase. But unfortunately, if Hira ṇyaka śipu 
occupies your seat, everything will be lost.  (13)  

O King, being thus informed by the demi-
gods, the most powerful Lord Brahm ā, accom-
panied by Bh ṛgu, Dak ṣa and other great sages, 
immediately s tarted for the place where 
Hiraṇyaka śipu was performing his penances 
and austerities.  (14) Lord Brahm ā, who is car-
ried by a swan airplane, at first could not see 
where Hira ṇyaka śipu was, for Hira ṇyaka śipu’s 
body was covered by an anthill and by grass 
and bamboo sticks. Because Hira ṇyaka śipu had 
been there for a long time, the ants had de-
voured his skin, fat, flesh and blood. Then Lord 
Brahm ā and the demigods spotted him, resem-
bling a cloud -covered sun, heating all the world 
by his austerity. Struck with wo nder, Lord 
Brahm ā began to smile and then addressed him 
as follows.  (15 -16)  

Lord Brahm ā said: O son of Ka śyapa Muni, 
please get up, please get up. All good fortune 
unto you. You are now perfect in the perfor-
mance of your austerities, and therefore I may  
give you a benediction. You may now ask from me whatever you desire, and I shall try to fulfill 
your wish.  (17) I have been very much aston-
ished to see your endurance. In spite of being 
eaten and bitten by all kinds of worms and ants, 
you are keeping you r life air circulating within 
your bones. Certainly this is wonderful.  (18) 
Even saintly persons like Bhṛgu, born previ-
ously, could not perform such severe austeri-
ties, nor will anyone in the future be able to do 
so. Who within these three worlds can sustain 
his life without even drinking water for one 
hundred celestial years?  (19) My dear son of 
Diti, wi th your great determination and auster-
ity you have done what was impossible even for 
great saintly persons, and thus I have certainly 
been conquered by you.  (20) O best of the 
asuras, for this reason I am now prepared to 
give you all benedictions, accordi ng to your de-
sire. I belong to the celestial world of demi-
gods, who do not die like human beings. There-
fore, although you are subject to death, your au-
dience with me will not go in vain.  (21)  

Śrī Nārada Muni continued: After speaking 
these words to Hira ṇyaka śipu, Lord Brahm ā, 
the original being of this universe, who is ex-
tremely powerful, sprinkled transcendental, in-
fallible, spiritual water from his kama ṇḍalu 
upon Hira ṇyaka śipu’s body, which h ad been 
eaten away by ants and moths. Thus he enliv-
ened Hira ṇyaka śipu.  (22) As soon as he was 
sprinkled with the water from Lord Brahm ā’s 
waterpot, Hira ṇyaka śipu arose, endowed with a 
full body with limbs so strong that they could 
bear the striking of a t hunderbolt. With physi-
cal strength and a bodily luster resembling mol-
ten gold, he emerged from the anthill a com-
pletely young man, just as fire springs from fuel 
wood.  (23) Seeing Lord Brahm ā present before 
him in the sky, carried by his swan airplane, 
Hiraṇyaka śipu was extremely pleased. He im-
mediately fell flat with his head on the ground 
and began to express his obligation to the lord.  
(24) Then, getting up from the ground and see-
ing Lord Brahm ā before him, the head of the 
Daityas was overwhelmed by ju bilation. With 
tears in his eyes, his whole body shivering, he 
began praying in a humble mood, with folded 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

420 
 hands and a faltering voice, to satisfy Lord 
Brahm ā.  (25)  

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto 
the supreme lord within this universe. At the  
end of each day of his life, the universe is fully 
covered with dense darkness by the influence 
of time, and then again, during his next day, 
that self -effulgent lord, by his own effulgence, 
manifests, maintains and destroys the entire 
cosmic manifestatio n through the material en-
ergy, which is invested with the three modes of 
material nature. He, Lord Brahm ā, is the shelter 
of those modes of naturesattva -guṇa, rajo -guṇa 
and tamo -guṇa.  (26 -27) I offer my obeisances 
to the original personality within this universe, 
Lord Brahm ā, who is cognizant and who can 
apply his mind and realized intelligence in cre-
ating this cosmic manifestation. It is because of 
his activities that everything within the uni-
verse is visible. He is therefore the cause of all 
manifestations.  (28) Your Lordship, being the 
origin of the life of this material world, is the 
master and controll er of the living entities, both 
moving and stationary, and you inspire their 
consciousness. You maintain the mind and the 
acting and knowledge -acquiring senses, and 
therefore you are the great controller of all the 
material elements and their qualities, an d you 
are the controller of all desires.  (29) My dear 
lord, by your form as the Vedas personified and 
through knowledge relating to the activities of 
all the yajñic br āhmaṇas, you spread the Vedic 
ritualistic ceremonies of the seven kinds of sac-
rifices, h eaded by agni ṣṭoma. Indeed, you in-
spire the yajñic br āhmaṇas to perform the ritu-
als mentioned in the three Vedas. Being the Su-
preme Soul, the Supersoul of all living entities, 
you are beginningless, endless and omniscient, 
beyond the limits of time and spa ce.  (30) O my 
lord, Your Lordship is eternally awake, seeing 
everything that happens. As eternal time, you 
reduce the duration of life for all living entities 
through your different parts, such as moments, 
seconds, minutes and hours. Nonetheless, you 
are unchanged, resting in one place as the Su-
persoul, witness and Supreme Lord, the birth-
less, all -pervading controller who is the cause of life for all living entities.  (31) There is noth-
ing separate from you, whether it be better or 
lower, stationary or mov ing. The knowledge 
derived from the Vedic literatures like the 
Upani ṣads, and from all the sub -limbs of the 
original Vedic knowledge, form your external 
body. You are Hira ṇyagarbha, the reservoir of 
the universe, but nonetheless, being situated as 
the supr eme controller, you are transcendental 
to the material world, which consists of the 
three modes of material nature.  (32) O my lord, 
being changelessly situated in your own abode, 
you expand your universal form within this 
cosmic manifestation, thus appear ing to taste 
the material world. You are Brahman, the Su-
persoul, the oldest, the Personality of Godhead.  
(33) Let me offer my respectful obeisances 
unto the Supreme, who in his unlimited, un-
manifested form has expanded the cosmic man-
ifestation, the form o f the totality of the uni-
verse. He possesses external and internal ener-
gies and the mixed energy called the marginal 
potency, which consists of all the living enti-
ties.  (34)  

O my lord, O best of the givers of benedic-
tion, if you will kindly grant me the  benediction 
I desire, please let me not meet death from any 
of the living entities created by you.  (35) Grant 
me that I not die within any residence or outside 
any residence, during the daytime or at night, 
nor on the ground or in the sky. Grant me that 
my death not be brought by any being other 
than those created by you, nor by any weapon, 
nor by any human being or animal.  (36) Grant 
me that I not meet death from any entity, living 
or nonliving. Grant me, further, that I not be 
killed by any demigod or demon or by any great 
snake from the lower planets. Since no one can 
kill you in the battlefield, you have no compet-
itor. Therefore, grant me the benediction that I 
too may have no rival. Give me sole lordship 
over all the living entities and presiding dei ties, 
and give me all the glories obtained by that po-
sition. Furthermore, give me all the mystic 
powers attained by long austerities and the 
practice of yoga, for these cannot be lost at any 
time.  (37 -38)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

421 

SB 7.4: Hira ṇyaka śipu Terrorizes the Uni-
verse  

Nārada Muni continued: Lord Brahm ā was 
very much satisfied by Hira ṇyaka śipu’s auster-
ities, which were difficult to perform. There-
fore, when solicited for benedictions, he indeed 
granted them, although they were rarely to be 
achieved.  (1)  

Lord Brahm ā said: O Hira ṇyaka śipu, these 
benedictions for which you have asked are dif-
ficult to obtain for most men. Nonetheless, O 
my son, I shall grant you them although they 
are generally not available.  (2)  

Then Lord Brahm ā, who awards infallible 
benedictions, depar ted, being worshiped by the 
best of the demons, Hira ṇyaka śipu, and being 
praised by great sages and saintly persons.  (3) 
The demon Hira ṇyaka śipu, having thus been 
blessed by Lord Brahm ā and having acquired a 
lustrous golden body, continued to remember 
the death of his brother and therefore be envi-
ous of Lord Vi ṣṇu.  (4) Hira ṇyaka śipu became 
the conqueror of the entire universe. Indeed, 
that great demon conquered all the planets in 
the three worldsupper, middle and lowerinclud-
ing the planets of the human be ings, the 
Gandharvas, the Garu ḍas, the great serpents, 
the Siddhas, C āraṇas and Vidy ādharas, the 
great saints, Yamar āja, the Manus, the Yak ṣas, 
the R ākṣasas, the Pi śācas and their masters, and 
the masters of the ghosts and Bh ūtas. He de-
feated the rulers of  all the other planets where 
there are living entities and brought them under 
his control. Conquering the abodes of all, he 
seized their power and influence.  (5 -7) 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, who possessed all opulence, 
began residing in heaven, with its famous Nan-
dana garden, which is enjoyed by the demi-
gods. In fact, he resided in the most opulent pal-
ace of Indra, the King of heaven. The palace 
had been directly constructed by the demigod 
architect Vi śvakarm ā and was as beautifully made as if the goddess of fortune o f the entire 
universe resided there.  (8) The steps of King 
Indra’s residence were made of coral, the floor 
was bedecked with invaluable emeralds, the 
walls were of crystal, and the columns of 
vaidūrya stone. The wonderful canopies were 
beautifully decorat ed, the seats were bedecked 
with rubies, and the silk bedding, as white as 
foam, was decorated with pearls. The ladies of 
the palace, who were blessed with beautiful 
teeth and the most wonderfully beautiful faces, 
walked here and there in the palace, their  ankle 
bells tinkling melodiously, and saw their own 
beautiful reflecti ons in the gems. The demi-
gods, however, being very much oppressed, 
had to bow down and offer obeisances at the 
feet of Hira ṇyaka śipu, who chastised the demi-
gods very severely and for no reason. Thus 
Hiraṇyaka śipu lived in the palace and severely 
ruled ever yone.  (9 -12) O my dear King, 
Hiraṇyaka śipu was always drunk on strong -
smelling wines and liquors, and therefore his 
coppery eyes were always rolling. Nonetheless, 
because he had powerfully executed great aus-
terities in mystic yoga, although he was abom-
inable, all but the three principal demigodsLord 
Brahm ā, Lord Śiva and Lord Vi ṣṇupersonally 
worshiped him to please him by bringing him 
various presentations with their own hands.  
(13) O Mah ārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, descendant of 
Pāṇḍu, by dint of his personal powe r, 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, being situated on the throne of 
King Indra, controlled the inhabitants of all the 
other planets. The two Gandharvas Vi śvāvasu 
and Tumburu, I myself and the Vidy ādharas, 
Apsar ās and sages all offered prayers to him 
again and again just to glorify him.  (14)  

Being worshiped by sacrifices offered with 
great gifts by those who strictly followed the 
principles of var ṇa and āśrama, Hira ṇyaka śipu, 
instead of offering shares of the oblations to the 
demigods, accepted them himself.  (15) As if in  
fear of Hira ṇyaka śipu, the planet earth, which 
consists of seven islands, delivered food grains 
without being plowed. Thus it resembled cows 
like the surabhi of the spiritual world or the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

422 
 kāma-dugh ā of heaven. The earth yielded suf-
ficient food grains, the  cows supplied abundant 
milk, and outer space was beautifully decorated 
with wonderful phenomena.  (16) By the flow-
ing of their waves, the various oceans of the 
universe, along with their tributaries, the rivers, 
which are compared to their wives, supplied  
various kinds of gems and jewels for 
Hiraṇyaka śipu’s use. These oceans were the 
oceans of salt water, sugarcane juice, wine, 
clarified butter, milk, yogurt, and sweet water.  
(17) The valleys between the mountains be-
came fields of pleasure for Hira ṇyaka śipu, by 
whose influence all the trees and plants pro-
duced fruits and flowers profusely in all sea-
sons. The qualities of pouring water, drying and 
burning, which are all qualities of the three de-
partmental heads of the universenamely Indra, 
Vāyu and Agniwere  all directed by 
Hiraṇyaka śipu alone, without assistance from 
the demigods.  (18) In spite of achieving the 
power to control in all directions and in spite of 
enjoying all types of dear sense gratification as 
much as possible, Hira ṇyaka śipu was dissatis-
fied because instead of controlling his senses he 
remained their servant.  (19)  

Hiraṇyaka śipu thus passed a long time being 
very much proud of his opulences and trans-
gressing the laws and regulations mentioned in 
the authoritative śāstras. He was therefore sub-
jected to a curse by the four Kum āras, who 
were great br āhmaṇas.  (20) Everyone, includ-
ing the rulers of the various planets, was ex-
tremely distressed because of the severe pun-
ishment inflicted upon them by Hira ṇyaka śipu. 
Fearful and disturbed, unable t o find any other 
shelter, they at last surrendered to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu.  (21) “Let us 
offer our respectful obeisances unto that direc-
tion where the Supreme Personality of God-
head is situated, where those purified souls in 
the renou nced order of life, the great saintly 
persons, go, and from which, having gone, they 
never return.” Without sleep, fully controlling 
their minds, and living on only their breath, the 
predominating deities of the various planets be-
gan worshiping H ṛṣīkeśa with this meditation.  (22-23) Then there appeared before them a 
transcendental sound vibration, emanating 
from a personality not visible to material eyes. 
The voice was as grave as the sound of a cloud, 
and it was very encouraging, driving away all 
fear.  ( 24) The voice of the Lord vibrated as fol-
lows: O best of learned persons, do not fear! I 
wish all good fortune to you. Become My dev-
otees by hearing and chanting about Me and of-
fering Me prayers, for these are certainly meant 
to award benedictions to all l iving entities. I 
know all about the activities of Hira ṇyaka śipu 
and shall surely stop them very soon. Please 
wait patiently until that time.  (25 -26) When 
one is envious of the demigods, who represent 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, of the 
Vedas, whic h give all knowledge, of the cows, 
brāhmaṇas, Vai ṣṇavas and religious principles, 
and ultimately of Me, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, he and his civilization will be van-
quished without delay.  (27) When 
Hiraṇyaka śipu teases the great devotee Prah-
lāda, his own son, who is peaceful and sober 
and who has no enemy, I shall kill 
Hiraṇyaka śipu immediately, despite the bene-
dictions of Brahm ā.  (28)  

The great saint N ārada Muni continued: 
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
spiritual master of every one, thus reassured all 
the demigods living in the heavenly planets, 
they offered their respectful obeisances unto 
Him and returned, confident that the demon 
Hiraṇyaka śipu was now practically dead.  (29)  

Hiraṇyaka śipu had four wonderful, well -
qualified s ons, of whom the one named Prah-
lāda was the best. Indeed, Prahl āda was a res-
ervoir of all transcendental qualities because he 
was an unalloyed devotee of the Personality of 
Godhead.  (30) [The qualities of Mah ārāja 
Prahl āda, the son of Hira ṇyaka śipu, are d e-
scribed herewith.] He was completely cultured 
as a qualified br āhmaṇa, having very good 
character and being determined to understand 
the Absolute Truth. He had full control of his 
senses and mind. Like the Supersoul, he was 
kind to every living entity and  was the best 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

423 
 friend of everyone. To respectable persons he 
acted exactly like a menial servant, to the poor 
he was like a father, to his equals he was at-
tached like a sympathetic brother, and he con-
sidered his teachers, spiritual masters and older 
Godbrot hers to be as good as the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. He was completely free 
from unnatural pride that might have arisen 
from his good education, riches, beauty, aris-
tocracy and so on.  (31 -32) Although Prahl āda 
Mahārāja was born in a family of asuras, he 
himself was not an asura but a great devotee of 
Lord Vi ṣṇu. Unlike the other asuras, he was 
never envious of Vai ṣṇavas. He was not agi-
tated when put into danger, and he was neither 
directly nor indirectly int erested in the fruitive 
activities described in the Vedas. Indeed, he 
considered everything material to be useless, 
and therefore he was completely devoid of ma-
terial desires. He always controlled his senses 
and life air, and being of steady intelligence a nd 
determination, he subdued all lusty desires.  
(33) O King, Prahl āda Mah ārāja’s good quali-
ties are still glorified by learned saints and 
Vaiṣṇavas. As all good qualities are always 
found existing in the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, they also exist forever in His devotee 
Prahl āda Mah ārāja.  (34) In any assembly 
where there are discourses about saints and 
devotees, O King Yudhi ṣṭhira, even the ene-
mies of the demons, namely the demigods, 
what to speak of you, would cite Prahl āda 
Mahārāja as an example of a great devotee.  
(35) Who could list the innumerable transcen-
denta l qualities of Prahl āda Mah ārāja? He had 
unflinching faith in V āsudeva, Lord K ṛṣṇa [the 
son of Vasudeva], and unalloyed devotion to 
Him. His attachment to Lord K ṛṣṇa was natural 
because of his previous devotional service. Alt-
hough his good qualities cannot  be enumerated, 
they prove that he was a great soul [mah ātmā].  
(36)  

From the very beginning of his childhood, 
Prahl āda Mah ārāja was uninterested in childish 
playthings. Indeed, he gave them up altogether 
and remained silent and dull, being fully ab-
sorbe d in K ṛṣṇa consciousness. Since his mind was always affected by K ṛṣṇa consciousness, 
he could not understand how the world goes on 
being fully absorbed in the activities of sense 
gratification.  (37) Prahl āda Mah ārāja was al-
ways absorbed in thought of K ṛṣṇa. Thus, being 
always embraced by the Lord, he did not know 
how his bodily necessities, such as sitting, 
walking, eating, lying down, drinking and talk-
ing, were being automatically performed.  (38) 
Because of advancement in K ṛṣṇa conscious-
ness, he sometime s cried, sometimes laughed, 
sometimes expressed jubilation and sometimes 
sang loudly.  (39) Sometimes, upon seeing the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Prahl āda 
Mahārāja would loudly call in full anxiety. He 
sometimes lost his shyness in jubilation and be-
gan dancing in ecstasy, and sometimes, being 
fully absorbed in thoughts of K ṛṣṇa, he felt one-
ness and imitated the pastimes of the Lord.  (40) 
Sometimes, feeling the touch of the Lord’s lo-
tus hands, he became spiritually jubilant and re-
mained silent, his hai rs standing on end and 
tears gliding down from his half -closed eyes 
because of his love for the Lord.  (41) Because 
of his association with perfect, unalloyed dev-
otees who had nothing to do with anything ma-
terial, Prahl āda Mah ārāja constantly engaged in 
the service of the Lord’s lotus feet. By seeing 
his bodily features when he was in perfect ec-
stasy, persons very poor in spiritual under-
standing became purified. In other words, Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja bestowed upon them transcen-
dental bliss.  (42) My dear King Yu dhiṣṭhira, 
the demon Hira ṇyaka śipu tormented this ex-
alted, fortunate devotee, although Prahl āda was 
his own son.  (43)  

Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira said: O best of the 
saints among the demigods, O best of spiritual 
leaders, how did Hira ṇyaka śipu give so much 
trouble to Prahl āda Mah ārāja, the pure and ex-
alted saint, although Prahl āda was his own son? 
I wish to know about this subject from you.  
(44) A father and mother are always affection-
ate to their children. When the children are dis-
obedient the parents chastis e them, not due to 
enmity but only for the child’s instruction and 
welfare. How did Hira ṇyaka śipu, the father of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

424 
 Prahl āda Mah ārāja, chastise such a noble son? 
This is what I am eager to know.  (45)  

Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira further inquired: How 
was it possib le for a father to be so violent to-
ward an exalted son who was obedient, well -
behaved and respectful to his father? O 
brāhmaṇa, O master, I have never heard of such 
a contradiction as an affectionate father’s pun-
ishing his noble son with the intention of k illing 
him. Kindly dissipate our doubts in this regard.  
(46)  

SB 7.5: Prahl āda Mah ārāja, the Saintly Son 
of Hira ṇyaka śipu 

The great saint N ārada Muni said: The de-
mons, headed by Hira ṇyaka śipu, accepted 
Śukrācārya as their priest for ritualistic ceremo-
nies. Śukrācārya’s two sons, Ṣaṇḍa and 
Amarka, lived near Hira ṇyaka śipu’s palace.  
(1) Prahl āda Mah ārāja was already educated in 
devotional life, but when his father sent him to 
those two sons of Śukrācārya to be educated, 
they accepted him at their school a long with the 
other sons of the asuras.  (2) Prahl āda certainly 
heard and recited the topics of politics and eco-
nomics taught by the teachers, but he under-
stood that political philosophy involves consid-
ering someone a friend and someone else an en-
emy, and thus he did not like it.  (3) My dear 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira, once upon a time the King of 
the demons, Hira ṇyaka śipu, took his son Prah-
lāda on his lap and very affectionately inquired: 
My dear son, please let me know what you 
think is the best of all the subject s you have 
studied from your teachers.  (4)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja replied: O best of the 
asuras, King of the demons, as far as I have 
learned from my spiritual master, any person 
who has accepted a temporary body and tem-
porary household life is certainly emb arrassed 
by anxiety because of having fallen in a dark 
well where there is no water but only suffering. 
One should give up this position and go to the forest [vana]. More clearly, one should go to 
Vṛndāvana, where only K ṛṣṇa consciousness is 
prevalent, and  should thus take shelter of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead.  (5)  

Nārada Muni continued: When Prahl āda 
Mahārāja spoke about the path of self -realiza-
tion in devotional service, thus being faithful to 
the camp of his father’s enemies, 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, th e King of the demons, heard 
Prahl āda’s words and he laughingly said, “Thus 
is the intelligence of children spoiled by the 
words of the enemy.”  (6) Hira ṇyaka śipu ad-
vised his assistants: My dear demons, give 
complete protection to this boy at the gurukula 
where he is instructed, so that his intelligence 
will not be further influenced by Vai ṣṇavas 
who may go there in disguise.  (7)  

When Hira ṇyaka śipu’s servants brought the 
boy Prahl āda back to the gurukula [the place 
where the br āhmaṇas taught the boys], th e 
priests of the demons, Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka, pac-
ified him. With very mild voices and affection-
ate words, they inquired from him as follows.  
(8) Dear son Prahl āda, all peace and good for-
tune unto you. Kindly do not speak lies; just re-
ply with the truth. Thes e boys you see are not 
like you, for they do not speak in a deviant way. 
How have you learned these instructions? How 
has your intelligence been spoiled in this way?  
(9) O best of your family, has this pollution of 
your intelligence been brought about by you or 
by the enemies? We are all your teachers and 
are very eager to hear about this. Please tell us 
the truth.  (10)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja replied: Let me offer my 
respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, whose external energy 
has created the distinctions of “my friend” and 
“my enemy” by deluding the intelligence of 
men. Indeed, I am now actually experiencin g 
this, although I have previously heard of it from 
authoritative sources.  (11) When the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is pleased with the liv-
ing entity because of his devotional service, one 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

425 
 becomes a pa ṇḍita and does not make distinc-
tions between enemi es, friends and himself. In-
telligently, he then thinks, “Every one of us is 
an eternal servant of God, and therefore we are 
not different from one another.”  (12) Persons 
who always think in terms of “enemy” and 
“friend” are unable to ascertain the Superso ul 
within themselves. Not to speak of them, even 
such exalted persons as Lord Brahm ā, who are 
fully conversant with the Vedic literature, are 
sometimes bewildered in following the princi-
ples of devotional service. The same Supreme 
Personality of Godhead who has created this 
situation has certainly given me the intelligence 
to take the si de of your so -called enemy.  (13) 
O brāhmaṇas [teachers], as iron attracted by a 
magnetic stone moves automatically toward the 
magnet, my consciousness, having been 
changed by His will, is attracted by Lord Vi ṣṇu, 
who carries a disc in His hand. Thus I hav e no 
independence.  (14)  

The great saint N ārada Muni continued: The 
great soul Prahl āda Mah ārāja became silent af-
ter saying this to his teachers, Ṣaṇḍa and 
Amarka, the seminal sons of Śukrācārya. These 
so-called br āhmaṇas then became angry at him. 
Becaus e they were servants of Hira ṇyaka śipu, 
they were very sorry, and to chastise Prahl āda 
Mahārāja they spoke as follows.  (15) Oh, 
please bring me a stick! This Prahl āda is dam-
aging our name and fame. Because of his bad 
intelligence, he has become like a cind er in the 
dynasty of the demons. Now he needs to be 
treated by the fourth of the four kinds of politi-
cal diplomacy.  (16) This rascal Prahl āda has 
appeared like a thorn tree in a forest of sandal-
wood. To cut down sandalwood trees, an axe is 
needed, and the  wood of the thorn tree is very 
suitable for the handle of such an axe. Lord 
Viṣṇu is the axe for cutting down the sandal-
wood forest of the family of demons, and this 
Prahl āda is the handle for that axe.  (17) Ṣaṇḍa 
and Amarka, the teachers of Prahl āda 
Mahārāja, chastised and threatened their disci-
ple in various ways and began teaching him 
about the paths of religion, economic develop-
ment and sense gratification. This is the way they educated him.  (18) After some time, the 
teachers Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka thought  that Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja was sufficiently educated in the 
diplomatic affairs of pacifying public leaders, 
appeasing them by giving them lucrative posts, 
dividing and ruling over them, and punishing 
them in cases of disobedience. Then, one day, 
after Prahl āda’s mother had personally washed 
the boy and dressed him nicely with sufficient 
ornaments, they presented him before his fa-
ther.  (19) When Hira ṇyaka śipu saw that his 
child had fallen at his feet and was offering 
obeisances, as an affectionate father he im me-
diately began showering blessings upon the 
child and embraced him with both arms. A fa-
ther naturally feels happy to embrace his son, 
and Hira ṇyaka śipu became very happy in this 
way.  (20) N ārada Muni continued: My dear 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira, Hira ṇyaka śipu sea ted Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja on his lap and began smelling his 
head. With affectionate tears gliding down 
from his eyes and moistening the child’s smil-
ing face, he spoke to his son as follows.  (21)  

Hiraṇyaka śipu said: My dear Prahl āda, my 
dear son, O long -lived one, for so much time 
you have heard many things from your teach-
ers. Now please repeat to me whatever you 
think is the best of that knowledge.  (22)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja said: Hearing and chant-
ing about the transcendental holy name, form, 
qualities, parap hernalia and pastimes of Lord 
Viṣṇu, remembering them, serving the lotus 
feet of the Lord, offering the Lord respectful 
worship with sixteen types of paraphernalia, of-
fering prayers to the Lord, becoming His serv-
ant, considering the Lord one’s best friend,  and 
surrendering everything unto Him (in other 
words, serving Him with the body, mind and 
words)these nine processes are accepted as 
pure devotional service. One who has dedicated 
his life to the service of K ṛṣṇa through these 
nine methods should be under stood to be the 
most learned person, for he has acquired com-
plete knowledge.  (23 -24) After hearing these 
words of devotional service from the mouth of 
his son Prahl āda, Hira ṇyaka śipu was extremely 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

426 
 angry. His lips trembling, he spoke as follows 
to Ṣaṇḍa, the son of his guru, Śukrācārya.  (25) 
O unqualified, most heinous son of a br āhmaṇa, 
you have disobeyed my order and taken shelter 
of the party of my enemies. You have taught 
this poor boy about devotional service! What is 
this nonsense?  (26) In due cours e of time, var-
ious types of diseases are manifest in those who 
are sinful. Similarly, in this world there are 
many deceptive friends in false garbs, but even-
tually, because of their false behavior, their ac-
tual enmity becomes manifest.  (27)  

The son of Śukrācārya, Hira ṇyaka śipu’s 
spiritual master, said: O enemy of King Indra, 
O King! Whatever your son Prahl āda has said 
was not taught to him by me or anyone else. His 
spontaneous devotional service has naturally 
developed in him. Therefore, please give up 
your anger and do not unnecessarily accuse us. 
It is not good to insult a br āhmaṇa in this way.  
(28)  

Śrī Nārada Muni continued: When 
Hiraṇyaka śipu received this reply from the 
teacher, he again addressed his son Prahl āda. 
Hiraṇyaka śipu said: You rascal, most fallen of 
our family, if you have not received this educa-
tion from your teachers, where have you gotten 
it?  (29)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja replied: Because of their 
uncontrolled senses, persons too addicted to 
materialistic life make progress toward hellis h 
conditions and repeatedly chew that which has 
already been chewed. Their inclinations toward 
Kṛṣṇa are never aroused, either by the instruc-
tions of others, by their own efforts, or by a 
combination of both.  (30) Persons who are 
strongly entrapped by the  consciousness of en-
joying material life, and who have therefore ac-
cepted as their leader or guru a similar blind 
man attached to external sense objects, cannot 
understand that the goal of life is to return 
home, back to Godhead, and engage in the ser-
vice of Lord Vi ṣṇu. As blind men guided by an-
other blind man miss the right path and fall into a ditch, materially attached men led by another 
materially attached man are bound by the ropes 
of fruitive labor, which are made of very strong 
cords, and they contin ue again and again in ma-
terialistic life, suffering the threefold miseries.  
(31) Unless they smear upon their bodies the 
dust of the lotus feet of a Vai ṣṇava completely 
freed from material contamination, persons 
very much inclined toward materialistic lif e 
cannot be attached to the lotus feet of the Lord, 
who is glorified for His uncommon activities. 
Only by becoming K ṛṣṇa conscious and taking 
shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord in this way 
can one be freed from material contamination.  
(32)  

After Prah lāda Mah ārāja had spoken in this 
way and become silent, Hira ṇyaka śipu, blinded 
by anger, threw him off his lap and onto the 
ground.  (33) Indignant and angry, his reddish 
eyes like molten copper, Hira ṇyaka śipu said to 
his servants: O demons, take this boy away 
from me! He deserves to be killed. Kill him as 
soon as possible!  (34) This boy Prahl āda is the 
killer of my brother, for he has given up his 
family to engage in the devotional service of 
the enemy, Lord Vi ṣṇu, like a menial servant.  
(35) Although Pr ahlāda is only five years old, 
even at this young age he has given up his af-
fectionate relationship with his father and 
mother. Therefore, he is certainly untrustwor-
thy. Indeed, it is not at all believable that he will 
behave well toward Vi ṣṇu.  (36) Altho ugh a 
medicinal herb, being born in the forest, does 
not belong to the same category as a man, if 
beneficial it is kept very carefully. Similarly, if 
someone outside one’s family is favorable, he 
should be given protection like a son. On the 
other hand, if  a limb of one’s body is poisoned 
by disease, it must be amputated so that the rest 
of the body may live happily. Similarly, even 
one’s own son, if unfavorable, must be rejected, 
although born of one’s own body.  (37) Just as 
uncontrolled senses are the en emies of all yog īs 
engaged in advancing in spiritual life, this Prah-
lāda, who appears to be a friend, is an enemy 
because I cannot control him. Therefore this en-
emy, whether eating, sitting or sleeping, must 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

427 
 be killed by all means.  (38)  

The demons [R ākṣasas], the servants of 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, thus began striking the tender 
parts of Prahl āda Mah ārāja’s body with their 
tridents. The demons all had fearful faces, 
sharp teeth and reddish, coppery beards and 
hair, and they appeared extremely threatening. 
Making a tumultuous sound, shouting, “Chop 
him up! Pierce him!” they began striking Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja, who sat silently, meditating 
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  
(39-40) Even though a person who has no as-
sets in pious activities performs some good 
deed, it will have no result. Thus the weapons 
of the demons had no tangible effects upon 
Prahl āda Mah ārāja because he was a devotee 
undisturbed by material conditions and fully 
engaged in meditating upon and serving the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is  un-
changeable, who cannot be realized by the ma-
terial senses, and who is the soul of the entire 
universe.  (41) My dear King Yudhi ṣṭhira, 
when all the attempts of the demons to kill 
Prahl āda Mah ārāja were futile, the King of the 
demons, Hira ṇyaka śipu, bein g most fearful, be-
gan contriving other means to kill him.  (42) 
Hiraṇyaka śipu could not kill his son by throw-
ing him beneath the feet of big elephants, 
throwing him among huge, fearful snakes, em-
ploying destructive spells, hurling him from the 
top of a hil l, conjuring up illusory tricks, ad-
ministering poison, starving him, exposing him 
to severe cold, winds, fire and water, or throw-
ing heavy stones to crush him. When 
Hiraṇyaka śipu found that he could not in any 
way harm Prahl āda, who was completely sin-
less, he was in great anxiety about what to do 
next.  (43 -44) Hira ṇyaka śipu thought: I have 
used many ill names in chastising this boy 
Prahl āda and have devised many means of kill-
ing him, but despite all my endeavors, he could 
not be killed. Indeed, he saved hi mself by his 
own powers, without being affected in the least 
by these treacheries and abominable actions.  
(45) Although he is very near to me and is 
merely a child, he is situated in complete fear-
lessness. He resembles a dog’s curved tail, which can never  be straightened , because he 
never forgets my miSBehavior and his connec-
tion with his master, Lord Vi ṣṇu.  (46) I can see 
that this boy’s strength is unlimited, for he has 
not feared any of my punishments. He appears 
immortal. Therefore, because of my enmity to-
ward him, I  shall die. Or maybe this will not 
take place.  (47)  

Thinking in this way, the King of the 
Daityas, morose and bereft of bodily luster, re-
mained silent with his face downward. Then 
Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka, the two sons of Śukrācārya, 
spoke to him in secret.  (4 8) O lord, we know 
that when you simply move your eyebrows, all 
the commanders of the various planets are most 
afraid. Without the help of any assistant, you 
have conquered all the three worlds. Therefore, 
we do not find any reason for you to be morose 
and full of anxiety. As for Prahl āda, he is noth-
ing but a child and cannot be a cause of anxiety. 
After all, his bad or good qualities have no 
value.  (49) Until the return of our spiritual 
master, Śukrācārya, arrest this child with the 
ropes of Varu ṇa so that he will not flee in fear. 
In any case, by the time he is somewhat grown 
up and has assimilated our instructions or 
served our spiritual master, he will change in 
his intelligence. Thus there need be no cause 
for anxiety.  (50)  

After hearing these instructions of Ṣaṇḍa 
and Amarka, t he sons of his spiritual master, 
Hiraṇyaka śipu agreed and requested them to in-
struct Prahl āda in that system of occupational 
duty which is followed by royal householder 
families.  (51) Thereafter, Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka 
systematically and unceasingly taught Prah lāda 
Mahārāja, who was very submissive and hum-
ble, about mundane religion, economic devel-
opment and sense gratification.  (52) The teach-
ers Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka instructed Prahl āda 
Mahārāja in the three kinds of material ad-
vancement called religion, economic d evelop-
ment and sense gratification. Prahl āda, how-
ever, being situated above such instructions, 
did not like them, for such instructions are 
based on the duality of worldly affairs, which 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

428 
 involve one in a materialistic way of life 
marked by birth, death, ol d age and disease.  
(53) When the teachers went home to attend to 
their household affairs, the students of the same 
age as Prahl āda Mah ārāja would call him to 
take the opportunity of leisure hours for play.  
(54) Prahl āda Mah ārāja, who was truly the su-
prem e learned person, then addressed his class 
friends in very sweet language. Smiling, he be-
gan to teach them about the uselessness of the 
materialistic way of life. Being very kind to 
them, he instructed them as follows.  (55) My 
dear King Yudhi ṣṭhira, all t he children were 
very much affectionate and respectful to Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja, and because of their tender age 
they were not so polluted by the instructions 
and actions of their teachers, who were attached 
to condemned duality and bodily comfort. Thus 
the bo ys surrounded Prahl āda Mah ārāja, giving 
up their playthings, and sat down to hear him. 
Their hearts and eyes being fixed upon him, 
they looked at him with great earnestness. Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja, although born in a demon fam-
ily, was an exalted devotee, and he  desired their 
welfare. Thus he began instructing them about 
the futility of materialistic life.  (56 -57)  

SB 7.6: Prahl āda Instructs His Demoniac 
Schoolmates  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja said: One who is suffi-
ciently intelligent should use the human form 
of body f rom the very beginning of lifein other 
words, from the tender age of childhoodto prac-
tice the activities of devotional service, giving 
up all other engagements. The human body is 
most rarely achieved, and although temporary 
like other bodies, it is meaning ful because in 
human life one can perform devotional service. 
Even a slight amount of sincere devotional ser-
vice can give one complete perfection.  (1) The 
human form of life affords one a chance to re-
turn home, back to Godhead. Therefore every 
living enti ty, especially in the human form of 
life, must engage in devotional service to the 
lotus feet of Lord Vi ṣṇu. This devotional ser-
vice is natural because Lord Vi ṣṇu, the Su-preme Personality of Godhead, is the most be-
loved, the master of the soul, and the wel l-
wisher of all other living beings.  (2) Prahl āda 
Mahārāja continued: My dear friends born of 
demoniac families, the happiness perceived 
with reference to the sense objects by contact 
with the body can be obtained in any form of 
life, according to one’s p ast fruitive activities. 
Such happiness is automatically obtained with-
out endeavor, just as we obtain distress.  (3) En-
deavors merely for sense gratification or mate-
rial happiness through economic development 
are not to be performed, for they result only i n 
a loss of time and energy, with no actual profit. 
If one’s endeavors are directed toward K ṛṣṇa 
consciousness, one can surely attain the spir-
itual platform of self -realization. There is no 
such benefit from engaging oneself in eco-
nomic development.  (4) T herefore, while in 
material existence [bhavam āśritaḥ], a person 
fully competent to distinguish wrong from right 
must endeavor to achieve the highest goal of 
life as long as the body is stout and strong and 
is not embarrassed by dwindling.  (5) Every hu-
man being has a maximum duration of life of 
one hundred years, but for one who cannot con-
trol his senses, half of those years are com-
pletely lost because at night he sleeps twelve 
hours, being covered by ignorance. Therefore 
such a person has a lifetime of on ly fifty years.  
(6) In the tender age of childhood, when every-
one is bewildered, one passes ten years. Simi-
larly, in boyhood, engaged in sporting and 
playing, one passes another ten years. In this 
way, twenty years are wasted. Similarly, in old 
age, when one is an invalid, unable to perform 
even material activities, one passes another 
twenty years wastefully.  (7) One whose mind 
and senses are uncontrolled becomes increas-
ingly attached to family life because of insatia-
ble lusty desires and very strong illu sion. In 
such a madman’s life, the remaining years are 
also wasted because even during those years he 
cannot engage himself in devotional service.  
(8)  

What person too attached to household life 
due to being unable to control his senses can 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

429 
 liberate hims elf? An attached householder is 
bound very strongly by ropes of affection for 
his family [wife, children and other relatives].  
(9) Money is so dear that one conceives of 
money as being sweeter than honey. Therefore, 
who can give up the desire to accumulat e 
money, especially in household life? Thieves, 
professional servants [soldiers] and merchants 
try to acquire money even by risking their very 
dear lives.  (10) How can a person who is most 
affectionate to his family, the core of his heart 
being always fil led with their pictures, give up 
their association? Specifically, a wife is always 
very kind and sympathetic and always pleases 
her husband in a solitary place. Who could give 
up the association of such a dear and affection-
ate wife? Small children talk in broken lan-
guage, very pleasing to hear, and their affec-
tionate father always thinks of their sweet 
words. How could he give up their association? 
One’s elderly parents and one’s sons and 
daughters are also very dear. A daughter is es-
pecially dear to her fa ther, and while living at 
her husband’s house she is always in his mind. 
Who could give up that association? Aside 
from this, in household affairs there are many 
decorated items of household furniture, and 
there are also animals and servants. Who could 
give up such comforts? The attached house-
holder is like a silkworm, which weaves a co-
coon in which it becomes imprisoned, unable to 
get out. Simply for the satisfaction of two im-
portant sensesthe genitals and the tongueone is 
bound by material conditions. How  can one es-
cape?  (11 -13) One who is too attached cannot 
understand that he is wasting his valuable life 
for the maintenance of his family. He also fails 
to understand that the purpose of human life, a 
life suitable for realization of the Absolute 
Truth, i s being imperceptibly spoiled. How-
ever, he is very cleverly attentive to seeing that 
not a single farthing is lost by mismanagement. 
Thus although an attached person in material 
existence always suffers from threefold miser-
ies, he does not develop a distas te for the way 
of material existence.  (14) If a person too at-
tached to the duties of family maintenance is 
unable to control his senses, the core of his 
heart is immersed in how to accumulate money. Although he knows that one who takes the 
wealth of other s will be punished by the law of 
the government, and by the laws of Yamar āja 
after death, he continues cheating others to ac-
quire money.  (15) O my friends, sons of de-
mons! In this material world, even those who 
are apparently advanced in education have the 
propensity to consider, “This is mine, and that 
is for others.” Thus th ey are always engaged in 
providing the necessities of life to their families 
in a limited conception of family life, just like 
uneducated cats and dogs. They are unable to 
take to spiritual knowledge; instead, they are 
bewildered and overcome by ignorance.   (16) 
My dear friends, O sons of the demons, it is cer-
tain that no one bereft of knowledge of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead has been able to 
liberate himself from material bondage at any 
time or in any country. Rather, those bereft of 
knowledge of th e Lord are bound by the mate-
rial laws. They are factually addicted to sense 
gratification, and their target is woman. Indeed, 
they are actually playthings in the hands of at-
tractive women. Victimized by such a concep-
tion of life, they become surrounded by chil-
dren, grandchildren and great -grandchildren, 
and thus they are shackled to material bondage. 
Those who are very much addicted to this con-
ception of life are called demons. Therefore, 
although you are sons of demons, keep aloof 
from such persons and tak e shelter of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, N ārāyaṇa, the 
origin of all the demigods, because the ultimate 
goal for the devotees of N ārāyaṇa is liberation 
from the bondage of material existence.  (17 -
18)  

My dear sons of demons, the Supreme Per-
sonali ty of Godhead, N ārāyaṇa, is the original 
Supersoul, the father of all living entities. Con-
sequently there are no impediments to pleasing 
Him or worshiping Him under any conditions, 
whether one be a child or an old man. The rela-
tionship between the living e ntities and the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead is always a fact, 
and therefore there is no difficulty in pleasing 
the Lord.  (19) The Supreme Personality of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

430 
 Godhead, the supreme controller, who is infal-
lible and indefatigable, is present in different 
forms  of life, from the inert living beings 
[sthāvara], such as the plants, to Brahm ā, the 
foremost created living being. He is also pre-
sent in the varieties of material creations and in 
the material elements, the total material energy 
and the modes of material nature [sattva -guṇa, 
rajo-guṇa and tamo -guṇa], as well as the un-
manifested material nature and the false ego. 
Although He is one, He is present everywhere, 
and He is also the transcendental Supersoul, the 
cause of all causes, who is present as the ob-
server in the cores of the hearts of all living en-
tities. He is indicated as that which is pervaded 
and as the all -pervading Supersoul, but actually 
He cannot be indicated. He is changeless and 
undivided. He is simply perceived as the su-
preme sac -cid-ānanda [eternity, knowledge and 
bliss]. Being covered  by the curtain of the ex-
ternal energy, to the atheist He appears nonex-
istent.  (20 -23) Therefore, my dear young 
friends born of demons, please act in such a 
way that the Supreme Lord, who is beyond the 
conception of material knowledge, will be sat-
isfied. Give up your demoniac nature and act 
without enmity or duality. Show mercy to all 
living entities by enlightening them in devo-
tional service, thus becoming their well -wish-
ers.  (24) Nothing is unobtainable for devotees 
who have satisfied the Supreme Person ality of 
Godhead, who is the cause of all causes, the 
original source of everything. The Lord is the 
reservoir of unlimited spiritual qualities. For 
devotees, therefore, who are transcendental to 
the modes of material nature, what is the use of 
following t he principles of religion, economic 
development, sense gratification and liberation, 
which are all automatically obtainable under 
the influence of the modes of nature? We dev-
otees always glorify the lotus feet of the Lord, 
and therefore we need not ask for  anything in 
terms of dharma, k āma, artha and mok ṣa.  (25) 
Religion, economic development and sense 
gratificationthese are described in the Vedas as 
tri-varga, or three ways to salvation. Within 
these three categories are education and self -re-
alization; ri tualistic ceremonies performed ac-
cording to Vedic injunction; logic; the science of law and order; and the various means of 
earning one’s livelihood. These are the external 
subject matters of study in the Vedas, and 
therefore I consider them material. Howe ver, I 
consider surrender to the lotus feet of Lord 
Viṣṇu to be transcendental.  (26) N ārāyaṇa, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the well -
wisher and friend of all living entities, formerly 
explained this transcendental knowledge to the 
great saint N ārada. Such knowledge is ex-
tremely difficult to understand without the 
mercy of a saintly person like N ārada, but eve-
ryone who has taken shelter of N ārada’s disci-
plic succession can understand this confidential 
knowledge.  (27) Prahl āda Mah ārāja continued: 
I received this knowledge from the great saint 
Nārada Muni, who is always engaged in devo-
tional service. This knowledge, which is called 
bhāgavata -dharma, is fully scientific. It is based 
on logic and philosophy and is free from all ma-
terial contamination.  ( 28)  

The sons of the demons replied: Dear Prah-
lāda, neither you nor we know any teacher or 
spiritual master other than Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka, 
the sons of Śukrācārya. After all, we are chil-
dren and they our controllers. For you espe-
cially, who always remain wit hin the palace, it 
is very difficult to associate with a great per-
sonality. Dear friend, most gentle one, would 
you kindly explain how it was possible for you 
to hear N ārada? Kindly dispel our doubts in this 
regard.  (29 -30)  

SB 7.7: What Prahl āda Learned  in the 
Womb  

Nārada Muni said: Although Prahl āda 
Mahārāja was born in a family of asuras, he was 
the greatest of all devotees. Having thus been 
questioned by his class friends, the sons of the 
asuras, he remembered the words spoken to 
him by me and replie d to his friends as follows.  
(1)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja said: When our father, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

431 
 Hiraṇyaka śipu, went to Mandar ācala Mountain 
to execute severe austerities, in his absence the 
demigods, headed by King Indra, made a se-
vere attempt to subdue all the demons in war-
fare.  (2) “Alas, as a serpent is eaten by small 
ants, so the troublesome Hira ṇyaka śipu, who 
always inflicted miseries upon all types of peo-
ple, has now been defeated by the reactions of 
his own sinful activities.” Saying this, the dem-
igods, headed by King  Indra, arranged to fight 
the demons.  (3) When the great leaders of the 
demons, who were being killed one after an-
other, saw the unprecedented exertion of the 
demigods in fighting, they began to flee, scat-
tering themselves in all directions. Simply to 
protect their lives, they hastily fled from their 
homes, wives, children , animals and household 
paraphernalia. Paying no heed to all these, the 
demons simply fled.  (4 -5) The victorious dem-
igods plundered the palace of Hira ṇyaka śipu, 
the King of the demons, and destroyed every-
thing within it. Then Indra, King of heaven, ar-
rested my mother, the Queen.  (6) As she was 
being led away, crying in fear like a kurar ī cap-
tured by a vulture, the great sage N ārada, who 
at that time had no engagement, appeared on 
the scene and saw her in that condition.  (7)  

Nārada Muni said: O Indra, K ing of the 
demigods, this woman is certainly sinless. You 
should not drag her off in this merciless way. O 
greatly fortunate one, this chaste woman is the 
wife of another. You must immediately release 
her.  (8)  

King Indra said: In the womb of this woman,  
the wife of the demon Hira ṇyaka śipu, is the 
seed of that great demon. Therefore, let her re-
main in our custody until her child is delivered, 
and then we shall release her.  (9)  

Nārada Muni replied: The child within this 
woman’s womb is faultless and sin less. Indeed, 
he is a great devotee, a powerful servant of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, 
you will not be able to kill him.  (10) When the 
great saint N ārada Muni had thus spoken, King Indra, being respectful to N ārada’s words, im-
mediately released my mother. Because of my 
being a devotee of the Lord, all the demigods 
circumambulated her. Then they returned to 
their celestial kingdom.  (11)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja continued: The great 
saint N ārada Muni brought my mother to his 
āśrama and assured  her of all protection, say-
ing, “My dear child, please remain at my 
āśrama until the arrival of your husband.”  (12) 
After accepting the instructions of Devar ṣi 
Nārada, my mother stayed in his care, without 
fear from any direction, as long as my father, 
the King of the Daityas, had not become free 
from his severe austerities.  (13) My mother, 
being pregnant, desired the safety of her em-
bryo and desired to give birth after her hus-
band’s arrival. Thus she stayed at N ārada 
Muni’s āśrama, where she rendered ser vice 
unto N ārada Muni with great devotion.  (14)  

Nārada Muni delivered his instructions both 
to me, who was within the womb, and to my 
mother, who was engaged in rendering him ser-
vice. Because he is naturally extremely kind to 
the fallen souls, being in a transcendental posi-
tion, he gave instructions on religion and tran-
scendental knowledge. These instructions were 
free from all material contamination.  (15) Be-
cause of the long duration of time that has 
passed and because of her being a woman and 
therefor e less intelligent, my mother has forgot-
ten all those instructions; but the great sage 
Nārada blessed me, and therefore I could not 
forget them.  (16) Prahl āda Mah ārāja contin-
ued: My dear friends, if you can place your 
faith in my words, simply by that faith you can 
also understand transcendental knowledge, just 
like me, although you are smal l children. Simi-
larly, a woman can also understand transcen-
dental knowledge and know what is spirit and 
what is matter.  (17) Just as the fruits and flow-
ers of a tree in due course of time undergo six 
changesbirth, existence, growth, transfor-
mation, dwindl ing and then deaththe material 
body, which is obtained by the spirit soul under 
different circumstances, undergoes similar 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

432 
 changes. However, there are no such changes 
for the spirit soul.  (18) “ Ātmā” refers to the 
Supreme Lord or the living entities. Both of 
them are spiritual, free from birth and death, 
free from deterioration and free from material 
contamination. They are individual, they are 
the knowers of the external body, and they are 
the f oundation or shelter of everything. They 
are free from material change, they are self -il-
luminated, they are the cause of all causes, and 
they are all -pervading. They have nothing to do 
with the material body, and therefore they are 
always uncovered. With t hese transcendental 
qualities, one who is actually learned must give 
up the illusory conception of life, in which one 
thinks, “I am this material body, and everything 
in relationship with this body is mine.”  (19 -20) 
An expert geologist can understand wher e there 
is gold and by various processes can extract it 
from the gold ore. Similarly, a spiritually ad-
vanced person can understand how the spiritual 
particle exists within the body, and thus by cul-
tivating spiritual knowledge he can attain per-
fection in sp iritual life. However, as one who is 
not expert cannot understand where there is 
gold, a foolish person who has not cultivated 
spiritual knowledge cannot understand how the 
spirit exists within the body.  (21)  

The Lord’s eight separated material ener-
gies, the three modes of material nature and the 
sixteen transformations [the eleven senses and 
the five gross material elements like earth and 
water] within all these, the one spiritual soul 
exists as the observer. Therefore, all the great 
ācāryas have conclu ded that the individual soul 
is conditioned by these material elements.  (22) 
There are two kinds of bodies for every indi-
vidual soul a gross body made of five gross el-
ements and a subtle body made of three subtle 
elements. Within these bodies, however, is  the 
spirit soul. One must find the soul by analysis, 
saying, “This is not it. This is not it.” Thus one 
must separate spirit from matter.  (23) Sober 
and expert persons should search for the spirit 
soul with minds purified through analytical 
study in term s of the soul’s connection with and distinction from all things that undergo crea-
tion, maintenance and destruction.  (24) Intelli-
gence can be perceived in three states of activ-
ity wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep. The 
person who perceives these three i s to be con-
sidered the original master, the ruler, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead.  (25) As one 
can understand the presence of the air by the 
aromas it carries, so, under the guidance of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can un-
derstand the living  soul by these three divisions 
of intelligence. These three divisions, however, 
are not the soul; they are constituted of the three 
modes and are born of activities.  (26) Through 
polluted intelligence one is subjected to the 
modes of nature, and thus one is conditioned by 
material existence. Like a dreaming state in 
which one falsely suffers, material existence, 
which is due to ignorance, must be considered 
unwanted and temporary.  (27)  

Therefore, my dear friends, O sons of the de-
mons, your duty is to ta ke to K ṛṣṇa conscious-
ness, which can burn the seed of fruitive activ-
ities artificially created by the modes of mate-
rial nature and stop the flow of the intelligence 
in wakefulness, dreaming and deep sleep. In 
other words, when one takes to K ṛṣṇa con-
sciousn ess, his ignorance is immediately dissi-
pated.  (28) Of the different processes recom-
mended for disentanglement from material life, 
the one personally explained and accepted by 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead should be 
considered all -perfect. That proces s is the per-
formance of duties by which love for the Su-
preme Lord develops.  (29) One must accept 
the bona fide spiritual master and render ser-
vice unto him with great devotion and faith. 
Whatever one has in one’s possession should 
be offered to the spirit ual master, and in the as-
sociation of saintly persons and devotees one 
should worship the Lord, hear the glories of the 
Lord with faith, glorify the transcendental qual-
ities and activities of the Lord, always meditate 
on the Lord’s lotus feet, and worship the Deity 
of the Lord strictly according to the injunctions 
of the śāstra and guru.  (30 -31) One should al-
ways remember the Supreme Personality of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

433 
 Godhead in His localized representation as the 
Param ātmā, who is situated in the core of every 
living entity’s heart. Thus one should offer re-
spect to every living entity accor ding to that liv-
ing entity’s position or manifestation.  (32) By 
these activities [as mentioned above] one is 
able to cut down the influence of the enemies, 
namely lust, anger, greed, illusion, madness 
and jealousy, and when thus situated, one can 
render s ervice to the Lord. In this way one 
surely attains the platform of loving service to 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  (33)  

One who is situated in devotional service is 
certainly the controller of his senses, and thus 
he is a liberated person. When su ch a liberated 
person, the pure devotee, hears of the transcen-
dental qualities and activities of the Lord’s in-
carnations for the performance of various pas-
times, his hair stands on end on his body, tears 
fall from his eyes, and in his spiritual realiza-
tion his voice falters. Sometimes he very 
openly dances, sometimes he sings loudly, and 
sometimes he cries. Thus he expresses his tran-
scendental jubilation.  (34) When a devotee be-
comes like a person haunted by a ghost, he 
laughs and very loudly chants about t he quali-
ties of the Lord. Sometimes he sits to perform 
meditation, and he offers respects to every liv-
ing entity, considering him a devotee of the 
Lord. Constantly breathing very heavily, he be-
comes careless of social etiquette and loudly 
chants like a mad man, “Hare K ṛṣṇa, Hare 
Kṛṣṇa! O my Lord, O master of the universe!”  
(35) The devotee is then freed from all material 
contamination because he constantly thinks of 
the Lord’s pastimes and because his mind and 
body have been converted to spiritual qualities . 
Because of his intense devotional service, his 
ignorance, material consciousness and all kinds 
of material desires are completely burnt to 
ashes. This is the stage at which one can 
achieve the shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet.  (36) 
The real problem of l ife is the repetition of birth 
and death, which is like a wheel rolling repeat-
edly up and down. This wheel, however, com-
pletely stops when one is in touch with the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. In other words, by the transcendental bliss realized from co n-
stant engagement in devotional service, one is 
completely liberated from material existence. 
All learned men know this. Therefore, my dear 
friends, O sons of the asuras, immediately 
begin meditating upon and worshiping the Su-
persoul within everyone’s hear t.  (37) O my 
friends, sons of the asuras, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead in His Supersoul feature al-
ways exists within the cores of the hearts of all 
living entities. Indeed, He is the well -wisher 
and friend of all living entities, and there is no 
difficulty in worshiping the Lord. Why, then, 
should people not engage in His devotional ser-
vice? Why are they so addicted to unneces-
sarily producing artificial paraphernalia for 
sense gratification?  (38) One’s riches, beauti-
ful wife and female friends, one’ s sons and 
daughters, one’s residence, one’s domestic an-
imals like cows, elephants and horses, one’s 
treasury, economic development and sense 
gratificationindeed, even the lifetime in which 
one can enjoy all these material opulencesare 
certainly temporary and flickering. Since the 
opportunity of human life is temporary, what 
benefit can these material opulences give to a 
sensible man who has understood himself to be 
eternal?  (39) It is learned from Vedic literature 
that by performing great sacrifices one m ay el-
evate himself to the heavenly planets. How-
ever, although life on the heavenly planets is 
hundreds and thousands of times more com-
fortable than life on earth, the heavenly planets 
are not pure [nirmalam], or free from the taint 
of material existence. T he heavenly planets are 
also temporary, and therefore they are not the 
goal of life. The Supreme Personality of God-
head, however, has never been seen or heard to 
possess inebriety. Consequently, for your own 
benefit and self -realization, you must worship 
the Lord with great devotion, as described in 
the revealed scriptures.  (40)  

A materialistic person, thinking himself 
very advanced in intelligence, continually acts 
for economic development. But again and 
again, as enunciated in the Vedas, he is frus-
trated by material activities, either in this life or 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

434 
 in the next. Indeed, the results one obtains are 
inevitably the opposite of those one desires.  
(41) In this material world, every materialist 
desires to achieve happiness and diminish his 
distress, and the refore he acts accordingly. Ac-
tually, however, one is happy as long as one 
does not endeavor for happiness; as soon as one 
begins his activities for happiness, his condi-
tions of distress begin.  (42) A living entity de-
sires comfort for his body and makes m any 
plans for this purpose, but actually the body is 
the property of others. Indeed, the perishable 
body embraces the living entity and then leaves 
him aside.  (43) Since the body itself is ulti-
mately meant to become stool or earth, what is 
the meaning of the paraphernalia related to the 
body, such as wives, residences, wealth, chil-
dren, relatives, servants, friends, kingdoms, 
treasuries, animals and ministers? They are also 
temporary. What more can be said about this?  
(44) All this paraphernalia is very n ear and dear 
as long as the body exists, but as soon as the 
body is destroyed, all things related to the body 
are also finished. Therefore, actually one has 
nothing to do with them, but because of igno-
rance one accepts them as valuable. Compared 
to the oce an of eternal happiness, they are most 
insignificant. What is the use of such insignifi-
cant relationships for the eternal living being?  
(45) My dear friends, O sons of the asuras, the 
living entity receives different types of bodies 
according to his previ ous fruitive activities. 
Thus he is seen to suffer with reference to his 
particular body in all conditions of life, begin-
ning with his infusion into the womb. Please 
tell me, therefore, after full consideration, what 
is the living entity’s actual interest in fruitive 
activities, which result in hardship and misery?  
(46) The living entity, who has received his 
present body because of his past fruitive activ-
ity, may end the results of his actions in this 
life, but this does not mean that he is liberated 
from  bondage to material bodies. The living en-
tity receives one type of body, and by perform-
ing actions with that body he creates another. 
Thus he transmigrates from one body to an-
other, through repeated birth and death, be-
cause of his gross ignorance.  (47) T he four 
principles of advancement in spiritual lifedharma, artha, k āma and mok ṣaall depend 
on the disposition of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. Therefore, my dear friends, follow 
in the footsteps of devotees. Without desire, 
fully depend upon the disposition of the Su-
preme Lord, worship Him, the Supersoul, in de-
votio nal service.  (48) The Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Hari, is the soul and the Supersoul 
of all living entities. Every living entity is a 
manifestation of His energy in terms of the liv-
ing soul and the material body. Therefore, the 
Lord is the most dear,  and He is the supreme 
controller.  (49) If a demigod, demon, human 
being, Yak ṣa, Gandharva or anyone within this 
universe renders service to the lotus feet of 
Mukunda, who can deliver liberation, he is ac-
tually situated in the most auspicious condition 
of life, exactly like us [the mah ājanas, headed 
by Prahl āda Mah ārāja].  (50)  

My dear friends, O sons of the demons, you 
cannot please the Supreme Personality of God-
head by becoming perfect br āhmaṇas, demi-
gods or great saints or by becoming perfectly 
good in etiquette or vast learning. None of these 
qualifications can  awaken the pleasure of the 
Lord. Nor by charity, austerity, sacrifice, clean-
liness or vows can one satisfy the Lord. The 
Lord is pleased only if one has unflinching, un-
alloyed devotion to Him. Without sincere de-
votional service, everything is simply a sho w.  
(51-52) My dear friends, O sons of the demons, 
in the same favorable way that one sees himself 
and takes care of himself, take to devotional 
service to satisfy the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is present everywhere as the Su-
persoul of all living  entities.  (53) O my friends, 
O sons of demons, everyone, including you (the 
Yakṣas and R ākṣasas), the unintelligent 
women, śūdras and cowherd men, the birds, the 
lower animals and the sinful living entities, can 
revive his original, eternal spiritual lif e and ex-
ist forever simply by accepting the principles of 
bhakti -yoga.  (54) In this material world, to ren-
der service to the lotus feet of Govinda, the 
cause of all causes, and to see Him everywhere, 
is the only goal of life. This much alone is the 
ultima te goal of human life, as explained by all 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

435 
 the revealed scriptures.  (55)  

SB 7.8: Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva Slays the King 
of the Demons  

Nārada Muni continued: All the sons of the 
demons appreciated the transcendental instruc-
tions of Prahl āda Mah ārāja and took them very 
seriously. They rejected the materialistic in-
structions given by th eir teachers, Ṣaṇḍa and 
Amarka.  (1) When Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka, the 
sons of Śukrācārya, observed that all the stu-
dents, the sons of the demons, were becoming 
advanced in K ṛṣṇa consciousness because of 
the association of Prahl āda Mah ārāja, they 
were afraid. The y approached the King of the 
demons and described the situation as it was.  
(2) When Hira ṇyaka śipu understood the entire 
situation, he was extremely angry, so much so 
that his body trembled. Thus he finally decided 
to kill his son Prahl āda. Hira ṇyaka śipu w as by 
nature very cruel, and feeling insulted, he be-
gan hissing like a snake trampled upon by 
someone’s foot. His son Prahl āda was peaceful, 
mild and gentle, his senses were under control, 
and he stood before Hira ṇyaka śipu with folded 
hands. According to P rahlāda’s age and behav-
ior, he was not to be chastised. Yet with staring, 
crooked eyes, Hira ṇyaka śipu rebuked him with 
the following harsh words.  (3 -4)  

Hiraṇyaka śipu said: O most impudent, most 
unintelligent disruptor of the family, O lowest 
of mankind,  you have violated my power to 
rule you, and therefore you are an obstinate 
fool. Today I shall send you to the place of 
Yamar āja.  (5) My son Prahl āda, you rascal, 
you know that when I am angry all the planets 
of the three worlds tremble, along with their  
chief rulers. By whose power has a rascal like 
you become so impudent that you appear fear-
less and overstep my power to rule you?  (6)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja said: My dear King, the 
source of my strength, of which you are asking, 
is also the source of yours.  Indeed, the original source of all kinds of strength is one. He is not 
only your strength or mine, but the only 
strength for everyone. Without Him, no one can 
get any strength. Whether moving or not mov-
ing, superior or inferior, everyone, including 
Lord B rahm ā, is controlled by the strength of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  (7)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who 
is the supreme controller and time factor, is the 
power of the senses, the power of the mind, the 
power of the body, and the vital force of the 
senses. His influence is unlimited. He is the 
best of all living entities, the controller of the 
three modes of material nature. By His own 
power, He creates this cosmic manifestation, 
maintains it and annihilates it also.  (8) Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja con tinued: My dear father, 
please give up your demoniac mentality. Do not 
discriminate in your heart between enemies and 
friends; make your mind equipoised toward 
everyone. Except for the uncontrolled and mis-
guided mind, there is no enemy within this 
world. W hen one sees everyone on the platform 
of equality, one then comes to the position of 
worshiping the Lord perfectly.  (9) In former 
times there were many fools like you who did 
not conquer the six enemies that steal away the 
wealth of the body. These fools were very 
proud, thinking, “I have conquered all enemies 
in all the ten directions.” But if a person is vic-
torious over the six enemies and is equipoised 
toward all living entities, for him there are no 
enemies. Enemies are merely imagined by one 
in ignora nce.  (10)  

Hiraṇyaka śipu replied: You rascal, you are 
trying to minimize my value, as if you were bet-
ter than me at controlling the senses. This is 
over-intelligent. I can therefore understand that 
you desire to die at my hands, for this kind of 
nonsensical talk is i ndulged in by those about 
to die.  (11) O most unfortunate Prahl āda, you 
have always described a supreme being other 
than me, a supreme being who is above every-
thing, who is the controller of everyone, and 
who is all -pervading. But where is He? If He is 
everywhere, then why is He not present before 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

436 
 me in this pillar?  (12) Because you are speak-
ing so much nonsense, I shall now sever your 
head from your body. Now let me see your 
most worshipable God come to protect you. I 
want to see it.  (13) Being obsessed  with anger, 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, who was very great in bodily 
strength, thus chastised his exalted devotee -son 
Prahl āda with harsh words. Cursing him again 
and again, Hira ṇyaka śipu took up his sword, 
got up from his royal throne, and with great an-
ger struck his  fist against the column.  (14) 
Then from within the pillar came a fearful 
sound, which appeared to crack the covering of 
the universe. O my dear Yudhi ṣṭhira, this sound 
reached even the abodes of the demigods like 
Lord Brahm ā, and when the demigods heard it, 
they thought, “Oh, now our planets are being 
destroyed!”  (15) While showing his extraordi-
nary prowess, Hira ṇyaka śipu, who desired to 
kill his own son, heard that wonderful, tumul-
tuous sound, which had never before been 
heard. Upon hearing the sound, t he other lead-
ers of the demons were afraid. None of them 
could find the origin of that sound in the assem-
bly.  (16) To prove that the statement of His 
servant Prahl āda Mah ārāja was substantialin 
other words, to prove that the Supreme Lord is 
present everyw here, even within the pillar of an 
assembly hallthe Supreme Personality of God-
head, Hari, exhibited a wonderful form never 
before seen. The form was neither that of a man 
nor that of a lion. Thus the Lord appeared in His 
wonderful form in the assembly hall .  (17)  

While Hira ṇyaka śipu looked all around to 
find the source of the sound, that wonderful 
form of the Lord, which could not be ascer-
tained to be either a man or a lion, emerged 
from the pillar. In amazement, Hira ṇyaka śipu 
wondered, “What is this creature that is half 
man and half lion?”  (18) Hira ṇyaka śipu stud-
ied the form of the Lord, trying to decide who 
the form of N ṛsiṁhadeva standing before him 
was. The Lord’s form was extremely fearsome 
because of His angry eyes, which resembled 
molten gold; His shining m ane, which ex-
panded the dimensions of His fearful face; His 
deadly teeth; and His razor -sharp tongue, which moved about like a dueling sword. His 
ears were erect and motionless, and His nostrils 
and gaping mouth appeared like caves of a 
mountain. His jaws parted fearfully, and His 
entire body touched the sky. His neck was very 
short and thick, His chest broad, His waist thin, 
and the hairs on His body as white as the rays 
of the moon. His arms, which resembled flanks 
of soldiers, spread in all directions as  He killed 
the demons, rogues and atheists with His 
conchshell, disc, club, lotus and other natural 
weapons.  (19 -22) Hira ṇyaka śipu murmured to 
himself, “Lord Vi ṣṇu, who possesses great 
mystic power, has made this plan to kill me, but 
what is the use of su ch an attempt? Who can 
fight with me?” Thinking like this and taking 
up his club, Hira ṇyaka śipu attacked the Lord 
like an elephant.  (23)  

Just as a small insect falls forcefully into a 
fire and the insignificant creature becomes in-
visible, when Hira ṇyaka śipu attacked the Lord, 
who was full of effulgence, Hira ṇyaka śipu be-
came invisible. This is not at all astonishing, for 
the Lord is always situated in pure goodness. 
Formerly, during creation, He entered the dark 
universe and illuminated it by His spiritua l ef-
fulgence.  (24) Thereafter, the great demon 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, who was extremely angry, 
swiftly attacked N ṛsiṁhadeva with his club and 
began to beat Him. Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva, how-
ever, captured the great demon, along with his 
club, just as Garu ḍa might capture  a great 
snake.  (25) O Yudhi ṣṭhira, O great son of Bha-
rata, when Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva gave 
Hiraṇyaka śipu a chance to slip from His hand, 
just as Garu ḍa sometimes plays with a snake 
and lets it slip from his mouth, the demigods, 
who had lost their abodes and w ho were hiding 
behind the clouds for fear of the demon, did not 
consider that incident very good. Indeed, they 
were perturbed.  (26) When Hira ṇyaka śipu was 
freed from the hands of N ṛsiṁhadeva, he 
falsely thought that the Lord was afraid of his 
prowess. The refore, after taking a little rest 
from the fight, he took up his sword and shield 
and again attacked the Lord with great force.  
(27) Making a loud, shrill sound of laughter, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

437 
 Supreme Personality of Godhead, N ārāyaṇa, 
who is extremely strong and powerf ul, captured 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, who was protecting himself 
with his sword and shield, leaving no gaps 
open. With the speed of a hawk, Hira ṇyaka śipu 
moved sometimes in the sky and sometimes on 
the earth, his eyes closed because of fear of 
Nṛsiṁhadeva’s laughter .  (28) As a snake cap-
tures a mouse or Garu ḍa captures a very ven-
omous snake, Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva captured 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, who could not be pierced even 
by the thunderbolt of King Indra. As 
Hiraṇyaka śipu moved his limbs here, there and 
all around, very much af flicted at being cap-
tured, Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva placed the demon on 
His lap, supporting him with His thighs, and in 
the doorway of the assembly hall the Lord very 
easily tore the demon to pieces with the nails of 
His hand.  (29) Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva’s mouth and 
mane were sprinkled with drops of blood, and 
His fierce eyes, full of anger, were impossible 
to look at. Licking the edge of His mouth with 
His tongue, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, N ṛsiṁhadeva, decorated with a garland of 
intestines taken from Hira ṇyakaśipu’s abdo-
men, resembled a lion that has just killed an el-
ephant.  (30) The Supreme Personality of God-
head, who had many, many arms, first uprooted 
Hiraṇyaka śipu’s heart and then threw him aside 
and turned toward the demon’s soldiers. These 
soldiers had  come in thousands to fight with 
Him with raised weapons and were very faith-
ful followers of Hira ṇyaka śipu, but Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva killed all of them merely with the 
ends of His nails.  (31)  

The hair on N ṛsiṁhadeva’s head shook the 
clouds and scattered the m here and there, His 
glaring eyes stole the effulgence of the luminar-
ies in the sky, and His breathing agitated the 
seas and oceans. Because of His roaring, all the 
elephants in the world began to cry in fear.  (32) 
Airplanes were thrown into outer space and the 
upper planetary system by the hair on 
Nṛsiṁhadeva’s head. Because of the pressure 
of the Lord’s lotus feet, the earth appeared to 
slip from its position, and all the hills and 
mountains sprang up due to His intolerable force. Because of the Lord’s bodily effulgence, 
both the sky and all directions diminished in 
their natural illumination.  (33) Manifesting a 
full effulgence and a fearsome countenance, 
Lord N ṛsiṁha, being very angry and finding no 
contestant to face His power and opulence, then 
sat d own in the assembly hall on the excellent 
throne of the king. Because of fear and obedi-
ence, no one could come forward to serve the 
Lord directly.  (34)  

Hiraṇyaka śipu had been exactly like a fever 
of meningitis in the head of the three worlds. 
Thus when the wives of the demigods in the 
heavenly planets saw that the great demon had 
been killed by the personal hands of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, their faces blos-
somed in great joy. The wives of the demigods 
again and again showered flowers from heav en 
upon Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva like rain.  (35) At that 
time, the airplanes of the demigods, who de-
sired to see the activities of the Supreme Lord, 
Nārāyaṇa, crowded the sky. The demigods be-
gan beating drums and kettledrums, and upon 
hearing them the angelic wom en began to 
dance, while the chiefs of the Gandharvas sang 
sweetly.  (36) My dear King Yudhi ṣṭhira, the 
demigods then approached the Lord. They were 
headed by Lord Brahm ā, King Indra and Lord 
Śiva and included great saintly persons and the 
residents of Pit ṛloka, Siddhaloka, Vidy ādhara -
loka and the planet of the snakes. The Manus 
approached, and so did the chiefs of various 
other planets. The angelic dancers approached, 
as did the Gandharvas, the C āraṇas, the Yak ṣas, 
the inhabitants of Kinnaraloka, the Vet ālas, the 
inhabitants of Kimpuru ṣa-loka, and the per-
sonal servants of Vi ṣṇu like Sunanda and Ku-
muda. All of them came near the Lord, who 
glowed with intense light. They individually 
offered their obeisances and prayers, their 
hands folded at their heads.  (3 7-39)  

Lord Brahm ā prayed: My Lord, You are un-
limited, and You possess unending potencies. 
No one can estimate or calculate Your prowess 
and wonderful influence, for Your actions are 
never polluted by the material energy. Through 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

438 
 the material qualities, Y ou very easily create 
the universe, maintain it and again annihilate it, 
yet You remain the same, without deteriora-
tion. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You.  (40)  

Lord Śiva said: The end of the millennium 
is the time for Your anger. Now that this insig-
nificant demon Hira ṇyaka śipu has been killed, 
O my Lord, who are naturally affectionate to 
Your devotee, kindly protect his son Prahl āda 
Mahārāja, who is standing nearby as Your fully 
surrendered devotee.  (41)  

King Indra said: O Supreme L ord, You are 
our deliverer and protector. Our shares of sac-
rifices, which are actually Yours, have been re-
covered from the demon by You. Because the 
demoniac king Hira ṇyaka śipu was most fear-
some, our hearts, which are Your permanent 
abode, were all overtak en by him. Now, by 
Your presence, the gloom and darkness in our 
hearts have been dissipated. O Lord, for those 
who always engage in Your service, which is 
more exalted than liberation, all material opu-
lence is insignificant. They do not even care for 
liberation, not to speak of the benefits of k āma, 
artha and dharma.  (42)  

All the saintly persons present offered their 
prayers in this way: O Lord, O supreme main-
tainer of those sheltered at Your lotus feet, O 
original Personality of Godhead, the process of 
austerity and penance, in which You inst ructed 
us before, is the spiritual power of Your very 
self. It is by austerity that You create the mate-
rial world, which lies dormant within You. This 
austerity was almost stopped by the activities 
of this demon, but now, by Yourself appearing 
in the form of N ṛsiṁhadeva, which is meant 
just to give us protection, and by killing this de-
mon, You have again approved the process of 
austerity.  (43)  

The inhabitants of Pit ṛloka prayed: Let us 
offer our respectful obeisances unto Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, the maintainer  of the religious 
principles of the universe. He has killed 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, the demon who by force en-
joyed all the offerings of the śrāddha ceremo-
nies performed by our sons and grandsons on 
the anniversaries of our death and who drank 
the water with sesame seeds offered in holy 
places of pilgrimage. By killing this demon, O 
Lord, You have taken back all this stolen prop-
erty from his abdomen by piercing it with Your 
nails. We therefore wish to offer our respectful 
obeisances unto You.  (44)  

The inhabitants of Siddhaloka prayed: O 
Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva, because we belong to Sid-
dhaloka, we automatically achieve perfection 
in all eight kinds of mystic power. Yet 
Hiraṇyaka śipu was so dishonest that by the 
strength of his power and austerity, he took 
away our powers. Thus he became very proud 
of his mystic strength. Now, because this rogue 
has been killed by Your nails, we offer our re-
spectful obeisances unto You.  (45)  

The inhabitants of Vidy ādhara -loka prayed: 
Our acquired power to appear and disappear in 
various w ays according to varieties of medita-
tion was banned by that foolish Hira ṇyaka śipu 
because of his pride in his superior bodily 
strength and his ability to conquer others. Now 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead has killed 
him just as if the demon were an ani mal. Unto 
that supreme pastime form of Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva, we eternally offer our respectful 
obeisances.  (46)  

The inhabitants of N āgaloka said: The most 
sinful Hira ṇyaka śipu took away all the jewels 
on our hoods and all our beautiful wives. Now, 
since his  chest has been pierced by Your nails, 
You are the source of all pleasure to our wives. 
Thus we together offer our respectful obei-
sances unto You.  (47)  

All the Manus offered their prayers as fol-
lows: As Your order carriers, O Lord, we, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

439 
 Manus, are th e law -givers for human society, 
but because of the temporary supremacy of this 
great demon, Hira ṇyaka śipu, our laws for 
maintaining var ṇāśrama -dharma were de-
stroyed. O Lord, now that You have killed this 
great demon, we are in our normal condition. 
Kindly order us, Your eternal servants, what to 
do now.  (48)  

The praj āpatis offered their prayers as fol-
lows: O Supreme Lord, Lord of even Brahm ā 
and Śiva, we, the praj āpatis, were created by 
You to execute Your orders, but we were for-
bidden by Hira ṇyaka śipu t o create any more 
good progeny. Now the demon is lying dead 
before us, his chest pierced by You. Let us 
therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto 
You, whose incarnation in this form of pure 
goodness is meant for the welfare of the entire 
universe.  (4 9)  

The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka prayed: 
Your Lordship, we ever engage in Your service 
by dancing and singing in dramatic perfor-
mances, but this Hira ṇyaka śipu, by the influ-
ence of his bodily strength and valor, brought 
us under his subjugation. Now he has been 
brought to this low condition by Your Lord-
ship. What benefit can result from the activities 
of such an upstart as Hira ṇyaka śipu?  (50)  

The inhabitants of the C āraṇa planet said: O 
Lord, because You have destroyed the demon 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, who was alw ays a stake in the 
hearts of all honest men, we are now relieved, 
and we eternally take shelter of Your lotus feet, 
which award the conditioned soul liberation 
from materialistic contamination.  (51)  

The inhabitants of Yak ṣaloka prayed: O 
controller of t he twenty -four elements, we are 
considered the best servants of Your Lordship 
because of rendering services pleasing to You, 
yet we engaged as palanquin carriers by the or-
der of Hira ṇyaka śipu, the son of Diti. O Lord in 
the form of N ṛsiṁhadeva, You know ho w this demon gave trouble to everyone, but now You 
have killed him, and his body is mixing with 
the five material elements.  (52)  

The inhabitants of Kimpuru ṣa-loka said: We 
are insignificant living entities, and You are the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead , the supreme 
controller. Therefore how can we offer suitable 
prayers unto You? When this demon was con-
demned by devotees because they were dis-
gusted with him, he was then killed by You.  
(53)  

The inhabitants of Vait ālika-loka said: Dear 
Lord, because of  chanting Your spotless glories 
in great assemblies and arenas of sacrifice, we 
were accustomed to great respect from every-
one. This demon, however, usurped that posi-
tion. Now, to our great fortune, You have killed 
this great demon, exactly as one cures a chronic 
disease.  (54)  

The Kinnaras said: O supreme controller, 
we are ever -existing servants of Your Lordship, 
but instead of rendering service to You, we 
were engaged by this demon in his service, con-
stantly and without remuneration. This sinful 
man ha s now been killed by You. Therefore, O 
Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva, our master, we offer our re-
spectful obeisances unto You. Please continue 
to be our patron.  (55)  

The associates of Lord Vi ṣṇu in Vaiku ṇṭha 
offered this prayer: O Lord, our supreme giver 
of shelter,  today we have seen Your wonderful 
form as Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva, meant for the good 
fortune of all the world. O Lord, we can under-
stand that Hira ṇyaka śipu was the same Jaya 
who engaged in Your service but was cursed by 
brāhmaṇas and who thus received the body of 
a demon. We understand that his having now 
been killed is Your special mercy upon him.  
(56)  

SB 7.9: Prahl āda Pacifies Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

440 
 Nṛsiṁhadeva with Prayers  

The great saint N ārada Muni continued: The 
demigods, headed by Lord Brahm ā, Lord Śiva 
and other great  demigods, dared not come for-
ward before the Lord, who at that time was ex-
tremely angry.  (1) The goddess of fortune, 
Lakṣmījī, was requested to go before the Lord 
by all the demigods present, who because of 
fear could not do so. But even she had never 
seen such a wonderful and extraordinary form 
of the Lord, and thus she could not approach 
Him.  (2) Thereafter Lord Brahm ā requested 
Prahl āda Mah ārāja, who was standing very 
near him: My dear son, Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva is 
extremely angry at your demoniac father. 
Please go forward and appease the Lord.  (3) 
Nārada Muni continued: O King, although the 
exalted devotee Prahl āda Mah ārāja was only a 
little boy, he accepted Lord Brahm ā’s words. 
He gradually proceeded toward Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva and fell down to offer his resp ect-
ful obeisances with folded hands.  (4) When 
Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva saw the small boy Prahl āda 
Mahārāja prostrated at the soles of His lotus 
feet, He became most ecstatic in affection to-
ward His devotee. Raising Prahl āda, the Lord 
placed His lotus hand upon th e boy’s head be-
cause His hand is always ready to create fear-
lessness in all of His devotees.  (5) By the touch 
of Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva’s hand on Prahl āda 
Mahārāja’s head, Prahl āda was completely 
freed of all material contaminations and de-
sires, as if he had be en thoroughly cleansed. 
Therefore he at once became transcendentally 
situated, and all the symptoms of ecstasy be-
came manifest in his body. His heart filled with 
love, and his eyes with tears, and thus he was 
able to completely capture the lotus feet of th e 
Lord within the core of his heart.  (6) Prahl āda 
Mahārāja fixed his mind and sight upon Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva with full attention in complete 
trance. With a fixed mind, he began to offer 
prayers in love with a faltering voice.  (7)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja prayed: How is it possi-
ble for me, who have been born in a family of asuras, to offer suitable prayers to satisfy the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead? Even until 
now, all the demigods, headed by Lord 
Brahm ā, and all the saintly persons, could not 
satisfy the Lord by streams of excellent words, 
although such pe rsons are very qualified, being 
in the mode of goodness. Then what is to be 
said of me? I am not at all qualified.  (8) Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja continued: One may possess 
wealth, an aristocratic family, beauty, austerity, 
education, sensory expertise, luster, in fluence, 
physical strength, diligence, intelligence and 
mystic yogic power, but I think that even by all 
these qualifications one cannot satisfy the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. However, one 
can satisfy the Lord simply by devotional ser-
vice. Gajendra di d this, and thus the Lord was 
satisfied with him.  (9) If a br āhmaṇa has all 
twelve of the brahminical qualifications [as 
they are stated in the book called Sanat -sujāta] 
but is not a devotee and is averse to the lotus 
feet of the Lord, he is certainly lower than a 
devotee who is a dog -eater but who has dedi-
cated eve rythingmind, words, activities, wealth 
and lifeto the Supreme Lord. Such a devotee is 
better than such a br āhmaṇa because the devo-
tee can purify his whole family, whereas the so -
called br āhmaṇa in a position of false prestige 
cannot purify even himself.  ( 10) The Supreme 
Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is 
always fully satisfied in Himself. Therefore 
when something is offered to Him, the offering, 
by the Lord’s mercy, is for the benefit of the 
devotee, for the Lord does not need service 
from anyone . To give an example, if one’s face 
is decorated, the reflection of one’s face in a 
mirror is also seen to be decorated.  (11) There-
fore, although I was born in a demoniac family, 
I may without a doubt offer prayers to the Lord 
with full endeavor, as far a s my intelligence al-
lows. Anyone who has been forced by igno-
rance to enter the material world may be puri-
fied of material life if he offers prayers to the 
Lord and hears the Lord’s glories.  (12)  

O my Lord, all the demigods, headed by 
Lord Brahm ā, are si ncere servants of Your 
Lordship, who are situated in a transcendental 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

441 
 position. Therefore they are not like us [Prah-
lāda and his father, the demon Hira ṇyaka śipu]. 
Your appearance in this fearsome form is Your 
pastime for Your own pleasure. Such an incar-
nation is always meant for the protection and 
improvement of the universe.  (13) My Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva, please, therefore, cease Your an-
ger now that my father, the great demon 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, has been killed. Since even 
saintly persons take pleasure in the killi ng of a 
scorpion or a snake, all the worlds have 
achieved great satisfaction because of the death 
of this demon. Now they are confident of their 
happiness, and they will always remember 
Your auspicious incarnation in order to be free 
from fear.  (14) My Lo rd, who are never con-
quered by anyone, I am certainly not afraid of 
Your ferocious mouth and tongue, Your eyes 
bright like the sun or Your frowning eyebrows. 
I do not fear Your sharp, pinching teeth, Your 
garland of intestines, Your mane soaked with 
blood,  or Your high, wedgelike ears. Nor do I 
fear Your tumultuous roaring, which makes el-
ephants flee to distant places, or Your nails, 
which are meant to kill Your enemies.  (15) O 
most powerful, insurmountable Lord, who are 
kind to the fallen souls, I have be en put into the 
association of demons as a result of my activi-
ties, and therefore I am very much afraid of my 
condition of life within this material world. 
When will that moment come when You will 
call me to the shelter of Your lotus feet, which 
are the ul timate goal for liberation from condi-
tional life?  (16) O great one, O Supreme Lord, 
because of combination with pleasing and dis-
pleasing circumstances and because of separa-
tion from them, one is placed in a most regret-
table position, within heavenly or he llish plan-
ets, as if burning in a fire of lamentation. Alt-
hough there are many remedies by which to get 
out of miserable life, any such remedies in the 
material world are more miserable than the 
miseries themselves. Therefore I think that the 
only remedy i s to engage in Your service. 
Kindly instruct me in such service.  (17) O my 
Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva, by engaging in Your tran-
scendental loving service in the association of 
devotees who are liberated souls [ha ṁsas], I 
shall become completely uncontaminated by the association of the three modes of material 
nature and be able to chant the glories of Your 
Lordship, who are so dear to me. I shall chant 
Your glories, following exactly in the footsteps 
of Lord Brahm ā and his disciplic succession. In 
this way I shall und oubtedly be able to cross the 
ocean of nescience.  (18) My Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva, O Supreme, because of a bodily 
conception of life, embodied souls neglected 
and not cared for by You cannot do anything 
for their betterment. Whatever remedies they 
accept, althou gh perhaps temporarily benefi-
cial, are certainly impermanent. For example, a 
father and mother cannot protect their child, a 
physician and medicine cannot relieve a suffer-
ing patient, and a boat on the ocean cannot pro-
tect a drowning man.  (19) My dear Lor d, eve-
ryone in this material world is under the modes 
of material nature, being influenced by good-
ness, passion and ignorance. Everyonefrom the 
greatest personality, Lord Brahm ā, down to the 
small antworks under the influence of these 
modes. Therefore everyone in this material 
world is influenced by Your energy. The cause 
for which they work, the place where they 
work, the time when they work, the matter due 
to which they work, the goal of life they have 
considered final, and the process for obtaining 
this goalall are nothing but manifestations of 
Your energy. Indeed, since the energy and en-
ergetic are identical, all of them are but mani-
festations of You.  (20)  

O Lord, O suprem e eternal, by expanding 
Your plenary portion You have created the sub-
tle bodies of the living entities through the 
agency of Your external energy, which is agi-
tated by time. Thus the mind entraps the living 
entity in unlimited varieties of desires to be fu l-
filled by the Vedic directions of karma -kāṇḍa 
[fruitive activity] and the sixteen elements. 
Who can get free from this entanglement unless 
he takes shelter at Your lotus feet?  (21) My 
dear Lord, O supreme great, You have created 
this material world of si xteen constituents, but 
You are transcendental to their material quali-
ties. In other words, these material qualities are 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

442 
 under Your full control, and You are never con-
quered by them. Therefore the time element is 
Your representation. My Lord, O Supreme, no  
one can conquer You. As for me, however, I am 
being crushed by the wheel of time, and there-
fore I surrender fully unto You. Now kindly 
take me under the protection of Your lotus feet.  
(22) My dear Lord, people in general want to 
be elevated to the higher  planetary systems for 
a long duration of life, opulence and enjoy-
ment, but I have seen all of these through the 
activities of my father. When my father was an-
gry and he laughed sarcastically at the demi-
gods, they were immediately vanquished 
simply by seei ng the movements of his eye-
brows. Yet my father, who was so powerful, 
has now been vanquished by You within a mo-
ment.  (23) My dear Lord, now I have complete 
experience concerning the worldly opulence, 
mystic power, longevity and other material 
pleasures e njoyed by all living entities, from 
Lord Brahm ā down to the ant. As powerful 
time, You destroy them all. Therefore, because 
of my experience, I do not wish to possess 
them. My dear Lord, I request You to place me 
in touch with Your pure devotee and let me 
serve him as a sincere servant.  (24) In this ma-
terial world, every living entity desires some 
future happiness, which is exactly like a mirage 
in the desert. Where is water in the desert, or, 
in other words, where is happiness in this ma-
terial world? As f or this body, what is its value? 
It is merely a source of various diseases. The 
so-called philosophers, scientists and politi-
cians know this very well, but nonetheless they 
aspire for temporary happiness. Happiness is 
very difficult to obtain, but because they are un-
able to control their senses, they run after the 
so-called happiness of the material world and 
never come to the right conclusion.  (25) O my 
Lord, O Supreme, because I was born in a fam-
ily full of the hellish material qualities of pas-
sion and i gnorance, what is my position? And 
what is to be said of Your causeless mercy, 
which was never offered even to Lord Brahm ā, 
Lord Śiva or the goddess of fortune, Lak ṣmī? 
You never put Your lotus hand upon their 
heads, but You have put it upon mine.  (26) Un-
like an ordinary living entity, my Lord, You do not discriminate between friends and enemies, 
the favorable and the unfav orable, because for 
You there is no conception of higher and lower. 
Nonetheless, You offer Your benedictions ac-
cording to the level of one’s service, exactly as 
a desire tree delivers fruits according to one’s 
desires and makes no distinction between the 
lower and the higher.  (27) My dear Lord, O 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, because of 
my association with material desires, one after 
another, I was gradually falling into a blind 
well full of snakes, following the general pop-
ulace. But Your servant N ārada Muni kindly 
accepted me as his disciple and instructed me 
how to achieve this transcendental position. 
Therefore, my first duty is to serve him. How 
could I leave his service?  (28) My Lord, O un-
limited reservoir of transcendental qualities, 
You have  killed my father, Hira ṇyaka śipu, and 
saved me from his sword. He had said very an-
grily, “If there is any supreme controller other 
than me, let Him save you. I shall now sever 
your head from your body.” Therefore I think 
that both in saving me and in killi ng him, You 
have acted just to prove true the words of Your 
devotee. There is no other cause.  (29)  

My dear Lord, You alone manifest Yourself 
as the entire cosmic manifestation, for You ex-
isted before the creation, You exist after the an-
nihilation, and Y ou are the maintainer between 
the beginning and the end. All this is done by 
Your external energy through actions and reac-
tions of the three modes of material nature. 
Therefore whatever existsexternally and inter-
nallyis You alone.  (30) My dear Lord, O Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the entire cos-
mic creation is caused by You, and the cosmic 
manifestation is an effect of Your energy. Alt-
hough the entire cosmos is but You alone, You 
keep Yourself aloof from it. The conception of 
“mine and yours,” is certain ly a type of illusion 
[māyā] because everything is an emanation 
from You and is therefore not different from 
You. Indeed, the cosmic manifestation is non-
different from You, and the annihilation is also 
caused by You. This relationship between Your 
Lordship and the cosmos is illus trated by the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

443 
 example of the seed and the tree, or the subtle 
cause and the gross manifestation.  (31)  

O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of God-
head, after the annihilation the creative energy 
is kept in You, who appear to sleep with half -
closed eyes. Actu ally, however, You do not 
sleep like an ordinary human being, for You are 
always in a transcendental stage, beyond the 
creation of the material world, and You always 
feel transcendental bliss. As K āraṇodaka śāyī 
Viṣṇu, You thus remain in Your transcendental 
status, not touching material objects. Although 
You appear to sleep, this sleeping is distinct 
from sleeping in ignorance.  (32) This cosmic 
manifestation, the material world, is also Your 
body. T his total lump of matter is agitated by 
Your potent energy known as k āla-śakti, and 
thus the three modes of material nature are 
manifested. You awaken from the bed of Śeṣa, 
Ananta, and from Your navel a small transcen-
dental seed is generated. It is from th is seed that 
the lotus flower of the gigantic universe is man-
ifested, exactly as a banyan tree grows from a 
small seed.  (33) From that great lotus flower, 
Brahm ā was generated, but Brahm ā certainly 
could see nothing but the lotus. Therefore, 
thinking You to be outside, Lord Brahm ā dove 
into the water and attempted to find the source 
of the lotus for one hundred years. He could 
find no trace of You, however, for when a seed 
fructifies, the original seed cannot be seen.  (34) 
Lord Brahm ā, who is celebrated a s ātma-yoni, 
having been born without a mother, was struck 
with wonder. Thus he took shelter of the lotus 
flower, and when he had been purified after un-
dergoing severe austerities for many hundreds 
of years, he could see that the cause of all 
causes, the S upreme Personality of Godhead, 
was spread throughout his own body and 
senses, just as aroma, although very subtle, is 
perceived in the earth.  (35)  

Lord Brahm ā could then see You possessing 
thousands and thousands of faces, feet, heads, 
hands, thighs, no ses, ears and eyes. You were 
very nicely dressed, being decorated and be-decked with varieties of ornaments and weap-
ons. Seeing You in the form of Lord Vi ṣṇu, 
Your symptoms and form being transcendental, 
Your legs extending from the lower planets, 
Lord Brah mā achieved transcendental bliss.  
(36) My dear Lord, when You appeared as 
Hayagr īva, with the head of a horse, You killed 
two demons known as Madhu and Kai ṭabha, 
who were full of the modes of passion and ig-
norance. Then You delivered the Vedic 
knowledge t o Lord Brahm ā. For this reason, all 
the great saints accept Your forms as transcen-
dental, untinged by material qualities.  (37) In 
this way, my Lord, You appear in various in-
carnations as a human being, an animal, a great 
saint, a demigod, a fish or a tort oise, thus main-
taining the entire creation in different planetary 
systems and killing the demoniac principles. 
According to the age, O my Lord, You protect 
the principles of religion. In the Age of Kali, 
however, You do not assert Yourself as the Su-
preme P ersonality of Godhead, and therefore 
You are known as Triyuga, or the Lord who ap-
pears in three yugas.  (38)  

My dear Lord of the Vaiku ṇṭha planets, 
where there is no anxiety, my mind is ex-
tremely sinful and lusty, being sometimes so -
called happy and sometimes so -called dis-
tressed. My mind is full of lamentation and 
fear, and it always seeks more and more money. 
Thus it has become most polluted and is never 
satisfied in topics concerning You. I am there-
fore most fallen and poor. In such a status of 
life, how shall I be able to discuss Your activi-
ties?  (39) My dear Lord, O infallible one, my 
position is like that o f a person who has many 
wives, all trying to attract him in their own way. 
For example, the tongue is attracted to palatable 
dishes, the genitals to sex with an attractive 
woman, and the sense of touch to contact with 
soft things. The belly, although fille d, still 
wants to eat more, and the ear, not attempting 
to hear about You, is generally attracted to cin-
ema songs. The sense of smell is attracted to yet 
another side, the restless eyes are attracted to 
scenes of sense gratification, and the active 
senses are attracted elsewhere. In this way I am 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

444 
 certainly embarrassed.  (40) My dear Lord, You 
are always transcendentally situated on the 
other side of the river of death, but because of 
the reactions of our own activities, we are suf-
fering on this side. Indeed , we have fallen into 
this river and are repeatedly suffering the pains 
of birth and death and eating horrible things. 
Now kindly look upon usnot only upon me but 
also upon all others who are sufferingand by 
Your causeless mercy and compassion, deliver 
us and maintain us.  (41) O my Lord, O Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, original spir-
itual master of the entire world, what is the dif-
ficulty for You, who manage the affairs of the 
universe, in delivering the fallen souls engaged 
in Your devotional service? Yo u are the friend 
of all suffering humanity, and for great person-
alities it is necessary to show mercy to the fool-
ish. Therefore I think that You will show Your 
causeless mercy to persons like us, who engage 
in Your service.  (42) O best of the great per-
sonalities, I am not at all afraid of material ex-
istence, for wherever I stay I am fully absorbed 
in thoughts of Your glories and activities. My 
concern is only for the fools and rascals who 
are making elaborate plans for material happi-
ness and maintaining th eir families, societies 
and countries. I am simply concerned with love 
for them.  (43) My dear Lord N ṛsiṁhadeva, I 
see that there are many saintly persons indeed, 
but they are interested only in their own deliv-
erance. Not caring for the big cities and town s, 
they go to the Him ālayas or the forest to medi-
tate with vows of silence [mauna -vrata]. They 
are not interested in delivering others. As for 
me, however, I do not wish to be liberated 
alone, leaving aside all these poor fools and ras-
cals. I know that wit hout K ṛṣṇa consciousness, 
without taking shelter of Your lotus feet, one 
cannot be happy. Therefore I wish to bring 
them back to shelter at Your lotus feet.  (44)  

Sex life is compared to the rubbing of two 
hands to relieve an itch. G ṛhamedhis, so -called 
gṛhasthas who have no spiritual knowledge, 
think that this itching is the greatest platform of 
happiness, although actually it is a source of 
distress. The k ṛpaṇas, the fools who are just the opposite of br āhmaṇas, are not satisfied by re-
peated sensuous en joyment. Those who are 
dhīra, however, who are sober and who tolerate 
this itching, are not subjected to the sufferings 
of fools and rascals.  (45) O Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, there are ten prescribed meth-
ods on the path to liberationto remain silent , not 
to speak to anyone, to observe vows, to amass 
all kinds of Vedic knowledge, to undergo aus-
terities, to study the Vedas and other Vedic lit-
eratures, to execute the duties of var ṇāśrama -
dharma, to explain the śāstras, to stay in a soli-
tary place, to ch ant mantras silently, and to be 
absorbed in trance. These different methods for 
liberation are generally only a professional 
practice and means of livelihood for those who 
have not conquered their senses. Because such 
persons are falsely proud, these proce dures 
may not be successful.  (46) By authorized Ve-
dic knowledge one can see that the forms of 
cause and effect in the cosmic manifestation 
belong to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
for the cosmic manifestation is His energy. 
Both cause and effect are nothing but energies 
of the Lord. Therefore, O my Lord, just as a 
wise man, by considering cause and effect, can 
see how fire pervades wood, those engaged in 
devotional service understand how You are 
both the cause and effect.  (47) O Supreme 
Lord, You are  actually the air, the earth, fire, 
sky and water. You are the objects of sense per-
ception, the life airs, the five senses, the mind, 
consciousness and false ego. Indeed, You are 
everything, subtle and gross. The material ele-
ments and anything expressed, e ither by the 
words or by the mind, are nothing but You.  
(48) Neither the three modes of material nature 
[sattva -guṇa, rajo -guṇa and tamo -guṇa], nor 
the predominating deities controlling these 
three modes, nor the five gross elements, nor 
the mind, nor the  demigods nor the human be-
ings can understand Your Lordship, for they are 
all subjected to birth and annihilation. Consid-
ering this, the spiritually advanced have taken 
to devotional service. Such wise men hardly 
bother with Vedic study. Instead, they enga ge 
themselves in practical devotional service.  (49) 
Therefore, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

445 
 the best of all persons to whom prayers are of-
fered, I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
You because without rendering six kinds of de-
votional service unto Youoffering prayers, ded-
icating all the results of activities, worshiping 
You, working on Your behalf, always remem-
bering Your lotus feet and hearing about Your 
glorieswho can achieve that which is meant for 
the paramaha ṁsas?  (50)  

The great saint N ārada said: Thus Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva was pacified by the devotee Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja with prayers offered from the 
transcendental platform. The Lord gave up His 
anger, and being very kind to Prahl āda, who 
was offering prostrated obeisances, He spoke 
as follows.  (51 )  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
My dear Prahl āda, most gentle one, best of the 
family of the asuras, all good fortune unto you. 
I am very much pleased with you. It is My pas-
time to fulfill the desires of all living beings, 
and therefore you ma y ask from Me any bene-
diction that you desire to be fulfilled.  (52) My 
dear Prahl āda, may you live a long time. One 
cannot appreciate or understand Me without 
pleasing Me, but one who has seen or pleased 
Me has nothing more for which to lament for 
his own  satisfaction.  (53) My dear Prahl āda, 
you are very fortunate. Please know from Me 
that those who are very wise and highly ele-
vated try to please Me in all different modes of 
mellows, for I am the only person who can ful-
fill all the desires of everyone.  ( 54)  

Nārada Muni said: Prahl āda Mah ārāja was 
the best person in the family of asuras, who al-
ways aspire for material happiness. Nonethe-
less, although allured by the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, who offered him all benedic-
tions for material happiness, b ecause of his un-
alloyed K ṛṣṇa consciousness he did not want to 
take any material benefit for sense gratification.  
(55)  
 SB 7.10: Prahl āda, the Best Among Exalted 
Devotees  

The saint N ārada Muni continued: Although 
Prahl āda Mah ārāja was only a boy, when h e 
heard the benedictions offered by Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva he considered them impediments 
on the path of devotional service. Thus he 
smiled very mildly and spoke as follows.  (1)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja said: My dear Lord, O 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, because I  
was born in an atheistic family I am naturally 
attached to material enjoyment. Therefore, 
kindly do not tempt me with these illusions. I 
am very much afraid of material conditions, 
and I desire to be liberated from materialistic 
life. It is for this reaso n that I have taken shelter 
of Your lotus feet.  (2) O my worshipable Lord, 
because the seed of lusty desires, which is the 
root cause of material existence, is within the 
core of everyone’s heart, You have sent me to 
this material world to exhibit the sym ptoms of 
a pure devotee.  (3) Otherwise, O my Lord, O 
supreme instructor of the entire world, You are 
so kind to Your devotee that You could not in-
duce him to do something unbeneficial for him. 
On the other hand, one who desires some mate-
rial benefit in ex change for devotional service 
cannot be Your pure devotee. Indeed, he is no 
better than a merchant who wants profit in ex-
change for service.  (4) A servant who desires 
material profits from his master is certainly not 
a qualified servant or pure devotee. S imilarly, a 
master who bestows benedictions upon his 
servant because of a desire to maintain a pres-
tigious position as master is also not a pure 
master.  (5) O my Lord, I am Your unmotivated 
servant, and You are my eternal master. There 
is no need of our b eing anything other than 
master and servant. You are naturally my mas-
ter, and I am naturally Your servant. We have 
no other relationship.  (6) O my Lord, best of 
the givers of benediction, if You at all want to 
bestow a desirable benediction upon me, then I 
pray from Your Lordship that within the core 
of my heart there be no material desires.  (7) O 
my Lord, because of lusty desires from the very 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

446 
 beginning of one’s birth, the functions of one’s 
senses, mind, life, body, religion, patience, in-
telligence, shy ness, opulence, strength, 
memory and truthfulness are vanquished.  (8) 
O my Lord, when a human being is able to give 
up all the material desires in his mind, he be-
comes eligible to possess wealth and opulence 
like Yours.  (9) O my Lord, full of six opu-
lences, O Supreme Person! O Supreme Soul, 
killer of all miseries! O Supreme Person in the 
form of a wonderful lion and man, let me offer 
my respectful obeisances unto You.  (10)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
My dear Prahl āda, a devotee like you ne ver de-
sires any kind of material opulences, either in 
this life or in the next. Nonetheless, I order you 
to enjoy the opulences of the demons in this 
material world, acting as their king until the end 
of the duration of time occupied by Manu.  (11) 
It does  not matter that you are in the material 
world. You should always, continuously, hear 
the instructions and messages given by Me and 
always be absorbed in thought of Me, for I am 
the Supersoul existing in the core of everyone’s 
heart. Therefore, give up fru itive activities and 
worship Me.  (12) My dear Prahl āda, while you 
are in this material world you will exhaust all 
the reactions of pious activity by feeling happi-
ness, and by acting piously you will neutralize 
impious activity. Because of the powerful tim e 
factor, you will give up your body, but the glo-
ries of your activities will be sung in the upper 
planetary systems, and being fully freed from 
all bondage, you will return home, back to God-
head.  (13) One who always remembers your 
activities and My activ ities also, and who 
chants the prayers you have offered, becomes 
free, in due course of time, from the reactions 
of material activities.  (14)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja said: O Supreme Lord, 
because You are so merciful to the fallen souls, 
I ask You for only one benediction. I know that 
my father, at the time of his death, had already 
been purified by Your glance upon him, but be-
cause of his ignorance of Your  beautiful power 
and supremacy, he was unnecessarily angry at You, falsely thinking that You were the killer 
of his brother. Thus he directly blasphemed 
Your Lordship, the spiritual master of all living 
beings, and committed heavily sinful activities 
direc ted against me, Your devotee. I wish that 
he be excused for these sinful activities.  (15 -
17)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
My dear Prahl āda, O most pure, O great saintly 
person, your father has been purified, along 
with twenty -one forefathers in your family. Be-
cause you were born in this family, the entire 
dynasty has been purified.  (18) Whenever and 
wherever there are peaceful, equipoise d devo-
tees who are well -behaved and decorated with 
all good qualities, that place and the dynasties 
there, even if condemned, are purified.  (19) 
My dear Prahl āda, King of the Daityas, because 
of being attached to devotional service to Me, 
My devotee does not distinguish between lower 
and higher living entities. In all respects, he is 
never jealous of anyone.  (20) Those who fol-
low your example will naturally become My 
pure devotees. You are the best example of My 
devotee, and others should follow in your f oot-
steps.  (21) My dear child, your father has al-
ready been purified just by the touch of My 
body at the time of his death. Nonetheless, the 
duty of a son is to perform the śrāddha ritualis-
tic ceremony after his father’s death so that his 
father may be promoted to a planetary system 
where he may become a good citizen and dev-
otee.  (22) After performing the ritualistic cer-
emonies, take charge of your father’s kingdom. 
Sit upon  the throne and do not be disturbed by 
materialistic activities. Please keep your mind 
fixed upon Me. Without transgressing the in-
junctions of the Vedas, as a matter of formality 
you may perform your particular duties.  (23)  

Śrī Nārada Muni continued: Th us, as the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead ordered, Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja performed the ritualistic cere-
monies for his father. O King Yudhi ṣṭhira, he 
was then enthroned in the kingdom of 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, as directed by the br āhmaṇas.  
(24) Lord Brahm ā, surrounded  by the other 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

447 
 demigods, was bright -faced because the Lord 
was pleased. Thus he offered prayers to the 
Lord with transcendental words.  (25)  

Lord Brahm ā said: O Supreme Lord of all 
lords, proprietor of the entire universe, O bene-
dictor of all living entit ies, O original person 
[ādi-puruṣa], because of our good fortune You 
have now killed this sinful demon, who was 
giving trouble to the entire universe.  (26) This 
demon, Hira ṇyaka śipu, received from me the 
benediction that he would not be killed by any 
living being within my creation. With this as-
surance and with strength derived from auster-
ities and mystic power, he became excessively 
proud and transgressed all the Vedic injunc-
tions.  (27) By great fortune, Hira ṇyaka śipu’s 
son Prahl āda Mah ārāja has now been  released 
from death, for although he is a child, he is an 
exalted devotee. Now he is fully under the pro-
tection of Your lotus feet.  (28) My dear Lord, 
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are 
the Supreme Soul. If one meditates upon Your 
transcendental b ody, You naturally protect him 
from all sources of fear, even the imminent 
danger of death.  (29)  

The Personality of Godhead replied: My 
dear Lord Brahm ā, O great lord born from the 
lotus flower, just as it is dangerous to feed milk 
to a snake, so it is dangerous to give benedic-
tions to demons, who are by nature ferocious 
and jealous. I warn you not to give such bene-
dictions to any demon again.  (30)  

Nārada Muni continued: O King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is not visible to an ordinary human 
being, spoke in this way, instructing Lord 
Brahm ā. Then, being worshiped by Brahm ā, 
the Lord disappeared from that place.  (31) 
Prahl āda Ma hārāja then worshiped and offered 
prayers to all the demigods, such as Brahm ā, 
Śiva and the praj āpatis, who are all parts of the 
Lord.  (32) Thereafter, along with Śukrācārya 
and other great saints, Lord Brahm ā, whose 
seat is on the lotus flower, made Prah lāda the king of all the demons and giants in the uni-
verse.  (33) O King Yudhi ṣṭhira, after all the 
demigods, headed by Lord Brahm ā, were 
properly worshiped by Prahl āda Mah ārāja, they 
offered Prahl āda their utmost benedictions and 
then returned to their re spective abodes.  (34)  

Thus the two associates of Lord Vi ṣṇu who 
had become Hira ṇyākṣa and Hira ṇyaka śipu, 
the sons of Diti, were both killed. By illusion 
they had thought that the Supreme Lord, who is 
situated in everyone’s heart, was their enemy.  
(35) Being cursed by the br āhmaṇas, the same 
two associates took birth again as 
Kumbhakar ṇa and the ten -headed R āvaṇa. 
These two R ākṣasas were killed by Lord 
Rāmacandra’s extraordinary power.  (36) 
Pierced by the arrows of Lord R āmacandra, 
both Kumbhakar ṇa and Rāvaṇa lay on the 
ground and left their bodies, fully absorbed in 
thought of the Lord, just as they had in their 
previous births as Hira ṇyākṣa and 
Hiraṇyaka śipu.  (37) They both took birth again 
in human society as Śiśupāla and Dantavakra 
and continued in the same enmity toward the 
Lord. It is they who merged into the body of the 
Lord in your presence.  (38) Not only Śiśupāla 
and Dantavakra but also many, many other 
kings who acted as enemies of K ṛṣṇa attained 
salvation at the time of death. Because they 
thought of the Lord, they received spiritual 
bodies and forms the same as His, just as 
worms captured by a black drone obtain the 
same type of body as the drone.  (39) By devo-
tional service, pure devotees who incessantly 
think of the Supreme Personality of G odhead 
receive bodies similar to His. This is known as 
sārūpya-mukti. Although Śiśupāla, Dantavakra 
and other kings thought of K ṛṣṇa as an enemy, 
they also achieved the same result.  (40)  

Everything you asked me about how 
Śiśupāla and others attained salvation although 
they were inimical has now been explaine d to 
you by me.  (41) In this narration about K ṛṣṇa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, various 
expansions or incarnations of the Lord have 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

448 
 been described, and the killing of the two de-
mons Hira ṇyākṣa and Hira ṇyaka śipu has also 
been described.  (42) This narration describes 
the characteristics of the great and exalted dev-
otee Prahl āda Mah ārāja, his staunch devotional 
service, his perfect knowledge, and his perfect 
detachment from material contamination. It 
also describes the Supreme Personality of God-
head as the cause of creation, maintenance and 
annihilation. Prahl āda Mah ārāja, in his prayers, 
has described the transcendental qualities of the 
Lord and has also described how the various 
abodes of the demigods and demons, regardless 
of how materially opulent , are destroyed by the 
mere direction of the Lord.  (43 -44) The princi-
ples of religion by which one can actually un-
derstand the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
are called bh āgavata -dharma. In this narration, 
therefore, which deals with these principles, ac-
tual transcendence is properly described.  (45) 
One who hears and chants this narration about 
the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, is certainly liberated from ma-
terial bondage without fail.  (46) Prahl āda 
Mahārāja was the best among  exalted devotees. 
Anyone who with great attention hears this nar-
ration concerning the activities of Prahl āda 
Mahārāja, the killing of Hira ṇyaka śipu, and the 
activities of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, N ṛsiṁhadeva, surely reaches the spiritual 
world,  where there is no anxiety.  (47)  

Nārada Muni continued: My dear Mah ārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, all of you [the P āṇḍavas] are ex-
tremely fortunate, for the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, lives in your palace just 
like a human being. Great saintly persons k now 
this very well, and therefore they constantly 
visit this house.  (48) The impersonal Brahman 
is Kṛṣṇa Himself because K ṛṣṇa is the source of 
the impersonal Brahman. He is the origin of the 
transcendental bliss sought by great saintly per-
sons, yet He, t he Supreme Person, is your most 
dear friend and constant well -wisher and is in-
timately related to you as the son of your ma-
ternal uncle. Indeed, He is always like your 
body and soul. He is worshipable, yet He acts 
as your servant and sometimes as your spir itual master.  (49) Exalted persons like Lord Śiva 
and Lord Brahm ā could not properly describe 
the truth of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, K ṛṣṇa. May the Lord, who is always wor-
shiped as the protector of all devotees by great 
saints who observe vows of silence, meditation, 
devotional service and renunciation, be pleased 
with us.  (50) My dear King Yudhi ṣṭhira, long, 
long ago in history, a demon known as Maya 
Dānava, who was very expert in technical 
knowledge, reduced the reputation of Lord 
Śiva. In that situation, K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Per-
sonality of  Godhead, saved Lord Śiva.  (51)  

Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira said: For what reason 
did the demon Maya D ānava vanquish Lord 
Śiva’s reputation? How did Lord K ṛṣṇa save 
Lord Śiva and expand his reputation again? 
Kindly describe these incidents.  (52)  

Nārada Muni  said: When the demigods, who 
are always powerful by the mercy of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, fought with the asuras, the asuras were 
defeated, and therefore they took shelter of 
Maya D ānava, the greatest of the demons.  (53)  

Maya D ānava, the great leader of the de-
mons,  prepared three invisible residences and 
gave them to the demons. These dwellings re-
sembled airplanes made of gold, silver and 
iron, and they contained uncommon parapher-
nalia. My dear King Yudhi ṣṭhira, because of 
these three dwellings the commanders of the  
demons remained invisible to the demigods. 
Taking advantage of this opportunity, the de-
mons, remembering their former enmity, began 
to vanquish the three worldsthe upper, middle 
and lower planetary systems.  (54 -55) Thereaf-
ter, when the demons had begun t o destroy the 
higher planetary systems, the rulers of those 
planets went to Lord Śiva, fully surrendered 
unto him and said: Dear Lord, we demigods liv-
ing in the three worlds are about to be van-
quished. We are your followers. Kindly save 
us.  (56)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

449 
 The most powerful and able Lord Śiva reas-
sured them and said, “Do not be afraid.” He 
then fixed his arrows to his bow and released 
them toward the three residences occupied by 
the demons.  (57) The arrows released by Lord 
Śiva appeared like fiery beams emanating from 
the sun globe and covered the three residential 
airplanes, which could then no longer be seen.  
(58) Attacked by Lord Śiva’s golden arrows, all 
the demoniac inhabitants of those three dwell-
ings lost their lives and fell down. Then the 
great mystic Maya D ānava dropped the demons 
into a nectarean well that he had created.  (59) 
When  the dead bodies of the demons came in 
touch with the nectar, their bodies became in-
vincible to thunderbolts. Endowed with great 
strength, they got up like lightning penetrating 
clouds.  (60)  

Seeing Lord Śiva very much aggrieved and 
disappointed, the Sup reme Personality of God-
head, Lord Vi ṣṇu, considered how to stop this 
nuisance created by Maya D ānava.  (61) Then 
Lord Brahm ā became a calf and Lord Vi ṣṇu a 
cow, and at noon they entered the residences 
and drank all the nectar in the well.  (62) The 
demons could see the calf and cow, but because 
of the illusion created by the energy of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the demons 
could not forbid them. The great mystic Maya 
Dānava became aware that the calf and cow 
were drinking the nectar, and he could un der-
stand this to be the unseen power of provi-
dence. Thus he spoke to the demons, who were 
grievously lamenting.  (63)  
Maya D ānava said: What has been destined 
by the Supreme Lord for oneself, for others, or 
for both oneself and others cannot be undone 
anywhere or by anyone, whether one be a dem-
igod, a demon, a human being or anyone else.  
(64) N ārada Muni continued: Thereafter, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, by His own personal potency, consisting 
of religion, knowledge, renunciation, opulence, 
austerity, education and activ ities, equipped 
Lord Śiva with all the necessary paraphernalia, 
such as a chariot, a charioteer, a flag, horses, 
elephants, a bow, a shield and arrows. When 
Lord Śiva was fully equipped in this way, he sat down on the chariot with his arrows and bow to 
fight with the demons.  (65 -66) My dear King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, the most powerful Lord Śiva 
joined the arrows to his bow, and at noon he set 
fire to all three residences of the demons and 
thus destroyed them.  (67) Seated in their air-
planes in the sky, the inhabita nts of the higher 
planetary systems beat many kettledrums. The 
demigods, saints, Pit ās, Siddhas and various 
great personalities showered flowers on the 
head of Lord Śiva, wishing him all victory, and 
the Apsar ās began to chant and dance with 
great pleasure .  (68) O King Yudhi ṣṭhira, thus 
Lord Śiva is known as Tripur āri, the annihilator 
of the three dwellings of the demons, because 
he burnt these dwellings to ashes. Being wor-
shiped by the demigods, headed by Lord 
Brahm ā, Lord Śiva returned to his own abode.  
(69) The Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, appeared as a human 
being, yet He performed many uncommon and 
wonderful pastimes by His own potency. How 
can I say more about His activities than what 
has already been said by great saintly persons? 
Everyone can be purified by Hi s activities, 
simply by hearing about them from the right 
source.  (70)  

SB 7.11: The Perfect Society: Four Social 
Classes  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: After hearing 
about the activities and character of Prahl āda 
Mahārāja, which are adored and discussed 
among great personalities like Lord Brahm ā 
and Lord Śiva, Yudhi ṣṭhira Mah ārāja, the most 
respectful king among exalted personalities, 
again inquired from the great saint N ārada 
Muni in a mood of great pleasure.  (1)  

Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira said: My dear lord , I 
wish to hear from you about the principles of 
religion by which one can attain the ultimate 
goal of lifedevotional service. I wish to hear 
about the general occupational duties of human 
society and the system of social and spiritual 
advancement known a s var ṇāśrama -dharma.  
(2) O best of the br āhmaṇas, you are directly 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

450 
 the son of Praj āpati [Lord Brahm ā]. Because of 
your austerities, mystic yoga and trance, you 
are considered the best of all of Lord Brahm ā
’s sons.  (3) No one is superior to you in 
peacefu l life and mercy, and no one knows bet-
ter than you how to execute devotional service 
or how to become the best of the br āhmaṇas. 
Therefore, you know all the principles of con-
fidential religious life, and no one knows them 
better than you.  (4)  

Śrī Nārada Muni said: After first offering 
my obeisances unto Lord K ṛṣṇa, the protector 
of the religious principles of all living entities, 
let me explain the principles of the eternal reli-
gious system, of which I have heard from the 
mouth of N ārāyaṇa.  (5) Lord N ārāyaṇa, along 
with His partial manifestation Nara, appeared 
in this world through the daughter of Dak ṣa 
Mahārāja known as M ūrti. He was begotten by 
Dharma Mah ārāja for the benefit of all living 
entities. Even now, He is still engaged in exe-
cuting great aust erities near the place known as 
Badarik āśrama.  (6) The Supreme Being, the 
Personality of Godhead, is the essence of all 
Vedic knowledge, the root of all religious prin-
ciples, and the memory of great authorities. O 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira, this principle of relig ion is to 
be understood as evidence. On the basis of this 
religious principle, everything is satisfied, in-
cluding one’s mind, soul and even one’s body.  
(7)  

These are the general principles to be fol-
lowed by all human beings: truthfulness, 
mercy, austeri ty (observing fasts on certain 
days of the month), bathing twice a day, toler-
ance, discrimination between right and wrong, 
control of the mind, control of the senses, non-
violence, celibacy, charity, reading of scripture, 
simplicity, satisfaction, rendering  service to 
saintly persons, gradually taking leave of un-
necessary engagements, observing the futility 
of the unnecessary activities of human society, 
remaining silent and grave and avoiding unnec-
essary talk, considering whether one is the body or the soul , distributing food equally to all liv-
ing entities (both men and animals), seeing 
every soul (especially in the human form) as a 
part of the Supreme Lord, hearing about the ac-
tivities and instructions given by the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead (who is the  shelter of 
the saintly persons), chanting about these activ-
ities and instructions, always remembering 
these activities and instructions, trying to ren-
der service, performing worship, offering obei-
sances, becoming a servant, becoming a friend, 
and surrende ring one’s whole self. O King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, these thirty qualifications must be 
acquired in the human form of life. Simply by 
acquiring these qualifications, one can satisfy 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  (8 -12)  

Those who have been reformed by the 
garbhādhāna ceremony and other prescribed re-
formatory methods, performed with Vedic 
mantras and without interruption, and who 
have been approved by Lord Brahm ā, are dvi-
jas, or twice -born. Such br āhmaṇas, k ṣatriyas 
and vai śyas, purified by their family tradi tions 
and by their behavior, should worship the Lord, 
study the Vedas and give charity. In this sys-
tem, they should follow the principles of the 
four āśramas [brahmacarya, g ṛhastha, 
vānaprastha and sanny āsa].  (13) For a 
brāhmaṇa there are six occupational  duties. A 
kṣatriya should not accept charity, but he may 
perform the other five of these duties. A king or 
kṣatriya is not allowed to levy taxes on 
brāhmaṇas, but he may make his livelihood by 
levying minimal taxes, customs duties, and 
penalty fines upon his other subjects.  (14) The 
mercantile community should always follow 
the directions of the br āhmaṇas and engage in 
such occupational duties as agriculture, trade, 
and protection of cows. For the śūdras the only 
duty is to accept a master from a higher s ocial 
order and engage in his service.  (15) As an al-
ternative, a br āhmaṇa may also take to the 
vaiśya’s occupational duty of agriculture, cow 
protection, or trade. He may depend on that 
which he has received without begging, he may 
beg in the paddy field every day, he may collect 
paddy left in a field by its proprietor, or he may 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

451 
 collect food grains left here and there in the 
shops of grain dealers. These are four means of 
livelihood that may also be adopted by 
brāhmaṇas. Among these four, each of them in 
succession is better than the one preceding it.  
(16) Except in a time of emergency, lower per-
sons should not accept the occupational duties 
of those who are higher. When there is such an 
emergency, of course, everyone but the k ṣatriya 
may accept the means  of livelihood of others.  
(17) In time of emergency, one may accept any 
of the various types of professions known as 
ṛta, am ṛta, m ṛta, pram ṛta and saty ānṛta, but one 
should not at any time accept the profession of 
a dog. The profession of uñcha śila, colle cting 
grains from the field, is called ṛta. Collecting 
without begging is called am ṛta, begging grains 
is called m ṛta, tilling the ground is called 
pram ṛta, and trade is called saty ānṛta. Engaging 
in the service of low -grade persons, however, 
is called śva-vṛtti, the profession of the dogs. 
Specifically, br āhmaṇas and k ṣatriyas should 
not engage in the low and abominable service 
of śūdras. Br āhmaṇas should be well ac-
quainted with all the Vedic knowledge, and 
kṣatriyas should be well acquainted with the 
wors hip of demigods.  (18 -20)  

The symptoms of a br āhmaṇa are control of 
the mind, control of the senses, austerity and 
penance, cleanliness, satisfaction, forgiveness, 
simplicity, knowledge, mercy, truthfulness, 
and complete surrender to the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead.  (21) To be influential in bat-
tle, unconquerable, patient, challenging and 
charitable, to control the bodily necessities, to 
be forgiving, to be attached to the brahminical 
nature and to be always jolly and truthfulthese 
are the symptoms of  the k ṣatriya.  (22) Being 
always devoted to the demigods, the spiritual 
master and the Supreme Lord, Vi ṣṇu; endeav-
oring for advancement in religious principles, 
economic development and sense gratification 
[dharma, artha and k āma]; believing in the 
words of the spiritual master and scripture; and 
always endeavoring with expertise in earning 
moneythese are the symptoms of the vai śya.  
(23) Offering obeisances to the higher sections of society [the br āhmaṇas, k ṣatriyas and 
vaiśyas], being always very clean, being free 
from duplicity, serving one’s master, perform-
ing sacrifices without uttering mantras, not 
stealing, always speaking the truth and giving 
all protection to the cows and br āhmaṇasthese 
are the symptoms of the śūdra.  (24)  

To render service to th e husband, to be al-
ways favorably disposed toward the husband, 
to be equally well disposed toward the hus-
band’s relatives and friends, and to follow the 
vows of the husbandthese are the four princi-
ples to be followed by women described as 
chaste.  (25) A c haste woman must dress nicely 
and decorate herself with golden ornaments for 
the pleasure of her husband. Always wearing 
clean and attractive garments, she should 
sweep and clean the household with water and 
other liquids so that the entire house is always  
pure and clean. She should collect the house-
hold paraphernalia and keep the house always 
aromatic with incense and flowers and must be 
ready to execute the desires of her husband. Be-
ing modest and truthful, controlling her senses, 
and speaking in sweet wo rds, a chaste woman 
should engage in the service of her husband 
with love, according to time and circumstances.  
(26-27) A chaste woman should not be greedy, 
but satisfied in all circumstances. She must be 
very expert in handling household affairs and 
shou ld be fully conversant with religious prin-
ciples. She should speak pleasingly and truth-
fully and should be very careful and always 
clean and pure. Thus a chaste woman should 
engage with affection in the service of a hus-
band who is not fallen.  (28) The wom an who 
engages in the service of her husband, follow-
ing strictly in the footsteps of the goddess of 
fortune, surely returns home, back to Godhead, 
with her devotee husband, and lives very hap-
pily in the Vaiku ṇṭha planets.  (29)  

Among the mixed classes kn own as sa ṅkara, 
those who are not thieves are known as ante-
vasāyī or ca ṇḍālas [dog -eaters], and they also 
have their hereditary customs.  (30) My dear 
King, br āhmaṇas well conversant in Vedic 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

452 
 knowledge have given their verdict that in 
every age [yuga] the conduct of different sec-
tions of people according to their material 
modes of nature is auspicious both in this life 
and after death.  (31) If one acts in his profes-
sion according to his position in the modes of 
nature and gradually gives up these activitie s, 
he attains the ni ṣkāma stage.  (32)  

My dear King, if an agricultural field is cul-
tivated again and again, the power of its pro-
duction decreases, and whatever seeds are 
sown there are lost. Just as drops of ghee on a 
fire never extinguish the fire but a flood of ghee 
will, similarly, overindulgence in lusty desires 
mitigates such desires entirely.  (33 -34) If one 
shows the symptoms of being a br āhmaṇa, kṣat-
riya, vai śya or śūdra, as described above, even 
if he has appeared in a different class, he should  
be accepted according to those symptoms of 
classification.  (35)  

SB 7.12: The Perfect Society: Four Spiritual 
Classes  

Nārada Muni said: A student should practice 
completely controlling his senses. He should be 
submissive and should have an attitude of firm 
friendship for the spiritual master. With a great 
vow, the brahmac ārī should live at the 
gurukula, only for the benefit of the guru.  (1) 
At both junctions of day and night, namely, in 
the early morning and in the evening, he should 
be fully absorbed in thoughts of the spiritual 
master, fire, the sun -god and Lord Vi ṣṇu and by 
chanting the G āyatrī mantra he should worship 
them.  (2)  

Being called by the spiritual master, the stu-
dent should study the Vedic mantras regularly. 
Every day, before beginning his studies and at 
the end of his studies, the disciple should re-
spectfully offer obeisances unto the spiritual 
master.  (3) Carrying pure ku śa grass in his 
hand, the brahmac ārī should dress regularly 
with a belt of straw and with deerskin garments. He sho uld wear matted hair, carry a rod and wa-
terpot and be decorated with a sacred thread, as 
recommended in the śāstras.  (4) The brah-
macārī should go out morning and evening to 
collect alms, and he should offer all that he col-
lects to the spiritual master. He  should eat only 
if ordered to take food by the spiritual master; 
otherwise, if the spiritual master does not give 
this order, he may sometimes have to fast.  (5) 
A brahmac ārī should be quite well -behaved and 
gentle and should not eat or collect more than 
necessary. He must always be active and ex-
pert, fully believing in the instructions of the 
spiritual master and the śāstra. Fully controlling 
his senses, he should associate only as much as 
necessary with women or those controlled by 
women.  (6) A brahmac ārī, or one who has not 
accepted the g ṛhastha -āśrama [family life], 
must rigidly avoid talking with women or about 
women, for the senses are so powerful that they 
may agitate even the mind of a sanny āsī, a 
member of the renounced order of life.  (7) If 
the wife of the spiritual master is young, a 
young brahmac ārī should not allow her to care 
for his hair, massage his body with oil, or bathe 
him with affection like a mother.  (8) Woman 
is compared to fire, and man is compared to a 
butter pot. Therefore a man should avoid asso-
ciating even with his own daughter in a se-
cluded place. Similarly, he should also avoid 
association with other women. One should as-
sociate with women only for important busi-
ness and not otherwise.  (9) As long as a living 
entity is not com pletely self -realizedas long as 
he is not independent of the misconception of 
identifying with his body, which is nothing but 
a reflection of the original body and senseshe 
cannot be relieved of the conception of duality, 
which is epitomized by the duality  between 
man and woman. Thus there is every chance 
that he will fall down because his intelligence 
is bewildered.  (10)  

All the rules and regulations apply equally 
to the householder and the sanny āsī, the mem-
ber of the renounced order of life. The g ṛhastha, 
however, is given permission by the spiritual 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

453 
 master to indulge in sex during the period fa-
vorable for procreation.  (11) Brahmac ārīs or 
gṛhasthas who have taken the vow of celibacy 
as described above should not indulge in the 
following: applying powde r or ointment to the 
eyes, massaging the head with oil, massaging 
the body with the hands, seeing a woman or 
painting a woman’s picture, eating meat, drink-
ing wine, decorating the body with flower gar-
lands, smearing scented ointment on the body, 
or decorat ing the body with ornaments. These 
they should give up.  (12) According to the 
rules and regulations mentioned above, one 
who is twice -born, namely a br āhmaṇa, kṣat-
riya or vai śya, should reside in the gurukula un-
der the care of the spiritual master. There he 
should study and learn all the Vedic literatures 
along with their supplements and the 
Upani ṣads, according to his ability and power 
to study. If poss ible, the student or disciple 
should reward the spiritual master with the re-
muneration the spiritual master requests, and 
then, following the master’s order, the disciple 
should leave and accept one of the other 
āśramas, namely the g ṛhastha -āśrama, 
vānapra stha-āśrama or sanny āsa-āśrama, as he 
desires.  (13 -14) One should realize that in the 
fire, in the spiritual master, in one’s self and in 
all living entitiesin all circumstances and con-
ditionsthe Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Viṣṇu, has simultaneously e ntered and not en-
tered. He is situated externally and internally as 
the full controller of everything.  (15) By prac-
ticing in this way, whether one be in the brah-
macārī-āśrama, g ṛhastha -āśrama, v ānaprastha -
āśrama or sanny āsa-āśrama, one must always 
realize  the all -pervading presence of the Su-
preme Lord, for in this way it is possible to un-
derstand the Absolute Truth.  (16)  

O King, I shall now describe the qualifica-
tions for a v ānaprastha, one who has retired 
from family life. By rigidly following the rule s 
and regulations for the v ānaprastha, one can 
easily be elevated to the upper planetary system 
known as Maharloka.  (17) A person in 
vānaprastha life should not eat grains grown by 
tilling of the fields. He should also not eat grains that have grown witho ut tilling of the 
field but are not fully ripe. Nor should a 
vānaprastha eat grains cooked in fire. Indeed, 
he should eat only fruit ripened by the sunshine.  
(18) A v ānaprastha should prepare cakes to be 
offered in sacrifice from fruits and grains 
grown n aturally in the forest. When he obtains 
some new grains, he should give up his old 
stock of grains.  (19) A v ānaprastha should pre-
pare a thatched cottage or take shelter of a cave 
in a mountain only to keep the sacred fire, but 
he should personally practic e enduring snow-
fall, wind, fire, rain and the shining of the sun.  
(20) The v ānaprastha should wear matted locks 
of hair on his head and let his body hair, nails 
and moustache grow. He should not cleanse his 
body of dirt. He should keep a waterpot, deer-
skin and rod, wear the bark of a tree as a cover-
ing, and use garments colored like fire.  (21) 
Being very thoughtful, a v ānaprastha should re-
main in the forest for twelve years, eight years, 
four years, two years or at least one year. He 
should behave in such  a way that he will not be 
disturbed or troubled by too much austerity.  
(22)  

When because of disease or old age one is 
unable to perform his prescribed duties for ad-
vancement in spiritual consciousness or study 
of the Vedas, he should practice fasting, not 
taking any food.  (23) He should properly place 
the fire element in his own self and in this way 
give up bodily affinity, by which one thinks the 
body to be one’s self or one’s own. One should 
gradually merge the material body into the five 
elements [e arth, water, fire, air and sky].  (24) 
A sober, self -realized person who has full 
knowledge should merge the various parts of 
the body in their original sources. The holes in 
the body are caused by the sky, the process of 
breathing is caused by the air, th e heat of the 
body is caused by fire, and semen, blood and 
mucus are caused by water. The hard sub-
stances, like skin, muscle and bone, are caused 
by earth. In this way all the constituents of the 
body are caused by various elements, and they 
should be merg ed again into those elements.  
(25) Thereafter, the object of speech, along 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

454 
 with the sense of speech [the tongue], should be 
bestowed upon fire. Craftsmanship and the two 
hands should be given to the demigod Indra. 
The power of movement and the legs should  be 
given to Lord Vi ṣṇu. Sensual pleasure, along 
with the genitals, should be bestowed upon 
Prajāpati. The rectum, with the power of evac-
uation, should be bestowed, in its proper place, 
unto M ṛtyu. The aural instrument, along with 
sound vibration, should b e given to the deities 
presiding over the directions. The instrument of 
touch, along with the sense objects of touch, 
should be given to V āyu. Form, with the power 
of sight, should be bestowed upon the sun. The 
tongue, along with the demigod Varu ṇa, should  
be bestowed upon water, and the power of 
smell, along with the two A śvinī-kumāra dem-
igods, should be bestowed upon the earth.  (26 -
28) The mind, along with all material desires, 
should be merged in the moon demigod. All the 
subject matters of intelligence , along with the 
intelligence itself, should be placed in Lord 
Brahm ā. False ego, which is under the influ-
ence of the material modes of nature and which 
induces one to think, “I am this body, and eve-
rything connected with this body is mine,” 
should be merg ed, along with material activi-
ties, in Rudra, the predominating deity of false 
ego. Material consciousness, along with the 
goal of thought, should be merged in the indi-
vidual living being, and the demigods acting 
under the modes of material nature should b e 
merged, along with the perverted living being, 
into the Supreme Being. The earth should be 
merged in water, water in the brightness of the 
sun, this brightness into the air, the air into the 
sky, the sky into the false ego, the false ego into 
the total m aterial energy, the total material en-
ergy into the unmanifested ingredients [the pra-
dhāna feature of the material energy], and at 
last the ingredient feature of material manifes-
tation into the Supersoul.  (29 -30) When all the 
material designations have thu s merged into 
their respective material elements, the living 
beings, who are all ultimately completely spir-
itual, being one in quality with the Supreme Be-
ing, should cease from material existence, as 
flames cease when the wood in which they are 
burning is consumed. When the material body is returned to its various material elements, 
only the spiritual being remains. This spiritual 
being is Brahman and is equal in quality with 
Parabrahman.  (31)  

SB 7.13: The Behavior of a Perfect Person  

Śrī Nārada Muni said: A person able to cul-
tivate spiritual knowledge should renounce all 
material connections, and merely keeping the 
body inhabitable, he should travel from one 
place to another, passing only one night in each 
village. In this way, without  dependence in re-
gard to the needs of the body, the sanny āsī 
should travel all over the world.  (1) A person 
in the renounced order of life may try to avoid 
even a dress to cover himself. If he wears any-
thing at all, it should be only a loincloth, and 
when  there is no necessity, a sanny āsī should 
not even accept a da ṇḍa. A sanny āsī should 
avoid carrying anything but a da ṇḍa and 
kama ṇḍalu.  (2) The sanny āsī, completely sat-
isfied in the self, should live on alms begged 
from door to door. Not being dependent o n any 
person or any place, he should always be a 
friendly well -wisher to all living beings and be 
a peaceful, unalloyed devotee of N ārāyaṇa. In 
this way he should move from one place to an-
other.  (3) The sanny āsī should always try to see 
the Supreme pervad ing everything and see eve-
rything, including this universe, resting on the 
Supreme.  (4) During unconsciousness and 
consciousness, and between the two, he should 
try to understand the self and be fully situated 
in the self. In this way, he should realize t hat 
the conditional and liberated stages of life are 
only illusory and not actually factual. With 
such a higher understanding, he should see only 
the Absolute Truth pervading everything.  (5) 
Since the material body is sure to be van-
quished and the duratio n of one’s life is not 
fixed, neither death nor life is to be praised. Ra-
ther, one should observe the eternal time factor, 
in which the living entity manifests himself and 
disappears.  (6) Literature that is a useless 
waste of timein other words, literatur e without 
spiritual benefitshould be rejected. One should 
not become a professional teacher as a means 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

455 
 of earning one’s livelihood, nor should one in-
dulge in arguments and counterarguments. Nor 
should one take shelter of any cause or faction.  
(7) A sanny āsī must not present allurements of 
material benefits to gather many disciples, nor 
should he unnecessarily read many books or 
give discourses as a means of livelihood. He 
must never attempt to increase material opu-
lences unnecessarily.  (8) A peaceful, eq ui-
poised person who is factually advanced in 
spiritual consciousness does not need to accept 
the symbols of a sanny āsī, such as the trida ṇḍa 
and kama ṇḍalu. According to necessity, he may 
sometimes accept those symbols and some-
times reject them.  (9) Althou gh a saintly per-
son may not expose himself to the vision of hu-
man society, by his behavior his purpose is dis-
closed. To human society he should present 
himself like a restless child, and although he is 
the greatest thoughtful orator, he should present 
hims elf like a dumb man.  (10)  

As a historical example of this, learned 
sages recite the story of an ancient discussion 
between Prahl āda Mah ārāja and a great saintly 
person who was feeding himself like a python.  
(11) Prahl āda Mah ārāja, the most dear servitor 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, once 
went out touring the universe with some of his 
confidential associates just to study the nature 
of saintly persons. Thus he arrived at the bank 
of the K āverī, where there was a mountain 
known as Sahya. There he found a great saintly 
person who was lying on the ground, covered 
with dirt and dust, but who was deeply spiritu-
ally advanced.  (1 2-13) Neither by that saintly 
person’s activities, by his bodily features, by 
his words nor by the symptoms of his 
varṇāśrama status could people understand 
whether he was the same person they had 
known.  (14) The advanced devotee Prahl āda 
Mahārāja duly wo rshiped and offered obei-
sances to the saintly person who had adopted a 
python’s means of livelihood. After thus wor-
shiping the saintly person and touching his own 
head to the saint’s lotus feet, Prahl āda 
Mahārāja, in order to understand him, inquired 
very submissively as follows.  (15) Seeing the saintly person to be quite fat, Prahl āda 
Mahārāja said: My dear sir, you undergo no en-
deavor to earn your livelihood, but you have a 
stout body, exactly like that of a materialistic 
enjoyer. I know that if one is v ery rich and has 
nothing to do, he becomes extremely fat by eat-
ing and sleeping and performing no work.  (16 -
17) O br āhmaṇa, fully in knowledge of tran-
scendence, you have nothing to do, and there-
fore you are lying down. It is also understood 
that you have no money for sense enjoyment. 
How then has your body become so fat? Under 
the circumstances, if you do not consider my 
question impudent, kindly explain how this has 
happened.  (18)  

Your Honor appears learned, expert and in-
telligent in every way. You can  speak very 
well, saying things that are pleasing to the 
heart. You see that people in general are en-
gaged in fruitive activities, yet you are lying 
here inactive.  (19)  

Nārada Muni continued: When the saintly 
person was thus questioned by Prahl āda 
Mahārāja, the King of the Daityas, he was cap-
tivated by this shower of nectarean words, and 
he replied to the inquisitiveness of Prahl āda 
Mahārāja with a smiling face.  (20) The saintly 
brāhmaṇa said: O best of the asuras, Prahl āda 
Mahārāja, who are recognized by advanced and 
civilized men, you are aware of the different 
stages of life because of your inherent transcen-
dental eyes, with which you can see a man’s 
character and thus know clearly the results of 
acceptance and rejection of things as they are.  
(21) N ārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is full of all opulences, is pre-
dominant within the core of your heart because 
of your being a pure devotee. He always drive s 
away all the darkness of ignorance, as the sun 
drives away the darkness of the universe.  (22)  

My dear King, although you know every-
thing, you have posed some questions, which I 
shall try to answer according to what I have 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

456 
 learned by hearing from autho rities. I cannot re-
main silent in this regard, for a personality like 
you is just fit to be spoken to by one who de-
sires self -purification.  (23) Because of insatia-
ble material desires, I was being carried away 
by the waves of material nature’s laws, and t hus 
I was engaging in different activities, strug-
gling for existence in various forms of life.  (24) 
In the course of the evolutionary process, which 
is caused by fruitive activities due to undesira-
ble material sense gratification, I have received 
this hum an form of life, which can lead to the 
heavenly planets, to liberation, to the lower 
species, or to rebirth among human beings.  
(25)  

In this human form of life, men and women 
unite for the sensual pleasure of sex, but by ac-
tual experience we have observ ed that none of 
them are happy. Therefore, seeing the contrary 
results, I have stopped taking part in material-
istic activities.  (26) The actual form of life for 
the living entities is one of spiritual happiness, 
which is real happiness. This happiness can  be 
achieved only when one stops all materialistic 
activities. Material sense enjoyment is simply 
an imagination. Therefore, considering this 
subject matter, I have ceased from all material 
activities and am lying down here.  (27) In this 
way the condition ed soul living within the body 
forgets his self -interest because he identifies 
himself with the body. Because the body is ma-
terial, his natural tendency is to be attracted by 
the varieties of the material world. Thus the liv-
ing entity suffers the miseries of material exist-
ence.  (28) Just as a deer, because of ignorance, 
cannot see the water within a well covered by 
grass, but runs after water elsewhere, the living 
entity covered by the material body does not 
see the happiness within himself, but runs after  
happiness in the material world.  (29) The liv-
ing entity tries to achieve happiness and rid 
himself of the causes of distress, but because 
the various bodies of the living entities are un-
der the full control of material nature, all his 
plans in different bodies, one after another, are 
ultimately baffled.  (30) Materialistic activities 
are always mixed with three kinds of miserable conditionsadhy ātmika, adhidaivika and adhi-
bautika. Therefore, even if one achieves some 
success by performing such activities, what is 
the benefit of this success? One is still sub-
jected to birth, death, old age, disease and the 
reactions of his fruitive activities.  (3 1) The 
brāhmaṇa continued: I am actually seeing how 
a rich man, who is a victim of his senses, is very 
greedy to accumulate wealth, and therefore suf-
fers from insomnia due to fear from all sides, 
despite his wealth and opulence.  (32) Those 
who are conside red materially powerful and 
rich are always full of anxieties because of gov-
ernmental laws, thieves and rogues, enemies, 
family members, animals, birds, persons seek-
ing charity, the inevitable time factor and even 
their own selves. Thus they are invariably  
afraid.  (33)  

Those in human society who are intelligent 
should give up the original cause of lamenta-
tion, illusion, fear, anger, attachment, poverty 
and unnecessary labor. The original cause of all 
of these is the desire for unnecessary prestige 
and mo ney.  (34) The bee and the python are 
two excellent spiritual masters who give us ex-
emplary instructions regarding how to be satis-
fied by collecting only a little and how to stay 
in one place and not move.  (35) From the bum-
blebee I have learned to be unat tached to accu-
mulating money, for although money is as good 
as honey, anyone can kill its owner and take it 
away.  (36) I do not endeavor to get anything, 
but am satisfied with whatever is achieved in its 
own way. If I do not get anything, I am patient 
and unagitated like a python and lie down in 
this way for many days.  (37) Sometimes I eat 
a very small quantity and sometimes a great 
quantity. Sometimes the food is very palatable, 
and sometimes it is stale. Sometimes pras āda is 
offered with great respect, and sometimes food 
is given neglectfully. Sometimes I eat during 
the day and sometimes at night. Thus I eat what 
is easily available.  (38) To cover my body I use 
whatever is available, whether it be linen, silk, 
cotton, bark or deerskin, according to my d es-
tiny, and I am fully satisfied and unagitated.  
(39) Sometimes I lie on the surface of the earth, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

457 
 sometimes on leaves, grass or stone, sometimes 
on a pile of ashes, or sometimes, by the will of 
others, in a palace on a first -class bed with pil-
lows.  (40)  O my lord, sometimes I bathe my-
self very nicely, smear sandalwood pulp all 
over my body, put on a flower garland, and 
dress in fine garments and ornaments. Then I 
travel like a king on the back of an elephant or 
on a chariot or horse. Sometimes, however, I 
travel naked, like a person haunted by a ghost.  
(41) Different people are of different mentali-
ties. Therefore it is not my business either to 
praise them or to blaspheme them. I only desire 
their welfare, hoping that they will agree to be-
come one with t he Supersoul, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa.  (42)  

The mental concoction of discrimination be-
tween good and bad should be accepted as one 
unit and then invested in the mind, which 
should then be invested in the false ego. The 
false ego should  be invested in the total mate-
rial energy. This is the process of fighting false 
discrimination.  (43) A learned, thoughtful per-
son must realize that material existence is illu-
sion. This is possible only by self -realization. A 
self-realized person, who has  actually seen the 
truth, should retire from all material activities, 
being situated in self -realization.  (44) Prahl āda 
Mahārāja, you are certainly a self -realized soul 
and a devotee of the Supreme Lord. You do not 
care for public opinion or so -called scriptures. 
For this reason I have described to you without 
hesitation the history of my self -realization.  
(45)  

Nārada Muni continued: After Prahl āda 
Mahārāja, the King of the demons, heard these 
instructions from the saint, he understood the 
occupational duties of a perfect person [para-
maha ṁsa]. Thus he duly worshiped the saint, 
took his permission and then left for his  own 
home.  (46)  

SB 7.14: Ideal Family Life  
 Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira inquired from N ārada 
Muni: O my lord, O great sage, kindly explain 
how we who are staying at home without 
knowledge of the goal of life may also easily 
attain liberation, according to the instructions 
of the Vedas.  (1)  

Nārada Muni replied: My dear King, those 
who stay at home as householders must act to 
earn their livelihood, and instead of trying to 
enjoy the results of their work themselves, they 
should offer these results to K ṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva. 
How to satisfy V āsudeva in this life can be per-
fectly understood through the association of 
great devotees of the Lord.  (2) A g ṛhastha must 
associate again and again with saintly persons, 
and with great respect he must hear the nectar 
of the activ ities of the Supreme Lord and His 
incarnations as these activities are described in 
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other Pur āṇas. Thus 
one should gradually become detached from af-
fection for his wife and children, exactly like a 
man awakening from a dream.  (3 -4) W hile 
working to earn his livelihood as much as nec-
essary to maintain body and soul together, one 
who is actually learned should live in human 
society unattached to family affairs, although 
externally appearing very much attached.  (5) 
An intelligent man in  human society should 
make his own program of activities very sim-
ple. If there are suggestions from his friends, 
children, parents, brothers or anyone else, he 
should externally agree, saying, “Yes, that is all 
right,” but internally he should be determine d 
not to create a cumbersome life in which the 
purpose of life will not be fulfilled.  (6)  

The natural products created by the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead should be utilized to 
maintain the bodies and souls of all living enti-
ties. The necessities of l ife are of three types: 
those produced from the sky [from rainfall], 
from the earth [from the mines, the seas or the 
fields], and from the atmosphere [that which is 
obtained suddenly and unexpectedly].  (7) One 
may claim proprietorship to as much wealth as  
required to maintain body and soul together, 
but one who desires proprietorship over more 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

458 
 than that must be considered a thief, and he de-
serves to be punished by the laws of nature.  (8) 
One should treat animals such as deer, camels, 
asses, monkeys, mice,  snakes, birds and flies 
exactly like one’s own son. How little differ-
ence there actually is between children and 
these innocent animals.  (9) Even if one is a 
householder rather than a brahmac ārī, a 
sanny āsī or a v ānaprastha, one should not en-
deavor very hard for religiosity, economic de-
velopment or satisfaction of the senses. Even in 
householder life, one should be satisfied to 
maintain body and soul together with whatever 
is available with mi nimum endeavor, according 
to place and time, by the grace of the Lord. One 
should not engage oneself in ugra -karma.  (10) 
Dogs, fallen persons and untouchables, includ-
ing ca ṇḍālas [dog -eaters], should all be main-
tained with their proper necessities, which 
should be contributed by the householders. 
Even one’s wife at home, with whom one is 
most intimately attached, should be offered for 
the reception of guests and people in general.  
(11) One so seriously considers one’s wife to 
be his own that he sometimes kills himself for 
her or kills others, including even his parents or 
his spiritual master or teacher. Therefore if one 
can give up his attachment to such a wife, he 
conquers the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is never conquered by anyone.  (12) 
Throug h proper deliberation, one should give 
up attraction to his wife’s body because that 
body will ultimately be transformed into small 
insects, stool or ashes. What is the value of this 
insignificant body? How much greater is the 
Supreme Being, who is all -pervading like the 
sky?  (13)  

An intelligent person should be satisfied 
with eating pras āda [food offered to the Lord] 
or with performing the five different kinds of 
yajña [pañca -sūnā]. By such activities, one can 
give up attachment for the body and so -called 
proprietorship with reference to the body. 
When one is able to do this, he is firmly  fixed 
in the position of a mah ātmā.  (14) Every day, 
one should worship the Supreme Being who is 
situated in everyone’s heart, and on this basis one should separately worship the demigods, 
the saintly persons, ordinary human beings and 
living entities, on e’s forefathers and one’s self. 
In this way one is able to worship the Supreme 
Being in the core of everyone’s heart.  (15) 
When one is enriched with wealth and 
knowledge which are under his full control and 
by means of which he can perform yajña or 
please  the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
one must perform sacrifices, offering oblations 
to the fire according to the directions of the 
śāstras. In this way one should worship the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead.  (16) The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the 
enjoyer of sacrificial offerings. Yet although 
His Lordship eats the oblations offered in the 
fire, my dear King, He is still more satisfied 
when nice food made of grains and ghee is of-
fered to Him through the mouths of qualified 
brāhmaṇas.  (17) Therefore, my dear King, first 
offer pras āda unto the br āhmaṇas and the dem-
igods, and after sumptuously feeding them you 
may dist ribute pras āda to other living entities 
according to your ability. In this way you will 
be able to worship all living entitiesor, in other 
words, the supreme living entity within every 
living entity.  (18)  

A brāhmaṇa who is sufficiently rich must of-
fer oblations to the forefathers during the dark -
moon fortnight in the latter part of the month of 
Bhādra. Similarly, he should offer oblations to 
the relatives of the forefathers during the 
mahālayā ceremonies in the month of Āśvina.*  
(19) One should perform the śrāddha ceremony 
on the Makara -saṅkrānti [the day when the sun 
begins to move north] or on the Karka ṭa-
saṅkrānti [the day when the sun begins to move 
south]. One should also perform this ceremony 
on the Me ṣa-saṅkrānti day and the Tul ā-
saṅkrānti day, in  the yoga named Vyat īpāta, on 
that day in which three lunar tithis are con-
joined, during an eclipse of either the moon or 
the sun, on the twelfth lunar day, and in the 
Śravaṇa-nakṣatra. One should perform this cer-
emony on the Ak ṣaya-tṛtīyā day, on the nint h 
lunar day of the bright fortnight of the month of 
Kārtika, on the four a ṣṭakās in the winter season 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

459 
 and cool season, on the seventh lunar day of the 
bright fortnight of the month of M āgha, during 
the conjunction of Magh ā-nakṣatra and the full -
moon day, a nd on the days when the moon is 
completely full, or not quite completely full, 
when these days are conjoined with the 
nakṣatras from which the names of certain 
months are derived. One should also perform 
the śrāddha ceremony on the twelfth lunar day 
when i t is in conjunction with any of the 
nakṣatras named Anur ādhā, Śravaṇa, Uttara -
phalgun ī, Uttar āṣāḍhā or Uttara -bhādrapad ā. 
Again, one should perform this ceremony when 
the eleventh lunar day is in conjunction with ei-
ther Uttara -phalgun ī, Uttar āṣāḍhā or Utta ra-
bhādrapad ā. Finally, one should perform this 
ceremony on days conjoined with one’s own 
birth star [janma -nakṣatra] or with Śravaṇa-
nakṣatra.  (20 -23) All of these seasonal times 
are considered extremely auspicious for hu-
manity. At such times, one should  perform all 
auspicious activities, for by such activities a hu-
man being attains success in his short duration 
of life.  (24) During these periods of seasonal 
change, if one bathes in the Ganges, in the Ya-
munā or in another sacred place, if one chants, 
offers fire sacrifices or executes vows, or if one 
worships the Supreme Lord, the br āhmaṇas, the 
forefathers, the demigods and the living entities 
in general, whatever he gives in charity yields 
a permanently beneficial result.  (25) O King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, at th e time prescribed for reform-
atory ritualistic ceremonies for one’s self, one’s 
wife or one’s children, or during funeral cere-
monies and annual death ceremonies, one must 
perform the auspicious ceremonies mentioned 
above in order to flourish in fruitive act ivities.  
(26)  

Nārada Muni continued: Now I shall de-
scribe the places where religious performances 
may be well executed. Any place where a 
Vaiṣṇava is available is an excellent place for 
all auspicious activities. The Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead is the support of this entire 
cosmic manifestation, with all its moving and 
nonmoving living entities, and the temple 
where the Deity of the Lord is installed is a most sacred place. Furthermore, places where 
learned br āhmaṇas observe Vedic principles by 
means of austerity, educ ation and mercy are 
also most auspicious and sacred.  (27 -28) Aus-
picious indeed are the places where there is a 
temple of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa, in which He is duly worshiped, and also 
the places where there flow the celebrated sa-
cred r ivers mentioned in the Pur āṇas, the sup-
plementary Vedic literatures. Anything spir-
itual done there is certainly very effective.  (29) 
The sacred lakes like Pu ṣkara and places where 
saintly persons live, like Kuruk ṣetra, Gay ā, 
Prayāga, Pulah āśrama, Naimi ṣāraṇya, the 
banks of the Ph ālgu River, Setubandha, Prab-
hāsa, Dv ārakā, Vārāṇasī, Mathur ā, Pamp ā, 
Bindu -sarovara, Badarik āśrama 
[Nārāyaṇāśrama], the places where the Nand ā 
River flows, the places where Lord R āmacan-
dra and mother S ītā took shelter, such as 
Citrakūṭa, and also the hilly tracts of land 
known as Mahendra and Malayaall of these are 
to be considered most pious and sacred. Simi-
larly, places outside India where there are cen-
ters of the K ṛṣṇa consciousness movement and 
where R ādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deities are wors hiped 
must all be visited and worshiped by those who 
want to be spiritually advanced. One who in-
tends to advance in spiritual life may visit all 
these places and perform ritualistic ceremonies 
to get results a thousand times better than the 
results of the same activities performed in any 
other place.  (30 -33)  

O King of the earth, it has been decided by 
expert, learned scholars that only the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, in whom all 
that is moving or nonmoving within this uni-
verse is resting and from whom everything is 
coming, is the best person to whom  everything 
must be given.  (34) O King Yudhi ṣṭhira, the 
demigods, many great sages and saints includ-
ing even the four sons of Lord Brahm ā, and I 
myself were present at your R ājasūya sacrifi-
cial ceremony, but when there was a question 
of who should be the first person worshiped, 
everyone decided upon Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Su-
preme Person.  (35) The entire universe, which 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

460 
 is full of living entities, is like a tree whose root 
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Acyuta 
[Kṛṣṇa]. Therefore simply by worshiping Lord 
Kṛṣṇa one can worship all living entities.  (36) 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has cre-
ated many residential places like the bodies of 
human beings, animals, birds, saints and demi-
gods. In all of these innumerable bodily forms, 
the Lord resides with th e living being as 
Param ātmā. Thus He is known as the 
puruṣāvatāra.  (37) O King Yudhi ṣṭhira, the Su-
persoul in every body gives intelligence to the 
individual soul according to his capacity for un-
derstanding. Therefore the Supersoul is the 
chief within the body. The Supersoul is mani-
fested to the individual soul according to the in-
dividual’s comparative development of 
knowledge, austerity, penance and so on.  (38)  

My dear King, when great sages and saintly 
persons saw mutually disrespectful dealings at 
the beginning of Tret ā-yuga, Deity worship in 
the temple was introduced with all parapherna-
lia.  (39) Sometimes a neophyte devotee offers 
all the paraphernalia for worshiping the Lord, 
and he factually worships the Lord as the Deity, 
but because he is envious of the authorized  dev-
otees of Lord Vi ṣṇu, the Lord is never satisfied 
with his devotional service.  (40) My dear King, 
of all persons a qualified br āhmaṇa must be ac-
cepted as the best within this material world be-
cause such a br āhmaṇa, by practicing austerity, 
Vedic studie s and satisfaction, becomes the 
counterpart body of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.  (41) My dear King Yudhi ṣṭhira, the 
brāhmaṇas, especially those engaged in preach-
ing the glories of the Lord throughout the entire 
world, are recognized and worshiped b y the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is the heart 
and soul of all creation. The br āhmaṇas, by 
their preaching, sanctify the three worlds with 
the dust of their lotus feet, and thus they are 
worshipable even for K ṛṣṇa.  (42)  

SB 7.15: Instructions for  Civilized Human 
Beings  
 Nārada Muni continued: My dear King, 
some br āhmaṇas are very much attached to fru-
itive activities, some are attached to austerities 
and penances, and still others study the Vedic 
literature, whereas some, although very few, 
cultiva te knowledge and practice different yo-
gas, especially bhakti -yoga.  (1) A person de-
siring liberation for his forefathers or himself 
should give charity to a br āhmaṇa who adheres 
to impersonal monism [Jnana -niṣṭhā]. In the 
absence of such an advanced br āhmaṇa, charity 
may be given to a br āhmaṇa addicted to fruitive 
activities [karma -kāṇḍa].  (2) During the period 
for offering oblations to the demigods, one 
should invite only two br āhmaṇas, and while 
offering oblations to the forefathers, one may 
invite three  brāhmaṇas. Or, in either case, only 
one br āhmaṇa will suffice. Even though one is 
very opulent, he should not endeavor to invite 
more br āhmaṇas or make various expensive ar-
rangements on those occasions.  (3) If one ar-
ranges to feed many br āhmaṇas or relat ives 
during the śrāddha ceremony, there will be dis-
crepancies in the time, place, respectability and 
ingredients, the person to be worshiped, and the 
method of offering worship.  (4) When one gets 
the opportunity of a suitable auspicious time 
and place, on e should, with love, offer food 
prepared with ghee to the Deity of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead and then offer the 
prasāda to a suitable persona Vai ṣṇava or 
brāhmaṇa. This will be the cause of everlasting 
prosperity.  (5) One should offer pras āda to the 
demigods, the saintly persons, one’s forefa-
thers, the people in general, one’s family mem-
bers, one’s relatives and one’s friends, seeing 
them all as devotees of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead.  (6)  

A person fully aware of religious principles 
should never offer anything like meat, eggs or 
fish in the śrāddha ceremony, and even if one is 
a kṣatriya, he himself should not eat such 
things. When suitable food prepared with ghee 
is offered to saintly persons, the function is 
pleasing to the forefathers and the Supreme 
Lord, who are never pleased when animal s are 
killed in the name of sacrifice.  (7) Persons who 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

461 
 want to advance in superior religion are advised 
to give up all envy of other living entities, 
whether in relationship to the body, words or 
mind. There is no religion superior to this.  (8) 
Because o f an awakening of spiritual 
knowledge, those who are intelligent in regard 
to sacrifice, who are actually aware of religious 
principles and who are free from material de-
sires, control the self in the fire of spiritual 
knowledge, or knowledge of the Absolut e 
Truth. They may give up the process of ritual-
istic ceremonies.  (9) Upon seeing the person 
engaged in performing the sacrifice, animals 
meant to be sacrificed are extremely afraid, 
thinking, “This merciless performer of sacri-
fices, being ignorant of the purpose of sacrifice 
and being most satisfied by killing others, will 
surely kill us.”  (10) Therefore, day by day, one 
who is actually aware of religious principles 
and is not heinously envious of poor animals 
should happily perform daily sacrifices and 
those for certain occasions with whatever food 
is available easily by the grace of the Lord.  (11)  

There are five branches of irreligion, appro-
priately known as irreligion [vidharma], reli-
gious principles for which one is unfit [para -
dharma], pretentious religion [ ābhāsa], analog-
ical religion [upadharma] and cheating religion 
[chala -dharma]. One who is aware of real reli-
gious life must abandon these five as irreli-
gious.  (12) Religious principles that obstruct 
one from following his own religion are called 
vidharma.  Religious principles introduced by 
others are called para -dharma. A new type of 
religion created by one who is falsely proud and 
who opposes the principles of the Vedas is 
called upadharma. And interpretation by one’s 
jugglery of words is called chala -dharma.  (13) 
A pretentious religious system manufactured 
by one who willfully neglects the prescribed 
duties of his order of life is called ābhāsa [a dim 
reflection or false similarity]. But if one per-
forms the prescribed duties for his particular 
āśrama or var ṇa, why are they not sufficient to 
mitigate all material distresses?  (14)  
 Even if a man is poor, he should not en-
deavor to improve h is economic condition just 
to maintain his body and soul together or to be-
come a famous religionist. Just as a great py-
thon, although lying in one place, not endeav-
oring for its livelihood, gets the food it needs to 
maintain body and soul, one who is desir eless 
also obtains his livelihood without endeavor.  
(15) One who is content and satisfied and who 
links his activities with the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead residing in everyone’s heart en-
joys transcendental happiness without endeav-
oring for his livelih ood. Where is such happi-
ness for a materialistic man who is impelled by 
lust and greed and who therefore wanders in all 
directions with a desire to accumulate wealth?  
(16) For a person who has suitable shoes on his 
feet, there is no danger even when he wa lks on 
pebbles and thorns. For him, everything is aus-
picious. Similarly, for one who is always self -
satisfied there is no distress; indeed, he feels 
happiness everywhere.  (17) My dear King, a 
self-satisfied person can be happy even with 
only drinking wate r. However, one who is 
driven by the senses, especially by the tongue 
and genitals, must accept the position of a 
household dog to satisfy his senses.  (18) Be-
cause of greed for the sake of the senses, the 
spiritual strength, education, austerity and rep-
utation of a devotee or br āhmaṇa who is not 
self-satisfied dwindle, and his knowledge grad-
ually vanishes.  (19) The strong bodily desires 
and needs of a person disturbed by hunger and 
thirst are certainly satisfied when he eats. Sim-
ilarly, if one becomes very angry, that anger is 
satisfied by chastisement and its reaction. But 
as for greed, even if a greedy person has con-
quered all the directions of the world or has en-
joyed everything in the world, still he will not 
be satisfied.  (20) O King Yudhi ṣṭhira, many 
persons with varied ex perience, many legal ad-
visers, many learned scholars and many per-
sons eligible to become presidents of learned 
assemblies fall down into hellish life because 
of not being satisfied with their positions.  (21)  

By making plans with determination, one 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

462 
 shoul d give up lusty desires for sense gratifica-
tion. Similarly, by giving up envy one should 
conquer anger, by discussing the disadvantages 
of accumulating wealth one should give up 
greed, and by discussing the truth one should 
give up fear.  (22) By discussin g spiritual 
knowledge one can conquer lamentation and il-
lusion, by serving a great devotee one can be-
come prideless, by keeping silent one can avoid 
obstacles on the path of mystic yoga, and 
simply by stopping sense gratification one can 
conquer envy.  (23 ) By good behavior and free-
dom from envy one should counteract suffer-
ings due to other living entities, by meditation 
in trance one should counteract sufferings due 
to providence, and by practicing ha ṭha-yoga, 
prāṇāyāma and so forth one should counteract 
sufferings due to the body and mind. Similarly, 
by developing the mode of goodness, espe-
cially in regard to eating, one should conquer 
sleep.  (24) One must conquer the modes of 
passion and ignorance by developing the mode 
of goodness, and then one must bec ome de-
tached from the mode of goodness by promot-
ing oneself to the platform of śuddha -sattva. All 
this can be automatically done if one engages 
in the service of the spiritual master with faith 
and devotion. In this way one can conquer the 
influence of the modes of nature.  (25) The spir-
itual master should be considered to be directl y 
the Supreme Lord because he gives transcen-
dental knowledge for enlightenment. Conse-
quently, for one who maintains the material 
conception that the spiritual master is an ordi-
nary human being, everything is frustrated. His 
enlightenment and his Vedic stud ies and 
knowledge are like the bathing of an elephant.  
(26) The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, is the master of all other living en-
tities and of the material nature. His lotus feet 
are sought and worshiped by great saintly per-
sons like Vy āsa. Nonetheless, there are fools 
who consider Lord K ṛṣṇa an ordinary human 
being.  (27)  

Ritualistic ceremonies, regulative princi-
ples, austerities and the practice of yoga are all 
meant to control the senses and mind, but even after one is able to control t he senses and mind, 
if he does not come to the point of meditation 
upon the Supreme Lord, all such activities are 
simply labor in frustration.  (28) As profes-
sional activities or business profits cannot help 
one in spiritual advancement but are a source of  
material entanglement, the Vedic ritualistic 
ceremonies cannot help anyone who is not a 
devotee of the Supreme Personality of God-
head.  (29)  

One who desires to conquer the mind must 
leave the company of his family and live in a 
solitary place, free from  contaminated associa-
tion. To maintain the body and soul together, he 
should beg as much as he needs for the bare ne-
cessities of life.  (30) My dear King, in a sacred 
and holy place of pilgrimage one should select 
a place in which to perform yoga. The plac e 
must be level and not too high or low. There 
one should sit very comfortably, being steady 
and equipoised, keeping his body straight, an d 
thus begin chanting the Vedic pra ṇava.  (31) 
While continuously staring at the tip of the 
nose, a learned yog ī practices the breathing ex-
ercises through the technical means known as 
pūraka, kumbhaka and recakacontrolling inha-
lation and exhalation and the n stopping them 
both. In this way the yog ī restricts his mind 
from material attachments and gives up all 
mental desires. As soon as the mind, being de-
feated by lusty desires, drifts toward feelings of 
sense gratification, the yog īshould immediately 
bring i t back and arrest it within the core of his 
heart.  (32 -33) When the yog ī regularly prac-
tices in this way, in a short time his heart be-
comes fixed and free from disturbance, like a 
fire without flames or smoke.  (34) When one’s 
consciousness is uncontamina ted by material 
lusty desires, it becomes calm and peaceful in 
all activities, for one is situated in eternal bliss-
ful life. Once situated on that platform, one 
does not return to materialistic activities.  (35)  

One who accepts the sanny āsa order gives 
up the three principles of materialistic activities 
in which one indulges in the field of household 
lifenamely religion, economic development 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

463 
 and sense gratification. One who first accepts 
sanny āsa but then returns to such materialistic 
activities is to be called a v āntāśī, or one who 
eats his own vomit. He is indeed a shameless 
person.  (36) Sanny āsīs who first consider that 
the body is subject to death, when it will be 
transformed into stool, worms or ashes, but 
who again give importance to the body and gl o-
rify it as the self, are to be considered the great-
est rascals.  (37) It is abominable for a person 
living in the g ṛhastha -āśrama to give up the reg-
ulative principles, for a brahmac ārī not to fol-
low the brahmac ārī vows while living under the 
care of the g uru, for a v ānaprastha to live in the 
village and engage in so -called social activities, 
or for a sanny āsī to be addicted to sense gratifi-
cation. One who acts in this way is to be con-
sidered the lowest renegade. Such a pretender 
is bewildered by the extern al energy of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, and one should 
either reject him from any position, or taking 
compassion upon him, teach him, if possible, to 
resume his original position.  (38 -39) The hu-
man form of body is meant for understanding 
the self  and the Supreme Self, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, both of whom are tran-
scendentally situated. If both of them can be 
understood when one is purified by advanced 
knowledge, for what reason and for whom does 
a foolish, greedy person maintain the bod y for 
sense gratification?  (40)  

Transcendentalists who are advanced in 
knowledge compare the body, which is made 
by the order of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, to a chariot. The senses are like the 
horses; the mind, the master of the senses, is 
like the reins; the objects of the senses are the 
destinations; intelligence is the chariot driver; 
and consciousness, which spreads throughout 
the body, is the cause of bondage in this mate-
rial world.  (41) The ten kinds of air acting 
within the body are com pared to the spokes of 
the chariot’s wheels, and the top and bottom of 
the wheel itself are called religion and irreli-
gion. The living entity in the bodily concept of 
life is the owner of the chariot. The Vedic man-
tra pra ṇava is the bow, the pure living en tity himself is the arrow, and the target is the Su-
preme Being.  (42) In the conditioned stage, 
one’s conceptions of life are sometimes pol-
luted by passion and ignorance, which are ex-
hibited by attachment, hostility, greed, lamen-
tation, illusion, fear, mad ness, false prestige, 
insults, fault -finding, deception, envy, intoler-
ance, passion, bewilderment, hunger and sleep. 
All of these are enemies. Sometimes one’s con-
ceptions are also polluted by goodness.  (43 -44) 
As long as one has to accept a material body,  
with its different parts and paraphernalia, 
which are not fully under one’s control, one 
must have the lotus feet of his superiors, 
namely his spiritual master and the spiritual 
master’s predecessors. By their mercy, one can 
sharpen the sword of knowledge , and with the 
power of the Supreme Personality of God-
head’s mercy one must then conquer the ene-
mies mentioned above. In this way, the devotee 
should be able to merge into his own transcen-
dental bliss, and then he may give up his body 
and resume his spirit ual identity.  (45) Other-
wise, if one does not take shelter of Acyuta and 
Baladeva, then the senses, acting as the horses, 
and the intelligence, acting as the driver, both 
being prone to material contamination, inatten-
tively bring the body, which acts as t he chariot, 
to the path of sense gratification. When one is 
thus attracted again by the rogues of 
viṣayaeating, sleeping and matingthe horses 
and chariot driver are thrown into the blinding 
dark well of material existence, and one is 
again put into a dange rous and extremely fear-
ful situation of repeated birth and death.  (46)  

According to the Vedas, there are two kinds 
of activitiesprav ṛtti and niv ṛtti. Prav ṛtti activi-
ties involve raising oneself from a lower to a 
higher condition of materialistic life, w hereas 
nivṛtti means the cessation of material desire. 
Through prav ṛtti activities one suffers from ma-
terial entanglement, but by niv ṛtti activities one 
is purified and becomes fit to enjoy eternal, 
blissful life.  (47) The ritualistic ceremonies 
and sacri fices known as agni -hotra -yajña, 
darśa-yajña, p ūrṇamāsa-yajña, c āturm āsya-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

464 
 yajña, pa śu-yajña and soma -yajña are all symp-
tomized by the killing of animals and the burn-
ing of many valuables, especially food grains, 
all for the fulfillment of material desires and the 
creation of anxiety. Performing such sacrifices, 
worshiping Vai śvadeva, and performing the 
ceremony of Balihara ṇa, which all supposedly 
constitute the goal of life, as well as construct-
ing temples for demigods, building resting 
houses and gardens, digging wells for the dis-
tribution of water, establishing booths for the 
distribution of food, and performing activities 
for public welfarethese are all symptomized by 
attachment to material desires.  (48 -49) My 
dear King Yudhi ṣṭhira, when oblations of ghe e 
and food grains like barley and sesame are of-
fered in sacrifice, they turn into celestial 
smoke, which carries one to successively 
higher planetary systems like the kingdoms of 
Dhum ā, Rātri, K ṛṣṇapak ṣa, Dak ṣiṇam and ulti-
mately the moon. Then, however, th e perform-
ers of sacrifice descend again to earth to be-
come herbs, creepers, vegetables and food 
grains. These are eaten by different living enti-
ties and turned to semen, which is injected into 
female bodies. Thus one takes birth again and 
again.  (50 -51) A  twice -born br āhmaṇa [dvija] 
gains his life by the grace of his parents through 
the process of purification known as 
garbh ādhāna. There are also other processes of 
purification, until the end of life, when the fu-
neral ceremony [antye ṣṭi-kriyā] is performed. 
Thus in due course a qualified br āhmaṇa be-
comes uninterested in materialistic activities 
and sacrifices, but he offers the sensual sacri-
fices, in full knowledge, into the working 
senses, which are illuminated by the fire of 
knowledge.  (52) The mind is always agitated  
by waves of acceptance and rejection. There-
fore all the activities of the senses should be of-
fered into the mind, which should be offered 
into one’s words. Then one’s words should be 
offered into the aggregate of all alphabets, 
which should be offered int o the concise form 
oṁkāra. O ṁkāra should be offered into the 
point bindu, bindu into the vibration of sound, 
and that vibration into the life air. Then the liv-
ing entity, who is all that remains, should be 
placed in Brahman, the Supreme. This is the proces s of sacrifice.  (53) On his path of ascent, 
the progressive living entity enters the different 
worlds of fire, the sun, the day, the end of the 
day, the bright fortnight, the full moon, and the 
passing of the sun in the north, along with their 
presiding d emigods. When he enters Brah-
maloka, he enjoys life for many millions of 
years, and finally his material designation 
comes to an end. He then comes to a subtle des-
ignation, from which he attains the causal des-
ignation, witnessing all previous states. Upon 
the annihilation of this causal state, he attains 
his pure state, in which he identifies with the 
Supersoul. In this way the living entity be-
comes transcendental.  (54) This gradual pro-
cess of elevation for self -realization is meant 
for those who are truly aware of the Absolute 
Truth. After repeated birth on this path, which 
is known as deva -yāna, one attains these con-
secutive stages. One who is completely free 
from all material desires, being situated in the 
self, need not traverse the path of repeated birth 
and death.  (55)  

Even though situated in a material body, one 
who is fully aware of the paths known as pit ṛ-
yāna and deva -yāna, and who thus opens his 
eyes in terms of Vedic knowledge, is never be-
wildered in this material world.  (56) He who 
exists internally and externally, at the begin-
ning and end of everything and of all living be-
ings,  as that which is enjoyable and as the en-
joyer of everything, superior and inferior, is the 
Supreme Truth. He always exists as knowledge 
and the object of knowledge, as expression and 
the object of understanding, as darkness and as 
light. Thus He, the Supr eme Lord, is every-
thing.  (57) Although one may consider the re-
flection of the sun from a mirror to be false, it 
has its factual existence. Accordingly, to prove 
by speculative knowledge that there is no real-
ity would be extremely difficult.  (58) In this 
world there are five elementsnamely earth, wa-
ter, fire, air and etherbut the body is not a re-
flection of them, nor a combination or transfor-
mation of them. Because the body and its ingre-
dients are neither distinct nor amalgamated, all 
such theories are ins ubstantial.  (59) Because 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

465 
 the body is formed of the five elements, it can-
not exist without the subtle sense objects. 
Therefore, since the body is false, the sense ob-
jects are also naturally false or temporary.  (60) 
When a substance and its parts are separ ated, 
the acceptance of similarity between one and 
the other is called illusion. While dreaming, 
one creates a separation between the existences 
called wakefulness and sleep. It is in such a 
state of mind that the regulative principles of 
the scriptures, c onsisting of injunctions and 
prohibitions, are recommended.  (61)  

After considering the oneness of existence, 
activity and paraphernalia and after realizing 
the self to be different from all actions and re-
actions, the mental speculator [muni], accord-
ing to his own realization, gives up the three 
states of wakefulness, dreaming and sleep.  (62) 
When one understands that result and cause are 
one and that duality is ultimately unreal, like 
the idea that the threads of a cloth are different 
from the cloth its elf, one reaches the conception 
of oneness called bh āvādvaita.  (63) My dear 
Yudhi ṣṭhira [P ārtha], when all the activities one 
performs with his mind, words and body are 
dedicated directly to the service of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, one reaches oneness of 
activities, called kriy ādvaita.  (64) When  the ul-
timate goal and interest of one’s self, one’s 
wife, one’s children, one’s relatives and all 
other embodied living beings is one, this is 
called dravy ādvaita, or oneness of interest.  
(65)  

In normal conditions, in the absence of dan-
ger, O King Yudh iṣṭhira, a man should perform 
his prescribed activities according to his status 
of life with the things, endeavors, process and 
living place that are not forbidden for him, and 
not by any other means.  (66) O King, one 
should perform his occupational dutie s accord-
ing to these instructions, as well as other in-
structions given in the Vedic literature, just to 
remain a devotee of Lord K ṛṣṇa. Thus, even 
while at home, one will be able to reach the des-
tination.  (67) O King Yudhi ṣṭhira, because of 
your service t o the Supreme Lord, all of you Pāṇḍavas defeated the greatest dangers posed 
by numerous kings and demigods. By serving 
the lotus feet of K ṛṣṇa, you conquered great en-
emies, who were like elephants, and thus you 
collected ingredients for sacrifice. By His 
grace, may you be delivered from material in-
volvement.  (68)  

Long, long ago, in another mah ā-kalpa [mil-
lennium of Brahm ā], I existed as the Gandharva 
known as Upabarha ṇa. I was very respected by 
the other Gandharvas.  (69) I had a beautiful 
face and a ple asing, attractive bodily structure. 
Decorated with flower garlands and sandal-
wood pulp, I was most pleasing to the women 
of my city. Thus I was bewildered, always feel-
ing lusty desires.  (70) Once there was a sa ṅkīr-
tana festival to glorify the Supreme Lord  in an 
assembly of the demigods, and the Gandharvas 
and Apsar ās were invited by the praj āpatis to 
take part in it.  (71)  

Nārada Muni continued: Being invited to 
that festival, I also joined, and, surrounded by 
women, I began musically singing the glories  
of the demigods. Because of this, the praj āpatis, 
the great demigods in charge of the affairs of 
the universe, forcefully cursed me with these 
words: “Because you have committed an of-
fense, may you immediately become a śūdra, 
devoid of beauty.”  (72) Alth ough I took birth 
as a śūdra from the womb of a maidservant, I 
engaged in the service of Vai ṣṇavas who were 
well-versed in Vedic knowledge. Conse-
quently, in this life I got the opportunity to take 
birth as the son of Lord Brahm ā.  (73) The pro-
cess of chant ing the holy name of the Lord is so 
powerful that by this chanting even household-
ers [g ṛhasthas] can very easily gain the ultimate 
result achieved by persons in the renounced or-
der. Mah ārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, I have now ex-
plained to you that process of religion .  (74) My 
dear Mah ārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira, you P āṇḍavas are 
so very fortunate in this world that many, many 
great saints, who can purify all the planets of 
the universe, come to your house just like ordi-
nary visitors. Furthermore, the Supreme Per-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

466 
 sonality of God head, K ṛṣṇa, is living confiden-
tially with you in your house, just like your 
brother.  (75) How wonderful it is that the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the Parabrah-
man, K ṛṣṇa, who is sought by great, great sages 
for the sake of liberation and transcendent al 
bliss, is acting as your best well -wisher, your 
friend, your cousin, your heart and soul, your 
worshipable director, and your spiritual master.  
(76) Present here now is the same Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead whose true form cannot be 
understood even b y such great personalities as 
Lord Brahm ā and Lord Śiva. He is realized by 
devotees because of their unflinching surren-
der. May that same Personality of Godhead, 
who is the maintainer of His devotees and who 
is worshiped by silence, by devotional service 
and by cessation of material activities, be 
pleased with us.  (77)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī said: Mah ārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, the best member of the Bharata 
dynasty, thus learned everything from the de-
scriptions of N ārada Muni. After hearing these 
instructions, he felt great pleasure from within 
his heart , and in great ecstasy, love and affec-
tion, he worshiped Lord K ṛṣṇa.  (78) N ārada 
Muni, being worshiped by K ṛṣṇa and Mah ārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, bade them farewell and went 
away. Yudhi ṣṭhira Mah ārāja, having heard that 
Kṛṣṇa, his cousin, is the Supreme Personali ty 
of Godhead, was struck with wonder.  (79) On 
all the planets within this universe, the varieties 
of living entities, moving and nonmoving, in-
cluding the demigods, demons and human be-
ings, were all generated from the daughters of 
Mahārāja Dak ṣa. I have n ow described them 
and their different dynasties.  (80)  

SB 8.1: The Manus, Administrators of the 
Universe  

King Par īkṣit said: O my lord, my spiritual 
master, now I have fully heard from Your 
Grace about the dynasty of Sv āyambhuva 
Manu. But there are also  other Manus, and I want to hear about their dynasties. Kindly de-
scribe them to us.  (1) O learned br āhmaṇa, 
Śukadeva Gosv āmī, the great learned persons 
who are completely intelligent describe the ac-
tivities and appearance of the Supreme Person-
ality of God head during the various manvanta-
ras. We are very eager to hear about these nar-
rations. Kindly describe them.  (2) O learned 
brāhmaṇa, kindly describe to us whatever ac-
tivities the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who created this cosmic manifestation, has p er-
formed in the past manvantaras, is performing 
at present, and will perform in the future man-
vantaras.  (3)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: In the present 
kalpa there have already been six Manus. I have 
described to you Sv āyambhuva Manu and the 
appearance of man y demigods. In this kalpa of 
Brahm ā, Svāyambhuva is the first Manu.  (4) 
Svāyambhuva Manu had two daughters, named 
Ākūti and Devah ūti. From their wombs, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead appeared as two 
sons named Yajñam ūrti and Kapila respec-
tively. These  sons were entrusted with preach-
ing about religion and knowledge.  (5) O best 
of the Kurus, I have already described [in the 
Third Canto] the activities of Kapila, the son of 
Devah ūti. Now I shall describe the activities of 
Yajñapati, the son of Ākūti.  (6 )  

Svāyambhuva Manu, the husband of 
Śatarūpā, was by nature not at all attached to 
enjoyment of the senses. Thus he gave up his 
kingdom of sense enjoyment and entered the 
forest with his wife to practice austerities.  (7) 
O scion of Bharata, after Sv āyamb huva Manu 
had thus entered the forest with his wife, he 
stood on one leg on the bank of the river 
Sunand ā, and in this way, with only one leg 
touching the earth, he performed great austeri-
ties for one hundred years. While performing 
these austerities, he s poke as follows.  (8)  

Lord Manu said: The supreme living being 
has created this material world of animation; it 
is not that He was created by this material 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

467 
 world. When everything is silent, the Supreme 
Being stays awake as a witness. The living en-
tity do es not know Him, but He knows every-
thing.  (9) Within this universe, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead in His Supersoul fea-
ture is present everywhere, wherever there are 
animate or inanimate beings. Therefore, one 
should accept only that which is allotted  to him; 
one should not desire to infringe upon the prop-
erty of others.  (10) Although the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead constantly watches the ac-
tivities of the world, no one sees Him. How-
ever, one should not think that because no one 
sees Him, He does n ot see, for His power to see 
is never diminished. Therefore, everyone 
should worship the Supersoul, who always 
stays with the individual soul as a friend.  (11) 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no 
beginning, no end and no middle. Nor does He 
belong t o a particular person or nation. He has 
no inside or outside. The dualities found within 
this material world, such as beginning and end, 
mine and theirs, are all absent from the person-
ality of the Supreme Lord. The universe, which 
emanates from Him, is ano ther feature of the 
Lord. Therefore the Supreme Lord is the ulti-
mate truth, and He is complete in greatness.  
(12) The entire cosmic manifestation is the 
body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the Absolute Truth, who has millions of names 
and unlimite d potencies. He is self -effulgent, 
unborn and changeless. He is the beginning of 
everything, but He has no beginning. Because 
He has created this cosmic manifestation by 
His external energy, the universe appears to be 
created, maintained and annihilated by  Him. 
Nonetheless, He remains inactive in His spir-
itual energy and is untouched by the activities 
of the material energy.  (13) Therefore, to ena-
ble people to reach the stage of activities that 
are not tinged by fruitive results, great saints 
first engage people in fruitive activities, for un-
less one begins by performing activities as rec-
ommended in the śāstras, one cannot reach the 
stage of liberation, or activities that produce no 
reactions.  (14) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is full in opulence by His own gain, 
yet He acts as the creator, maintainer and anni-
hilator of this material world. In spite of acting in that way, He is never entangled. Hence dev-
otees who follow in His footsteps are also never 
entangled.  (15) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhea d, K ṛṣṇa, works just like an ordinary 
human being, yet He does not desire to enjoy 
the fruits of work. He is full in knowledge, free 
from material desires and diversions, and com-
pletely independent. As the supreme teacher of 
human society, He teaches His o wn way of ac-
tivities, and thus He inaugurates the real path of 
religion. I request everyone to follow Him.  
(16)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: 
Svāyambhuva Manu was thus in a trance, 
chanting the mantras of Vedic instruction 
known as the Upani ṣads. Upon see ing him, the 
Rākṣasas and asuras, being very hungry, 
wanted to devour him. Therefore they ran after 
him with great speed.  (17) The Supreme Lord, 
Viṣṇu, who sits in everyone’s heart, appearing 
as Yajñapati, observed that the R ākṣasas and 
demons were going to devour Sv āyambhuva 
Manu. Thus the Lord, accompanied by His sons 
named the Y āmas and by all the other demi-
gods, killed the demons and R ākṣasas. He then 
took the post of Indra and began to rule the 
heavenly kingdom.  (18)  

The son of Agni named Sv ārociṣa became 
the second Manu. His several sons were headed 
by Dyumat, Su ṣeṇa and Roci ṣmat.  (19) During 
the reign of Sv ārociṣa, the post of Indra was as-
sumed by Rocana, the son of Yajña. Tu ṣita and 
others became the principal demigods, and 
Ūrja, Stambha and oth ers became the seven 
saints. All of them were faithful devotees of the 
Lord.  (20) Veda śirā was a very celebrated ṛṣi. 
From the womb of his wife, whose name was 
Tuṣitā, came the avat āra named Vibhu.  (21) 
Vibhu remained a brahmac āri and never mar-
ried throu ghout his life. From him, eighty -eight 
thousand other saintly persons took lessons on 
self-control, austerity and similar behavior.  
(22)  

O King, the third Manu, Uttama, was the son 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

468 
 of King Priyavrata. Among the sons of this 
Manu were Pavana, S ṛñjaya and  Yajñahotra.  
(23) During the reign of the third Manu, 
Pramada and other sons of Vasi ṣṭha became the 
seven sages. The Satyas, Veda śrutas and 
Bhadras became demigods, and Satyajit was 
selected to be Indra, the King of heaven.  (24) 
In this manvantara, the S upreme Personality of 
Godhead appeared from the womb of S ūnṛtā, 
who was the wife of Dharma, the demigod in 
charge of religion. The Lord was celebrated as 
Satyasena, and He appeared with other demi-
gods, known as the Satyavratas.  (25) 
Satyasena, along with His friend Satyajit, who 
was the King of heaven, Indra, killed all the un-
truthful, impious and miSBehaved Yak ṣas, 
Rākṣasas and ghostly living entities, who gave 
pains to other living beings.  (26)  

The brother of the third Manu, Uttama, was 
celebrated by the name T āmasa, and he became 
the fourth Manu. T āmasa had ten sons, headed 
by Pṛthu, Khy āti, Nara and Ketu.  (27) During 
the reign of T āmasa Manu, among the demi-
gods were the Satyakas, Haris and V īras. The 
heavenly King, Indra, was Tri śikha. The sages 
in saptar ṣi-dhāma were headed by Jyotirdh āma.  
(28) O King, in the T āmasa manvantara the 
sons of Vidh ṛti, who were known as the 
Vaidh ṛtis, also became demigods. Since in 
course of time the Vedic authority was lost, 
these demigods, by their own powers, protect ed 
the Vedic authority.  (29) Also in this manvan-
tara, the Supreme Lord, Vi ṣṇu, took birth from 
the womb of Hari ṇī, the wife of Harimedh ā, 
and He was known as Hari. Hari saved His dev-
otee Gajendra, the King of the elephants, from 
the mouth of a crocodile.  (30)  

King Par īkṣit said: My lord, B ādarāyaṇi, we 
wish to hear from you in detail how the King of 
the elephants, when attacked by a crocodile, 
was delivered by Hari.  (31) Any literature or 
narration in which the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Uttama śloka, is described and glori-
fied is certainly great, pure, glorious, auspi-
cious and all good.  (32)   
Śrī Sūta Gosv āmī said: O br āhmaṇas, when 
Parīkṣit Mah ārāja, who was awaiting impend-
ing death, thus requested Śukadeva Gosv āmī to 
speak, Śukadeva Gosv āmī, encouraged by the 
King’s words, offered respect to the King and 
spoke with great pleasure in the assembly of 
sages, who desired to hear him.  (33)  

SB 8.2: The Elephant Gajendra’s Crisis  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: My dear King, 
there is a very large mountain c alled Trik ūṭa. It 
is ten thousand yojanas [eighty thousand miles] 
high. Being surrounded by the Ocean of Milk, 
it is very beautifully situated.  (1) The length 
and breadth of the mountain are of the same 
measurement [eighty thousand miles]. Its three 
princ ipal peaks, which are made of iron, silver 
and gold, beautify all directions and the sky. 
The mountain also has other peaks, which are 
full of jewels and minerals and are decorated 
with nice trees, creepers and shrubs. The 
sounds of the waterfalls on the m ountain create 
a pleasing vibration. In this way the mountain 
stands, increasing the beauty of all directions.  
(2-3) The ground at the foot of the mountain is 
always washed by waves of milk that produce 
emeralds all around in the eight directions 
[north, south, east, west and the directions mid-
way between them].  (4) The inhabitants of the 
higher planetsthe Siddhas, C āraṇas, Gandhar-
vas, Vidy ādharas, serpents, Kinnaras and Ap-
sarāsgo to that mountain to sport. Thus all the 
caves of the mountain are full of t hese denizens 
of the heavenly planets.  (5) Because of the re-
sounding vibrations of the denizens of heaven 
singing in the caves, the lions there, being very 
proud of their strength, roar with unbearable 
envy, thinking that another lion is roaring in 
that w ay.  (6)  

The valleys beneath Trik ūṭa Mountain are 
beautifully decorated by many varieties of jun-
gle animals, and in the trees, which are main-
tained in gardens by the demigods, varieties of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

469 
 birds chirp with sweet voices.  (7) Trik ūṭa 
Mountain has many lakes and rivers, with 
beaches covered  by small gems resembling 
grains of sand. The water is as clear as crystal, 
and when the demigod damsels bathe in it, their 
bodies lend fragrance to the water and the 
breeze, thus enriching the atmosphere.  (8)  

In a valley of Trik ūṭa Mountain there was a  
garden called Ṛtumat. This garden belonged to 
the great devotee Varu ṇa and was a sporting 
place for the damsels of the demigods. Flowers 
and fruits grew there in all seasons. Among 
them were mand āras, p ārijātas, p āṭalas, a śokas, 
campakas, c ūtas, piy ālas, panasas, mangoes, 
āmrātakas, kramukas, coconut trees, date trees 
and pomegranates. There were madhukas, palm 
trees, tam ālas, asanas, arjunas, ari ṣṭas, uḍumba-
ras, plak ṣas, banyan trees, ki ṁśukas and san-
dalwood trees. There were also picumardas, 
kovid āras, s aralas, sura -dārus, grapes, sugar-
cane, bananas, jambu, badar īs, ak ṣas, abhayas 
and āmalak īs.  (9 -13) In that garden there was 
a very large lake filled with shining golden lo-
tus flowers and the flowers known as kumuda, 
kahlāra, utpala and śatapatra, which a dded ex-
cellent beauty to the mountain. There were also 
bilva, kapittha, jamb īra and bhall ātaka trees. In-
toxicated bumblebees drank honey and 
hummed with the chirping of the birds, whose 
songs were very melodious. The lake was 
crowded with swans, k āraṇḍavas, cakr āvakas, 
cranes, and flocks of water chickens, d ātyūhas, 
koya ṣṭis and other murmuring birds. Because 
of the agitating movements of the fish and tor-
toises, the water was decorated with pollen that 
had fallen from the lotus flowers. The lake was 
surroun ded by kadamba flowers, vetasa flow-
ers, nalas, n īpas, vañjulakas, kundas, kuruba-
kas, a śokas, śirīṣas, kūṭajas, i ṅgudas, kubjakas, 
svarṇa-yūthīs, nāgas, punn āgas, j ātīs, mallik ās, 
śatapatras, j ālakās and m ādhav ī-latās. The 
banks were also abundantly adorned  with vari-
eties of trees that yielded flowers and fruits in 
all seasons. Thus the entire mountain stood glo-
riously decorated.  (14 -19)  

The leader of the elephants who lived in the forest of the mountain Trik ūṭa once wandered 
toward the lake with his fema le elephants. He 
broke many plants, creepers, thickets and trees, 
not caring for their piercing thorns.  (20) 
Simply by catching scent of that elephant, all 
the other elephants, the tigers and the other fe-
rocious animals, such as lions, rhinoceroses, 
great  serpents and black and white sarabhas, 
fled in fear. The camar ī deer also fled.  (21) By 
the mercy of this elephant, animals like the 
foxes, wolves, buffalos, bears, boars, gopuc-
chas, porcupines, monkeys, rabbits, the other 
deer and many other small animals loitered 
elsewhere in the forest. They were not afraid of 
him.  (22) Surrounded by the herd’s other ele-
phants, including females, and followed by the 
young ones, Gajapati, the leader of the ele-
phants, made Trik ūṭa Mountain tremble all 
around because of the weight of his body. He 
was perspiring, liquor dripped from his mouth, 
and his vision was overwhelmed by intoxica-
tion. He was being served by bumblebees who 
drank honey, and from a distance he could 
smell the dust of the lotus flowers, which was 
carried from the lake by the breeze. Thus sur-
rounded by his associates , who were afflicted 
by thirst, he soon arrived at the bank of the lake.  
(23-24) The King of the elephants entered the 
lake, bathed thoroughly and was relieved of his 
fatigue. Then, with the aid of his trunk, he 
drank the cold, clear, nectarean water, whi ch 
was mixed with the dust of lotus flowers and 
water lilies, until he was fully satisfied.  (25) 
Like a human being who lacks spiritual 
knowledge and is too attached to the members 
of his family, the elephant, being illusioned by 
the external energy of K ṛṣṇa, had his wives and 
children bathe and drink the water. Indeed, he 
raised water from the lake with his trunk and 
sprayed it over them. He did not mind the hard 
labor involved in this endeavor.  (26)  

By the arrangement of providence, O King, 
a strong c rocodile was angry at the elephant and 
attacked the elephant’s leg in the water. The el-
ephant was certainly strong, and he tried his 
best to get free from this danger sent by provi-
dence.  (27) Thereafter, seeing Gajendra in that 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

470 
 grave condition, his wives felt very, very sorry 
and began to cry. The other elephants wanted 
to help Gajendra, but because of the crocodile’s 
great strength, they could not rescue him by 
grasping him from behind.  (28) O King, the el-
ephant and the crocodile fought in this way, 
pulling one another in and out of the water, for 
one thousand years. Upon seeing the fight, the 
demigods were very surprised.  (29)  

Thereafter, because of being pulled into the 
water and fighting for many long years, the el-
ephant became diminished in his men tal, phys-
ical and sensual strength. The crocodile, on the 
contrary, being an animal of the water, in-
creased in enthusiasm, physical strength and 
sensual power.  (30) When the King of the ele-
phants saw that he was under the clutches of the 
crocodile by the will of providence and, being 
embodied and circumstantially helpless, could 
not save himself from danger, he was extremely 
afraid of being killed. He consequently thought 
for a long time and finally reached the follow-
ing decision.  (31) The other elephants , who are 
my friends and relatives, could not rescue me 
from this danger. What then to speak of my 
wives? They cannot do anything. It is by the 
will of providence that I have been attacked by 
this crocodile, and therefore I shall seek shelter 
of the Suprem e Personality of Godhead, who is 
always the shelter of everyone, even of great 
personalities.  (32) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is certainly not known to everyone, 
but He is very powerful and influential. There-
fore, although the serpent of eternal t ime, 
which is fearful in force, endlessly chases eve-
ryone, ready to swallow him, if one who fears 
this serpent seeks shelter of the Lord, the Lord 
gives him protection, for even death runs away 
in fear of the Lord. I therefore surrender unto 
Him, the great  and powerful supreme authority 
who is the actual shelter of everyone.  (33)  

SB 8.3: Gajendra’s Prayers of Surrender  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī continued: Thereaf-
ter, the King of the elephants, Gajendra, fixed his mind in his heart with perfect intelligence 
and chanted a mantra which he had learned in 
his previous birth as Indradyumna and which 
he remembered by the grace of K ṛṣṇa.  (1)  

The King of the elephants, Gajendra, said: I 
offer my respectful obeisances unto the Su-
preme Person, V āsudeva [o ṁ namo bhagav ate 
vāsudev āya]. Because of Him this material 
body acts due to the presence of spirit, and He 
is therefore the root cause of everyone. He is 
worshipable for such exalted persons as 
Brahm ā and Śiva, and He has entered the heart 
of every living being. Let me  meditate upon 
Him.  (2) The Supreme Godhead is the supreme 
platform on which everything rests, the ingre-
dient by which everything has been produced, 
and the person who has created and is the only 
cause of this cosmic manifestation. Nonethe-
less, He is diff erent from the cause and the re-
sult. I surrender unto Him, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, who is self -sufficient in eve-
rything.  (3) The Supreme Personality of God-
head, by expanding His own energy, keeps this 
cosmic manifestation visible and again som e-
times renders it invisible. He is both the su-
preme cause and the supreme result, the ob-
server and the witness, in all circumstances. 
Thus He is transcendental to everything. May 
that Supreme Personality of Godhead give me 
protection.  (4) In due course of  time, when all 
the causative and effective manifestations of 
the universe, including the planets and their di-
rectors and maintainers, are annihilated, there 
is a situation of dense darkness. Above this 
darkness, however, is the Supreme Personality 
of Godh ead. I take shelter of His lotus feet.  (5) 
An artist onstage, being covered by attractive 
dresses and dancing with different movements, 
is not understood by his audience; similarly, the 
activities and features of the supreme artist can-
not be understood ev en by the demigods or 
great sages, and certainly not by those who are 
unintelligent like animals. Neither the demi-
gods and sages nor the unintelligent can under-
stand the features of the Lord, nor can they ex-
press in words His actual position. May that Su-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

471 
 preme Personality of Godhead give me protec-
tion.  (6) Renunciants and great sages who see 
all living beings equally, who are friendly to 
everyone and who flawlessly practice in the 
forest the vows of brahmacarya, v ānaprastha 
and sanny āsa desire to see the al l-auspicious lo-
tus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
May that same Supreme Personality of God-
head be my destination.  (7) The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead has no material birth, ac-
tivities, name, form, qualities or faults. To ful-
fill the purpos e for which this material world is 
created and destroyed, He comes in the form of 
a human being like Lord R āma or Lord K ṛṣṇa 
by His original internal potency. He has im-
mense potency, and in various forms, all free 
from material contamination, He acts wonder-
fully. He is therefore the Supreme Brahman. I 
offer my respects to Him.  (8 -9) I offer my re-
spectful obeis ances unto the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, the self -effulgent Supersoul, 
who is the witness in everyone’s heart, who en-
lightens the individual soul and who cannot be 
reached by exercises of the mind, words or con-
sciousness.  (10)  

The Supreme Personal ity of Godhead is re-
alized by pure devotees who act in the transcen-
dental existence of bhakti -yoga. He is the be-
stower of uncontaminated happiness and is the 
master of the transcendental world. Therefore I 
offer my respect unto Him.  (11) I offer my re-
spectful obeisances to Lord V āsudeva, who is 
all-pervading, to the Lord’s fierce form as Lord 
Nṛsiṁhadeva, to the Lord’s form as an animal 
[Lord Var āhadeva], to Lord Datt ātreya, who 
preached impersonalism, to Lord Buddha, and 
to all the other incarnations. I o ffer my respect-
ful obeisances unto the Lord, who has no mate-
rial qualities but who accepts the three qualities 
goodness, passion and ignorance within this 
material world. I also offer my respectful obei-
sances unto the impersonal Brahman efful-
gence.  (12) I  beg to offer my respectful obei-
sances unto You, who are the Supersoul, the su-
perintendent of everything, and the witness of 
all that occurs. You are the Supreme Person, the origin of material nature and of the total mate-
rial energy. You are also the owner  of the ma-
terial body. Therefore, You are the supreme 
complete. I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
You.  (13) My Lord, You are the observer of all 
the objectives of the senses. Without Your 
mercy, there is no possibility of solving the 
problem of doubts . The material world is just 
like a shadow resembling You. Indeed, one ac-
cepts this material world as real because it gives 
a glimpse of Your existence.  (14) My Lord, 
You are the cause of all causes, but You Your-
self have no cause. Therefore You are the w on-
derful cause of everything. I offer my respect-
ful obeisances unto You, who are the shelter of 
the Vedic knowledge contained in the śāstras 
like the Pañcar ātras and Ved ānta-sūtra, which 
are Your representations, and who are the 
source of the parampar ā system. Because it is 
You who can give liberation, You are the only 
shelter for all transcendentalists. Let me offer 
my respectful obeisances unto You.  (15) My 
Lord, as the fire in ara ṇi wood is covered, You 
and Your unlimited knowledge are covered by 
the ma terial modes of nature. Your mind, how-
ever, is not attentive to the activities of the 
modes of nature. Those who are advanced in 
spiritual knowledge are not subject to the regu-
lative principles directed in the Vedic litera-
tures. Because such advanced souls  are tran-
scendental, You personally appear in their pure 
minds. Therefore I offer my respectful obei-
sances unto You.  (16)  

Since an animal such as me has surrendered 
unto You, who are supremely liberated, cer-
tainly You will release me from this dangerous  
position. Indeed, being extremely merciful, 
You incessantly try to deliver me. By your par-
tial feature as Param ātmā, You are situated in 
the hearts of all embodied beings. You are cel-
ebrated as direct transcendental knowledge, 
and You are unlimited. I off er my respectful 
obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead.  (17) My Lord, those who are com-
pletely freed from material contamination al-
ways meditate upon You within the cores of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

472 
 their hearts. You are extremely difficult to at-
tain for those l ike me who are too attached to 
mental concoction, home, relatives, friends, 
money, servants and assistants. You are the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, uncontami-
nated by the modes of nature. You are the res-
ervoir of all enlightenment, the supreme con-
trolle r. I therefore offer my respectful obei-
sances unto You.  (18) After worshiping the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, those who are 
interested in the four principles of religion, eco-
nomic development, sense gratification and lib-
eration obtain from Him what th ey desire. What 
then is to be said of other benedictions? Indeed, 
sometimes the Lord gives a spiritual body to 
such ambitious worshipers. May that Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is unlimitedly 
merciful, bestow upon me the benediction of 
liberation fro m this present danger and from the 
materialistic way of life.  (19) Unalloyed devo-
tees, who have no desire other than to serve the 
Lord, worship Him in full surrender and always 
hear and chant about His activities, which are 
most wonderful and auspicious. Thus they al-
ways merge in an ocean of transcendental bliss. 
Such devotees never ask the Lord for any ben-
ediction. I, however, am in danger. Thus I pray 
to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who 
is eternally existing, who is invisible, who is the 
Lord of all great personalities, such as Brahm ā, 
and who is available only by transcendental 
bhakti -yoga. Being extremely subtle, He is be-
yond the reach of my senses and transcendental 
to all external realization. He is unlimited, He 
is the original cause, and He is completely full 
in everything. I offer my obeisances unto Him.  
(20-21)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead cre-
ates His minor parts and parcels, the j īva-tattva, 
beginning with Lord Brahm ā, the demigods 
and the expansions of Vedic knowledge [S āma, 
Ṛg, Yajur and Atharva] and including all other 
living entities, moving and nonmoving, with 
their different names and characteristics. As the 
sparks of a fire or the shining rays of the sun 
emanate from their source and merge into it 
again and again, the mind, the intelligence, the senses, the gross and subtle material bodies, 
and the continuous transformations of the dif-
ferent modes of nature all emanate from the 
Lord and again merge into Him. He is neither 
demigod nor demon, neither human nor bird or 
beast. He  is not woman, man, or neuter, nor is 
He an animal. He is not a material quality, a 
fruitive activity, a manifestation or nonmani-
festation. He is the last word in the discrimina-
tion of “not this, not this,” and He is unlimited. 
All glories to the Supreme P ersonality of God-
head!  (22 -24) I do not wish to live anymore 
after I am released from the attack of the croc-
odile. What is the use of an elephant’s body 
covered externally and internally by ignorance? 
I simply desire eternal liberation from the cov-
ering o f ignorance. That covering is not de-
stroyed by the influence of time.  (25) Now, 
fully desiring release from material life, I offer 
my respectful obeisances unto that Supreme 
Person who is the creator of the universe, who 
is Himself the form of the univers e and who is 
nonetheless transcendental to this cosmic man-
ifestation. He is the supreme knower of every-
thing in this world, the Supersoul of the uni-
verse. He is the unborn, supremely situated 
Lord. I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
Him.  (26) I offer m y respectful obeisances 
unto the Supreme, the Supersoul, the master of 
all mystic yoga, who is seen in the core of the 
heart by perfect mystics when they are com-
pletely purified and freed from the reactions of 
fruitive activity by practicing bhakti -yoga.  (27) 
My Lord, You are the controller of formidable 
strength in three kinds of energy. You appear 
as the reservoir of all sense pleasure and the 
protector of the surrendered souls. You possess 
unlimited energy, but You are unapproachable 
by those who are un able to control their senses. 
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You 
again and again.  (28) I offer my respectful 
obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, by whose illusory energy the j īva, 
who is part and parcel of God, forgets his real 
identity because of the bodily concept of life. I 
take shelter of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, whose glories are difficult to understand.  
(29)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

473 
 ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī continued: When the 
King of th e elephants was describing the su-
preme authority, without mentioning any par-
ticular person, he did not invoke the demigods, 
headed by Lord Brahm ā, Lord Śiva, Indra and 
Candra. Thus none of them approached him. 
However, because Lord Hari is the Supersoul, 
Puruṣottama, the Personality of Godhead, He 
appeared before Gajendra.  (30) After under-
standing the awkward condition of Gajendra, 
who had offered his prayers, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Hari, who lives every-
where, appeared with the demigods, who w ere 
offering prayers to Him. Carrying His disc and 
other weapons, He appeared there on the back 
of His carrier, Garu ḍa, with great speed, ac-
cording to His desire. Thus He appeared before 
Gajendra.  (31) Gajendra had been forcefully 
captured by the crocodil e in the water and was 
feeling acute pain, but when he saw that 
Nārāyaṇa, wielding His disc, was coming in the 
sky on the back of Garu ḍa, he immediately took 
a lotus flower in his trunk, and with great diffi-
culty due to his painful condition, he uttered th e 
following words: “O my Lord, N ārāyaṇa, mas-
ter of the universe, O Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
You.”  (32) Thereafter, seeing Gajendra in such 
an aggrieved position, the unborn Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Hari,  immediately got 
down from the back of Garu ḍa by His causeless 
mercy and pulled the King of the elephants, 
along with the crocodile, out of the water. 
Then, in the presence of all the demigods, who 
were looking on, the Lord severed the croco-
dile’s mouth fr om its body with His disc. In this 
way He saved Gajendra, the King of the ele-
phants.  (33)  

SB 8.4: Gajendra Returns to the Spiritual 
World  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī said: When the Lord 
delivered Gajendra, King of the elephants, all 
the demigods, sages and Gan dharvas, headed 
by Brahm ā and Śiva, praised this activity of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead and showered 
flowers upon both the Lord and Gajendra.  (1) There was a beating of kettledrums in the heav-
enly planets, the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka 
began to  dance and sing, while great sages and 
the inhabitants of C āraṇaloka and Siddhaloka 
offered prayers to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Puru ṣottama.  (2) The best of the 
Gandharvas, King H ūhū, having been cursed 
by Devala Muni, had become a crocodile. N ow, 
having been delivered by the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, he assumed a very beautiful 
form as a Gandharva. Understanding by whose 
mercy this had happened, he immediately of-
fered his respectful obeisances with his head 
and began chanting prayers just  suitable for the 
transcendental Lord, the supreme eternal, who 
is worshiped by the choicest verses.  (3 -4) Hav-
ing been favored by the causeless mercy of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead and having 
regained his original form, King H ūhū circum-
ambulated the Lord and offered his obeisances. 
Then, in the presence of all the demigods, 
headed by Brahm ā, he returned to Gandhar-
valoka. He had been freed of all sinful reac-
tions.  (5)  

Because Gajendra, King of the elephants, 
had been touched directly by the hands of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was im-
mediately freed of all material ignorance and 
bondage. Thus he received the salvation of 
sārūpya-mukti, in which he achieved the same 
bodily features as the Lord, being dressed in 
yellow  garments and possessing four hands.  
(6) This Gajendra had formerly been a 
Vaiṣṇava and the king of the country known as 
Pāṇḍya, which is in the province of Dravi ḍa 
[South India]. In his previous life, he was 
known as Indradyumna Mah ārāja.  (7) In-
dradyumn a Mah ārāja retired from family life 
and went to the Malaya Hills, where he had a 
small cottage for his āśrama. He wore matted 
locks on his head and always engaged in aus-
terities. Once, while observing a vow of si-
lence, he was fully engaged in the worship o f 
the Lord and absorbed in the ecstasy of love of 
Godhead.  (8) While Indradyumna Mah ārāja 
was engaged in ecstatic meditation, worshiping 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the great 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

474 
 sage Agastya Muni arrived there, surrounded 
by his disciples. When the M uni saw that 
Mahārāja Indradyumna, who was sitting in a 
secluded place, remained silent and did not fol-
low the etiquette of offering him a reception, he 
was very angry.  (9) Agastya Muni then spoke 
this curse against the King: This King In-
dradyumna is not at all gentle. Being low and 
uneducated, he has insulted a br āhmaṇa. May 
he therefore enter the region of darkness and re-
ceive the dull, dumb body of an elephant.  (10)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: My dear 
King, after Agastya Muni had thus cursed King 
Indradyumna, the Muni left that place along 
with his disciples. Since the King was a devo-
tee, he accepted Agastya Muni’s curse as wel-
come because it was the desire of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Therefore, although in 
his next life he got the body of an elephant, be-
cause of devotional service he remembered 
how to worship and offer prayers to the Lord.  
(11-12) Upon delivering the King of the ele-
phants from the clutches of the crocodile, and 
from material existence, which resembles a 
crocodile, the Lord  awarded him the status of 
sārūpya-mukti. In the presence of the Gandhar-
vas, the Siddhas and the other demigods, who 
were praising the Lord for His wonderful tran-
scendental activities, the Lord, sitting on the 
back of His carrier, Garu ḍa, returned to His a ll-
wonderful abode and took Gajendra with Him.  
(13) My dear King Par īkṣit, I have now de-
scribed the wonderful power of K ṛṣṇa, as dis-
played when the Lord delivered the King of the 
elephants. O best of the Kuru dynasty, those 
who hear this narration become fit to be pro-
moted to the higher planetary systems. Simply 
because of hearing this narration, they gain a 
reputation as devotees, they are unaffected by 
the contamination of Kali -yuga, and they never 
see bad dreams.  (14) Therefore, after getting 
up from b ed in the morning, those who desire 
their own welfareespecially the br āhmaṇas, 
kṣatriyas, vai śyas and in particular the 
brāhmaṇa Vai ṣṇavasshould chant this narration 
as it is, without deviation, to counteract the 
troubles of bad dreams.  (15) O best of the Kuru dynasty, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the Supersoul of ev eryone, being thus pleased, 
addressed Gajendra in the presence of everyone 
there. He spoke the following blessings.  (16)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
Freed from all sinful reactions are those who 
rise from bed at the end of night, early in t he 
morning, and fully concentrate their minds with 
great attention upon My form; your form; this 
lake; this mountain; the caves; the gardens; the 
cane plants; the bamboo plants; the celestial 
trees; the residential quarters of Me, Lord 
Brahm ā and Lord Śiva; the three peaks of 
Trikūṭa Mountain, made of gold, silver and 
iron; My very pleasing abode [the Ocean of 
Milk]; the white island, Śvetadv īpa, which is 
always brilliant with spiritual rays; My mark of 
Śrīvatsa; the Kaustubha gem; My Vaijaya ntī 
garland; My club, Kaumodak ī; My Sudar śana 
disc and P āñcajanya conchshell; My bearer, 
Garu ḍa, the king of the birds; My bed, Śeṣa 
Nāga; My expansion of energy the goddess of 
fortune; Lord Brahm ā; Nārada Muni; Lord 
Śiva; Prahl āda; My incarnations like Ma tsya, 
Kūrma and Var āha; My unlimited all -auspi-
cious activities, which yield piety to he who 
hears them; the sun; the moon; fire; the mantra 
oṁkāra; the Absolute Truth; the total material 
energy; the cows and br āhmaṇas; devotional 
service; the wives of Soma  and Ka śyapa, who 
are all daughters of King Dak ṣa; the rivers Gan-
ges, Sarasvat ī, Nand ā and Yamun ā [Kālindī]; 
the elephant Air āvata; Dhruva Mah ārāja; the 
seven ṛṣis; and the pious human beings.  (17 -
24) My dear devotee, unto those who rise from 
bed at the e nd of night and offer Me the prayers 
offered by you, I give an eternal residence in 
the spiritual world at the end of their lives.  (25)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī continued: After giv-
ing this instruction, the Lord, who is known as 
Hṛṣīkeśa, bugled with His P āñcajanya 
conchshell, in this way pleasing all the demi-
gods, headed by Lord Brahm ā. Then He 
mounted the back of His carrier, Garu ḍa.  (26)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

475 
 SB 8.5: The Demigods Appeal to the Lord 
for Protection  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: O King, I 
have described to you t he pastime of Gajendra -
mokṣaṇa, which is most pious to hear. By hear-
ing of such activities of the Lord, one can be 
freed from all sinful reactions. Now please lis-
ten as I describe Raivata Manu.  (1) The brother 
of Tāmasa Manu was the fifth Manu, named 
Raiv ata. His sons were headed by Arjuna, Bali 
and Vindhya.  (2) O King, in the millennium of 
Raivata Manu the King of heaven was known 
as Vibhu, among the demigods were the 
Bhūtarayas, and among the seven br āhmaṇas 
who occupied the seven planets were 
Hiraṇyaromā, Veda śirā and Ūrdhvab āhu.  (3) 
From the combination of Śubhra and his wife, 
Viku ṇṭhā, there appeared the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Vaiku ṇṭha, along with demi-
gods who were His personal plenary expan-
sions.  (4) Just to please the goddess of fortune,  
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Vaiku ṇṭha, at her request, created another 
Vaiku ṇṭha planet, which is worshiped by eve-
ryone.  (5) Although the great activities and 
transcendental qualities of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead’s various incarnations a re 
wonderfully described, sometimes we are una-
ble to understand them. Yet everything is pos-
sible for Lord Vi ṣṇu. If one could count the at-
oms of the universe, then he could count the 
qualities of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. But no one can count the  atoms of the 
universe, nor can anyone count the transcen-
dental qualities of the Lord.  (6)  

The son of Cak ṣu known as C ākṣuṣa was the 
sixth Manu. He had many sons, headed by 
Pūru, P ūruṣa and Sudyumna.  (7) During the 
reign of C ākṣuṣa Manu, the King of he aven was 
known as Mantradruma. Among the demigods 
were the Āpyas, and among the great sages 
were Havi ṣmān and V īraka.  (8) In this sixth 
manvantara millennium, Lord Vi ṣṇu, the mas-
ter of the universe, appeared in His partial ex-
pansion. He was begotten by Va irāja in the 
womb of his wife, Devasambh ūti, and His name was Ajita.  (9) By churning the Ocean of 
Milk, Ajita produced nectar for the demigods. 
In the form of a tortoise, He moved here and 
there, carrying on His back the great mountain 
known as Mandara.  (10)  

King Par īkṣit inquired: O great br āhmaṇa, 
Śukadeva Gosv āmī, why and how did Lord 
Viṣṇu churn the Ocean of Milk? For what rea-
son did He stay in the water as a tortoise and 
hold up Mandara Mountain? How did the dem-
igods obtain the nectar, and what oth er things 
were produced from the churning of the ocean? 
Kindly describe all these wonderful activities 
of the Lord.  (11 -12) My heart, which is dis-
turbed by the three miserable conditions of ma-
terial life, is not yet sated with hearing you de-
scribe the glo rious activities of the Lord, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the 
master of the devotees.  (13)  

Śrī Sūta Gosv āmī said: O learned br āhmaṇas 
assembled here at Naimi ṣāraṇya, when 
Śukadeva Gosv āmī, the son of Dvaip āyana, 
was thus questioned by the King, he congratu-
lated the King and then endeavored to describe 
further the glories of the Supreme Personali ty 
of Godhead.  (14)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: When the asuras, 
with their serpent weapons, severely attacked 
the demigods in a fight, many of the demigods 
fell and lost their lives. Indeed, they could not 
be revived. At that time, O King, the demigods 
had been cursed by Durv āsā Muni, the three 
worlds were poverty -stricken, and therefore rit-
ualistic ceremonies could not be performed. 
The effects of this were very serious.  (15 -16) 
Lord Indra, Varu ṇa and the other demigods, 
seeing their lives in such a state,  consulted 
among themselves, but they could not find any 
solution. Then all the demigods assembled and 
went together to the peak of Sumeru Mountain. 
There, in the assembly of Lord Brahm ā, they 
fell down to offer Lord Brahm ā their obei-
sances, and then they informed him of all the 
incidents that had taken place.  (17 -18)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

476 

Upon seeing that the demigods were bereft 
of all influence and strength and that the three 
worlds were consequently devoid of auspi-
ciousness, and upon seeing that the demigods 
were in an aw kward position whereas all the 
demons were flourishing, Lord Brahm ā, who is 
above all the demigods and who is most pow-
erful, concentrated his mind on the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Thus being encour-
aged, he became bright -faced and spoke to the 
demigods as follows.  (19 -20)  

Lord Brahm ā said: I, Lord Śiva, all of yo u 
demigods, the demons, the living entities born 
of perspiration, the living beings born of eggs, 
the trees and plants sprouting from the earth, 
and the living entities born from embryosall 
come from the Supreme Lord, from His incar-
nation of rajo -guṇa [Lor d Brahm ā, the gu ṇa-
avatāra] and from the great sages [ ṛṣis] who are 
part of me. Let us therefore go to the Supreme 
Lord and take shelter of His lotus feet.  (21) For 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead there is no 
one to be killed, no one to be protected, n o one 
to be neglected and no one to be worshiped. 
Nonetheless, for the sake of creation, mainte-
nance and annihilation according to time, He 
accepts different forms as incarnations either in 
the mode of goodness, the mode of passion or 
the mode of ignorance .  (22) Now is the time to 
invoke the mode of goodness of the living enti-
ties who have accepted material bodies. The 
mode of goodness is meant to establish the Su-
preme Lord’s rule, which will maintain the ex-
istence of the creation. Therefore, this is the o p-
portune moment to take shelter of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Because He is natu-
rally very kind and dear to the demigods, He 
will certainly bestow good fortune upon us.  
(23)  

O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, subduer of all enemies, 
after Lord Brahm ā finishe d speaking to the 
demigods, he took them with him to the abode 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, which 
is beyond this material world. The Lord’s abode is on an island called Śvetadv īpa, which 
is situated in the Ocean of Milk.  (24) There [at 
Śvetadv īpa], Lord Brahm ā offered prayers to 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even 
though he had never seen the Supreme Lord. 
Simply because Lord Brahm ā had heard about 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead from Ve-
dic literature, with a fixed mind he offered the 
Lord prayers as written or approved by Vedic 
literature.  (25)  

Lord Brahm ā said: O Supreme Lord, O 
changeless, unlimited supreme truth. You are 
the origin of everything. Being all -pervading, 
You are in everyone’s heart and also in the 
atom. You have no mate rial qualities. Indeed, 
You are inconceivable. The mind cannot catch 
You by speculation, and words fail to describe 
You. You are the supreme master of everyone, 
and therefore You are worshipable for every-
one. We offer our respectful obeisances unto 
You.  ( 26) The Supreme Personality of God-
head directly and indirectly knows how every-
thing, including the living force, mind and in-
telligence, is working under His control. He is 
the illuminator of everything and has no igno-
rance. He does not have a material body  subject 
to the reactions of previous activities, and He is 
free from the ignorance of partiality and mate-
rialistic education. I therefore take shelter of the 
lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, who is eternal, 
all-pervading and as great as the sky and who 
appears with six opulences in three yugas 
[Satya, Tret ā and Dv āpara].  (27) In the cycle 
of material activities, the material body resem-
bles the wheel of a mental chariot. The ten 
senses [five for working and five for gathering 
knowledge] and the five life airs within the 
body form the fifteen spokes of the c hariot’s 
wheel. The three modes of nature [goodness, 
passion and ignorance] are its center of activi-
ties, and the eight ingredients of nature [earth, 
water, fire, air, sky, mind, intelligence and false 
ego] comprise the rim of the wheel. The exter-
nal, mate rial energy moves this wheel like elec-
trical energy. Thus the wheel revolves very 
quickly around its hub or central support, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

477 
 Supersoul and the ultimate truth. We offer our 
respectful obeisances unto Him.  (28)  The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead is situated in 
pure goodness [ śuddha -sattva], and therefore 
He is eka -varṇathe o ṁkāra [pra ṇava]. Because 
the Lord is beyond the cosmic manifestation, 
which is considered to be darkness, He is not 
visible to material eyes . Nonetheless, He is not 
separated from us by time or space, but is pre-
sent everywhere. Seated on His carrier, Garu ḍa, 
He is worshiped by means of mystical yogic 
power by those who have achieved freedom 
from agitation. Let us all offer our respectful 
obeis ances unto Him.  (29) No one can over-
come the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s il-
lusory energy [m āyā], which is so strong that it 
bewilders everyone, making one lose the sense 
to understand the aim of life. That same m āyā, 
however, is subdued by the Suprem e Personal-
ity of Godhead, who rules everyone and who is 
equally disposed toward all living entities. Let 
us offer our obeisances unto Him.  (30) Since 
our bodies are made of sattva -guṇa, we, the 
demigods, are internally and externally situated 
in goodness.  All the great saints are also situ-
ated in that way. Therefore, if even we cannot 
understand the Supreme Personality of God-
head, what is to be said of those who are most 
insignificant in their bodily constitutions, being 
situated in the modes of passion an d ignorance? 
How can they understand the Lord? Let us offer 
our respectful obeisances unto Him.  (31)  

On this earth there are four kinds of living 
entities, who are all created by Him. The mate-
rial creation rests on His lotus feet. He is the 
great Suprem e Person, full of opulence and 
power. May He be pleased with us.  (32) The 
entire cosmic manifestation has emerged from 
water, and it is because of water that all living 
entities endure, live and develop. This water is 
nothing but the semen of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. Therefore, may the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who has such great po-
tency, be pleased with us.  (33) Soma, the 
moon, is the source of food grains, strength and 
longevity for all the demigods. He is also the master of all vegetat ion and the source of gen-
eration for all living entities. As stated by 
learned scholars, the moon is the mind of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. May that Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the source of all 
opulences, be pleased with us.  (34) Fire, which  
is born for the sake of accepting oblations in 
ritualistic ceremonies, is the mouth of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. Fire exists 
within the depths of the ocean to produce 
wealth, and fire is also present in the abdomen 
to digest food and produce var ious secretions 
for the maintenance of the body. May that su-
premely powerful Personality of Godhead be 
pleased with us.  (35) The sun -god marks the 
path of liberation, which is called arcir ādi-
vartma. He is the chief source for understand-
ing of the Vedas, he is the abode where the Ab-
solute Truth can be worshiped, he is the gate-
way to liberation, and he is the source of eternal 
life as well as the cause of death. The sun -god 
is the eye of the Lord. May that Supreme Lord, 
who is supremely opulent, be pleased with us.  
(36) All living entities, moving and nonmov-
ing, receive their vital force, their bodily 
strength and their very lives from the air. All of 
us follow the air for our vital force, exactly as 
servants follow an emperor. The vital force of 
air is gen erated from the original vital force of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. May that 
Supreme Lord be pleased with us.  (37) May 
the supremely powerful Personality of God-
head be pleased with us. The different direc-
tions are generated from His ears, the hole s of 
the body come from His heart, and the vital 
force, the senses, the mind, the air within the 
body, and the ether, which is the shelter of the 
body, come from His navel.  (38) Mahendra, 
the King of Heaven, was generated from the 
prowess of the Lord, the  demigods were gener-
ated from the mercy of the Lord, Lord Śiva was 
generated from the anger of the Lord, and Lord 
Brahm ā from His sober intelligence. The Vedic 
mantras were generated from the bodily holes 
of the Lord, and the great saints and praj āpatis 
were generated from His genitals. May that su-
premely powerful Lord be pleased with us.  
(39) The goddess of fortune was generated 
from His chest, the inhabitants of Pit ṛloka from 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

478 
 His shadow, religion from His bosom, and irre-
ligion [the opposite of religion] from His back. 
The heavenly planets were generated from the 
top of His head, and the Apsar ās from His sense 
enjoyment. May that supremely powerful Per-
sonality of Godhead be pleased with us.  (40) 
The br āhmaṇas and Vedic knowledge come 
from the mouth of the  Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, the k ṣatriyas and bodily strength 
come from His arms, the vai śyas and their ex-
pert knowledge in productivity and wealth 
come from His thighs, and the śūdras, who are 
outside of Vedic knowledge, come from His 
feet. May that Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is full in prowess, be pleased with 
us.  (41) Greed is generated from His lower lip, 
affection from His upper lip, bodily luster from 
His nose, animalistic lusty desires from His 
sense of touch, Yamar āja from His eyebrow s, 
and eternal time from His eyelashes. May that 
Supreme Lord be pleased with us.  (42) All 
learned men say that the five elements, eternal 
time, fruitive activity, the three modes of mate-
rial nature, and the varieties produced by these 
modes are all creat ions of yoga -māyā. This ma-
terial world is therefore extremely difficult to 
understand, but those who are highly learned 
have rejected it. May the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, who is the controller of every-
thing, be pleased with us.  (43) Let us offer our 
respectful o beisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is completely silent, 
free from endeavor, and completely satisfied by 
His own achievements. He is not attached to the 
activities of the material world through His 
senses. Indeed, in performing His past imes in 
this material world, He is just like the unat-
tached air.  (44)  

O Supreme Personality of Godhead, we are 
surrendered unto You, yet we wish to see You. 
Please make Your original form and smiling lo-
tus face visible to our eyes and appreciable to 
our other senses.  (45) O Lord, O Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, by Your sweet will You 
appear in various incarnations, millennium af-
ter millennium, and act wonderfully, perform-ing uncommon activities that would be impos-
sible for us.  (46) Karm īs are always anxious to 
accumulate wealth for their sense gratification, 
but for that purpose they must work very hard. 
Yet even though they work hard, the results are 
not satisfying. Indeed, sometimes their work 
results only in frustration. But devotees who 
have dedic ated their lives to the service of the 
Lord can achieve substantial results without 
working very hard. These results exceed the 
devotee’s expectations.  (47) Activities dedi-
cated to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
even if performed in small measure, ne ver go 
in vain. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
being the supreme father, is naturally very dear 
and always ready to act for the good of the liv-
ing entities.  (48) When one pours water on the 
root of a tree, the trunk and branches of the tree 
are autom atically pleased. Similarly, when one 
becomes a devotee of Lord Vi ṣṇu, everyone is 
served, for the Lord is the Supersoul of every-
one.  (49) My Lord, all obeisances unto You, 
who are eternal, beyond time’s limits of past, 
present and future. You are inconce ivable in 
Your activities, You are the master of the three 
modes of material nature, and, being transcen-
dental to all material qualities, You are free 
from material contamination. You are the con-
troller of all three of the modes of nature, but at 
the prese nt You are in favor of the quality of 
goodness. Let us offer our respectful obei-
sances unto You.  (50)  

SB 8.6: The Demigods and Demons Declare 
a Truce  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King Par īkṣit, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, be-
ing thus worshiped with prayers by the demi-
gods and Lord Brahm ā, appeared before them. 
His bodily effulgence resembled the simultane-
ous rising of thousands of suns.  (1)  The vision 
of all the demigods was blocked by the Lord’s 
effulgence. Thus they could see neither the sky, 
the directions, the land, nor even themselves, 
what to speak of seeing the Lord, who was pre-
sent before them.  (2) Lord Brahm ā, along with 
Lord Śiva, saw the crystal -clear personal 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

479 
 beauty of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
whose blackish body resembles a marakata 
gem, whose eyes are reddish like the depths of 
a lotus, who is dressed with garments that are 
yellow like molten gold, and whose entire b ody 
is attractively decorated. They saw His beauti-
ful, smiling, lotuslike face, crowned by a hel-
met bedecked with valuable jewels. The Lord 
has attractive eyebrows, and His cheeks are 
adorned with earrings. Lord Brahm ā and Lord 
Śiva saw the belt on the Lord’s waist, the ban-
gles on His arms, the necklace on His chest, and 
the ankle bells on His legs. The Lord is be-
decked with flower garlands, His neck is deco-
rated with the Kaustubha gem, and He carries 
with Him the godd ess of fortune and His per-
sonal weapons, like His disc and club. When 
Lord Brahm ā, along with Lord Śiva and the 
other demigods, thus saw the form of the Lord, 
they all immediately fell to the ground, offering 
their obeisances.  (3 -7)  

Lord Brahm ā said: Al though You are never 
born, Your appearance and disappearance as an 
incarnation never cease. You are always free 
from the material qualities, and You are the 
shelter of transcendental bliss resembling an 
ocean. Eternally existing in Your transcenden-
tal form , You are the supreme subtle of the 
most extremely subtle. We therefore offer our 
respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme, 
whose existence is inconceivable.  (8) O best of 
persons, O supreme director, those who actu-
ally aspire for supreme good fortune worship 
this form of Your Lordship according to the 
Vedic Tantras. My Lord, we can see all the 
three worlds in You.  (9) My dear Lord, who 
are always fully independent, this entire cosmic 
manifestation arises from You, rests upon You 
and ends in You. Your Lordship is the begin-
ning, sustenance and end of everything, like the 
earth, which is the cause of an earthen pot, 
which supports the pot, and to which the pot, 
when broken, finally returns.  (10) O Supreme, 
You are independent in Your self and do not 
take help from others. Through Your own po-
tency, You create this cosmic manifestation 
and enter into it. Those who are advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, who are fully in 
knowledge of the authoritative śāstra, and who, 
through the practice of bhakti -yoga, are 
cleansed of all material contamination, can see 
with clear minds that although You exist within 
the transformations of the material qualities, 
Your presence is untouched by these qualities.  
(11) As one can derive fire from wood, milk 
from the milk bag of th e cow, food grains and 
water from the land, and prosperity in one’s 
livelihood from industrial enterprises, so, by 
the practice of bhakti -yoga, even within this 
material world, one can achieve Your favor or 
intelligently approach You. Those who are pi-
ous a ll affirm this.  (12) Elephants afflicted by 
a forest fire become very happy when they get 
water from the Ganges. Similarly, O my Lord, 
from whose navel grows a lotus flower, since 
You have now appeared before us, we have be-
come transcendentally happy. By seeing Your 
Lordship, whom we have desired to see for a 
very long time, we have achieved our ultimate 
goal in life.  (13) My Lord, we, the various 
demigods, the directors of this universe, have 
come to Your lotus feet. Please fulfill the pur-
pose for which we have come. You are the wit-
ness of everything, from within and without. 
Nothing is unknown to You, and therefore it is 
unnecessary to inform You again of anything.  
(14) I [Lord Brahm ā], Lord Śiva and all the 
demigods, accompanied by the praj āpatis like 
Dakṣa, are nothing but sparks illuminated by 
You, who are the original fire. Since we are 
particles of You, what can we understand about 
our welfare? O Supreme Lord, please give us 
the means of deliverance that is suitable for the 
brāhmaṇas and demigods.  (15)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: When the 
Lord was thus offered prayers by the demigods, 
headed by Lord Brahm ā, He understood the 
purpose for which they had approached Him. 
Therefore, in a deep voice that resembled the 
rumbling of clouds, the Lord replie d to the 
demigods, who all stood there attentively with 
folded hands.  (16) Although the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, the master of the demi-
gods, was capable of performing the activities 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

480 
 of the demigods by Himself, He wanted to en-
joy pastimes in churnin g the ocean. Therefore, 
He spoke as follows.  (17)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
O Lord Brahm ā, Lord Śiva and other demigods, 
please hear Me with great attention, for what I 
say will bring good fortune for all of you.  (18) 
As long as you are not flourishing, you should 
make a truce with the demons and asuras, who 
are now being favored by time.  ( 19) O demi-
gods, fulfilling one’s own interests is so im-
portant that one may even have to make a truce 
with one’s enemies. For the sake of one’s self -
interest, one has to act according to the logic of 
the snake and the mouse.  (20) Immediately en-
deavor to p roduce nectar, which a person who 
is about to die may drink to become immortal.  
(21) O demigods, cast into the Ocean of Milk 
all kinds of vegetables, grass, creepers and 
drugs. Then, with My help, making Mandara 
Mountain the churning rod and V āsuki the rope 
for churning, churn the Ocean of Milk with un-
diverted attention. Thus the demons will be en-
gaged in labor, but you, the demigods, will gain 
the actual result, the nectar produced from the 
ocean.  (22 -23) My dear demigods, with pa-
tience and p eace everything can be done, but if 
one is agitated by anger, the goal is not 
achieved. Therefore, whatever the demons ask, 
agree to their proposal.  (24) A poison known 
as kālakūṭa will be generated from the Ocean of 
Milk, but you should not fear it. And when var-
ious products are churned from the ocean, you 
should not be greedy for them or anxious to ob-
tain them, nor should you be angry.  (25)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: O King 
Parīkṣit, after advising the demigods in this 
way, the independent Supreme Pe rsonality of 
Godhead, the best of all living entities, disap-
peared from their presence.  (26) Then Lord 
Brahm ā and Lord Śiva, after offering their re-
spectful obeisances to the Lord, returned to 
their abodes. All the demigods then approached 
Mahārāja Bali.  (27) Mah ārāja Bali, a most cel-
ebrated king of the demons, knew very well 
when to make peace and when to fight. Thus although his commanders and captains were 
agitated and were about to kill the demigods, 
Mahārāja Bali, seeing that the demigods were 
coming  to him without a militant attitude, for-
bade his commanders to kill them.  (28) The 
demigods approached Bali Mah ārāja, the son of 
Virocana, and sat down near him. Bali 
Mahārāja was protected by the commanders of 
the demons and was most opulent, having con-
quered the entire universe.  (29) After pleasing 
Bali Mah ārāja with mild words, Lord Indra, the 
King of the demigods, who was most intelli-
gent, very politely submitted all the proposals 
he had learned from the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Lord Vi ṣṇu.  (3 0) The proposals sub-
mitted by King Indra were immediately ac-
cepted by Bali Mah ārāja and his assistants, 
headed by Śambara and Ari ṣṭanemi, and by all 
the other residents of Tripura.  (31) O Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, chastiser of enemies, the demigods 
and the demon s thereafter made an armistice 
between them. Then, with great enterprise, they 
arranged to produce nectar, as proposed by 
Lord Indra.  (32) Thereafter, with great 
strength, the demons and demigods, who were 
all very powerful and who had long, stout arms, 
uprooted Mandara Mountain. Crying very 
loudly, they brought it toward the Ocean of 
Milk.  (33) Because of conveying the great 
mountain for a long distance, King Indra, 
Mahārāja Bali and the other demigods and de-
mons became fatigued. Being unable to carry 
the mountain, they left it on the way.  (34) The 
mountain known as Mandara, which was ex-
tremely heavy, being made of gold, fell and 
smashed many demigods and demons.  (35)  

The demigods and demons were frustrated 
and disheartened, and their arms, thighs and 
shoulders were broken. Therefore, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who knows every-
thing, appeared there on the back of His carrier, 
Garu ḍa.  (36) Observing that most of the de-
mons and the demigods had been crushed by 
the falling of the mountain, the Lord glanced 
over them and brought them back to life. Thus 
they became free from grief, and they even had 
no bruises on their bodies.  (37) The Lord very 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

481 
 easily lifted the mountain with one hand and 
placed it on the back of Garu ḍa. Then, He too 
got on the back of Garu ḍa and went to the 
Ocean of Milk, surrounded by the demigods 
and demons.  (38) Thereafter, Garu ḍa, the chief 
of birds, unloaded Mandara Mountain from his 
should er and brought it near the water. Then he 
was asked by the Lord to leave that place, and 
he left.  (39)  

SB 8.7: Lord Śiva Saves the Universe by 
Drinking Poison  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O best of the Ku-
rus, Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, the demigods and de-
mons summon ed V āsuki, king of the serpents, 
requesting him to come and promising to give 
him a share of the nectar. They coiled V āsuki 
around Mandara Mountain as a churning rope, 
and with great pleasure they endeavored to pro-
duce nectar by churning the Ocean of Milk.   (1) 
The Personality of Godhead, Ajita, grasped the 
front portion of the snake, and then the demi-
gods followed.  (2) The leaders of the demons 
thought it unwise to hold the tail, the inauspi-
cious portion of the snake. Instead, they wanted 
to hold the fron t, which had been taken by the 
Personality of Godhead and the demigods, be-
cause that portion was auspicious and glorious. 
Thus the demons, on the plea that they were all 
highly advanced students of Vedic knowledge 
and were all famous for their birth and ac tivi-
ties, protested that they wanted to hold the front 
of the snake.  (3) Thus the demons remained si-
lent, opposing the desire of the demigods. See-
ing the demons and understanding their motive, 
the Personality of Godhead smiled. Without 
discussion, He imme diately accepted their pro-
posal by grasping the tail of the snake, and the 
demigods followed Him.  (4) After thus adjust-
ing how the snake was to be held, the sons of 
Kaśyapa, both demigods and demons, began 
their activities, desiring to get nectar by churn-
ing the Ocean of Milk.  (5)  

O son of the P āṇḍu dynasty, when Mandara 
Mountain was thus being used as a churning rod in the Ocean of Milk, it had no support, and 
there fore although held by the strong hands of 
the demigods and demons, it sank into the wa-
ter.  (6) Because the mountain had been sunk 
by the strength of providence, the demigods 
and demons were disappointed, and their faces 
seemed to shrivel.  (7) Seeing the situation that 
had been created by the will of the Supreme, 
the unlimitedly powerful Lord, whose determi-
nation is infallible, took the wonderful shape of 
a tortoise, entered the water, and lifted the great 
Mandara Mountain.  (8) When the demigods 
and demon s saw that Mandara Mountain had 
been lifted, they were enlivened and encour-
aged to begin churning again. The mountain 
rested on the back of the great tortoise, which 
extended for eight hundred thousand miles like 
a large island.  (9) O King, when the demig ods 
and demons, by the strength of their arms, ro-
tated Mandara Mountain on the back of the ex-
traordinary tortoise, the tortoise accepted the 
rolling of the mountain as a means of scratching 
His body, and thus He felt a pleasing sensation.  
(10) Thereafter,  Lord Vi ṣṇu entered the de-
mons as the quality of passion, the demigods as 
the quality of goodness, and V āsuki as the qual-
ity of ignorance to encourage them and increase 
their various types of strength and energy.  (11) 
Manifesting Himself with thousands of  hands, 
the Lord then appeared on the summit of Man-
dara Mountain, like another great mountain, 
and held Mandara Mountain with one hand. In 
the upper planetary systems, Lord Brahm ā and 
Lord Śiva, along with Indra, King of heaven, 
and other demigods, offered  prayers to the Lord 
and showered flowers upon Him.  (12) The 
demigods and demons worked almost madly 
for the nectar, encouraged by the Lord, who 
was above and below the mountain and who 
had entered the demigods, the demons, V āsuki 
and the mountain itself.  Because of the strength 
of the demigods and demons, the Ocean of 
Milk was so powerfully agitated that all the al-
ligators in the water were very much perturbed. 
Nonetheless the churning of the ocean contin-
ued in this way.  (13) V āsuki had thousands of 
eyes and mouths. From his mouths he breathed 
smoke and blazing fire, which affected the de-
mons, headed by Pauloma, K āleya, Bali and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

482 
 Ilvala. Thus the demons, who appeared like 
sarala trees burned by a forest fire, gradually 
became powerless.  (14) Because the d emigods 
were also affected by the blazing breath of 
Vāsuki, their bodily lusters diminished, and 
their garments, garlands, weapons and faces 
were blackened by smoke. However, by the 
grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
clouds appeared on the sea, p ouring torrents of 
rain, and breezes blew, carrying particles of 
water from the sea waves, to give the demigods 
relief.  (15)  

When nectar did not come from the Ocean 
of Milk, despite so much endeavor by the best 
of the demigods and demons, the Supreme Pe r-
sonality of Godhead, Ajita, personally began to 
churn the ocean.  (16) The Lord appeared like 
a blackish cloud. He was dressed with yellow 
garments, His earrings shone on His ears like 
lightning, and His hair spread over His shoul-
ders. He wore a garland o f flowers, and His 
eyes were pinkish. With His strong, glorious 
arms, which award fearlessness throughout the 
universe, He took hold of V āsuki and began 
churning the ocean, using Mandara Mountain 
as a churning rod. When engaged in this way, 
the Lord appear ed like a beautifully situated 
mountain named Indran īla.  (17) The fish, 
sharks, tortoises and snakes were most agitated 
and perturbed. The entire ocean became turbu-
lent, and even the large aquatic animals like 
whales, water elephants, crocodiles and 
timiṅgila fish [large whales that can swallow 
small whales] came to the surface. While the 
ocean was being churned in this way, it first 
produced a fiercely dangerous poison called 
hālahala.  (18) O King, when that uncontrolla-
ble poison was forcefully spreading  up and 
down in all directions, all the demigods, along 
with the Lord Himself, approached Lord Śiva 
[Sadāśiva]. Feeling unsheltered and very much 
afraid, they sought shelter of him.  (19) The 
demigods observed Lord Śiva sitting on the 
summit of Kail āsa Hil l with his wife, Bhav ānī, 
for the auspicious development of the three 
worlds. He was being worshiped by great saintly persons desiring liberation. The demi-
gods offered him their obeisances and prayers 
with great respect.  (20)  

The praj āpatis said: O grea test of all demi-
gods, Mah ādeva, Supersoul of all living entities 
and cause of their happiness and prosperity, we 
have come to the shelter of your lotus feet. Now 
please save us from this fiery poison, which is 
spreading all over the three worlds.  (21) O 
lord, you are the cause of bondage and libera-
tion of the entire universe because you are its 
ruler. Those who are advanced in spiritual con-
sciousness surrender unto you, and therefore 
you are the cause of mitigating their distresses, 
and you are also the ca use of their liberation. 
We therefore worship Your Lordship.  (22) O 
lord, you are self -effulgent and supreme. You 
create this material world by your personal en-
ergy, and you assume the names Brahm ā, 
Viṣṇu and Mahe śvara when you act in creation, 
maintenance and annihilation.  (23) You are the 
cause of all causes, the self -effulgent, incon-
ceivable, impersonal Brahman, which is origi-
nally Parabrahman. You manifest various po-
tencies in this cosmic mani festation.  (24) O 
lord, you are the original source of Vedic liter-
ature. You are the original cause of material 
creation, the life force, the senses, the five ele-
ments, the three modes and the mahat -tattva. 
You are eternal time, determination and the two 
religio us systems called truth [satya] and truth-
fulness [ ṛta]. You are the shelter of the syllable 
om, which consists of three letters a -u-m.  (25) 
O father of all planets, learned scholars know 
that fire is your mouth, the surface of the globe 
is your lotus feet , eternal time is your move-
ment, all the directions are your ears, and Var-
uṇa, master of the waters, is your tongue.  (26) 
O lord, the sky is your navel, the air is your 
breathing, the sun is your eyes, and the water is 
your semen. You are the shelter of a ll kinds of 
living entities, high and low. The god of the 
moon is your mind, and the upper planetary 
system is your head.  (27) O lord, you are the 
three Vedas personified. The seven seas are 
your abdomen, and the mountains are your 
bones. All drugs, creep ers and vegetables are 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

483 
 the hairs on your body, the Vedic mantras like 
Gāyatrī are the seven layers of your body, and 
the Vedic religious system is the core of your 
heart.  (28) O lord, the five important Vedic 
mantras are represented by your five faces, 
from which the thirty -eight most celebrated Ve-
dic mantras have been gener ated. Your Lord-
ship, being celebrated as Lord Śiva, is self -illu-
minated. You are directly situated as the su-
preme truth, known as Param ātmā.  (29) O lord, 
your shadow is seen in irreligion, which brings 
about varieties of irreligious creations. The 
three m odes of naturegoodness, passion and ig-
noranceare your three eyes. All the Vedic liter-
atures, which are full of verses, are emanations 
from you because their compilers wrote the 
various scriptures after receiving your glance.  
(30) O Lord Gir īśa, since the impersonal Brah-
man effulgence is transcendental to the material 
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance, the 
various directors of this material world cer-
tainly cannot appreciate it or even know where 
it is. It is not understandable even to Lord 
Brahm ā, Lord Vi ṣṇu or the King of heaven, 
Mahendra.  (31) When annihilation is per-
formed by the flames and sparks emanating 
from your eyes, the entire creation is burned to 
ashes. Nonetheless, you do not know how this 
happens. What then is to be said of your de-
stroy ing the Dak ṣa-yajña, Tripur āsura and the 
kālakūṭa poison? Such activities cannot be sub-
ject matters for prayers offered to you.  (32) Ex-
alted, self -satisfied persons who preach to the 
entire world think of your lotus feet constantly 
within their hearts. Ho wever, when persons 
who do not know your austerity see you mov-
ing with Um ā, they misunderstand you to be 
lusty, or when they see you wandering in the 
crematorium they mistakenly think that you are 
ferocious and envious. Certainly they are 
shameless. They c annot understand your activ-
ities.  (33) Even personalities like Lord Brahm ā 
and other demigods cannot understand your po-
sition, for you are beyond the moving and non-
moving creation. Since no one can understand 
you in truth, how can one offer you prayers? I t 
is impossible. As far as we are concerned, we 
are creatures of Lord Brahm ā’s creation. Un-der the circumstances, therefore, we cannot of-
fer you adequate prayers, but as far as our abil-
ity allows, we have expressed our feelings.  
(34) O greatest of all rul ers, your actual identity 
is impossible for us to understand. As far as we 
can see, your presence brings flourishing hap-
piness to everyone. Beyond this, no one can ap-
preciate your activities. We can see this much, 
and nothing more.  (35)  

Śrīla Śukadeva G osvāmī continued: Lord 
Śiva is always benevolent toward all living en-
tities. When he saw that the living entities were 
very much disturbed by the poison, which was 
spreading everywhere, he was very compas-
sionate. Thus he spoke to his eternal consort, 
Satī, as follows.  (36)  

Lord Śiva said: My dear Bhav ānī, just see 
how all these living entities have been placed 
in danger because of the poison produced from 
the churning of the Ocean of Milk.  (37) It is 
my duty to give protection and safety to all liv-
ing e ntities struggling for existence. Certainly 
it is the duty of the master to protect his suffer-
ing dependents.  (38) People in general, being 
bewildered by the illusory energy of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, are always en-
gaged in animosity toward one  another. But 
devotees, even at the risk of their own tempo-
rary lives, try to save them.  (39) My dear gentle 
wife Bhav ānī, when one performs benevolent 
activities for others, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Hari, is very pleased. And when the 
Lord is pleased, I am also pleased, along with 
all other living creatures. Therefore, let me 
drink this poison, for all the liv ing entities may 
thus become happy because of me.  (40)  

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: After 
informing Bhav ānī in this way, Lord Śiva be-
gan to drink the poison, and Bhav ānī, who 
knew perfectly well the capabilities of Lord 
Śiva, gave him her permissio n to do so.  (41) 
Thereafter, Lord Śiva, who is dedicated to aus-
picious, benevolent work for humanity, com-
passionately took the whole quantity of poison 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

484 
 in his palm and drank it.  (42) As if in defama-
tion, the poison born from the Ocean of Milk 
manifested its potency by marking Lord Śiva’s 
neck with a bluish line. That line, however, is 
now accepted as an ornament of the Lord.  (43) 
It is said that great personalities almost always 
accept voluntary suffering because of the suf-
fering of people in general. Th is is considered 
the highest method of worshiping the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is present in eve-
ryone’s heart.  (44)  

Upon hearing of this act, everyone, includ-
ing Bhav ānī [the daughter of Mah ārāja Dak ṣa], 
Lord Brahm ā, Lord Vi ṣṇu, and the peopl e in 
general, very highly praised this deed per-
formed by Lord Śiva, who is worshiped by the 
demigods and who bestows benedictions upon 
the people.  (45) Scorpions, cobras, poisonous 
drugs and other animals whose bites are poi-
sonous took the opportunity to drink whatever 
little poison had fallen and scattered from Lord 
Śiva’s hand while he was drinking.  (46)  

SB 8.8: The Churning of the Milk Ocean  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: Upon Lord 
Śiva’s drinking the poison, both the demigods 
and the demons, being ver y pleased, began to 
churn the ocean with renewed vigor. As a result 
of this, there appeared a cow known as surabhi.  
(1) O King Par īkṣit, great sages who were com-
pletely aware of the Vedic ritualistic ceremo-
nies took charge of that surabhi cow, which 
produ ced all the yogurt, milk and ghee abso-
lutely necessary for offering oblations into the 
fire. They did this just for the sake of pure ghee, 
which they wanted for the performance of sac-
rifices to elevate themselves to the higher plan-
etary systems, up to Brah maloka.  (2) Thereaf-
ter, a horse named Uccai ḥśravā, which was as 
white as the moon, was generated. Bali 
Mahārāja desired to possess this horse, and In-
dra, the King of heaven, did not protest, for he 
had previously been so advised by the Supreme 
Personality  of Godhead.  (3) As the next result 
of the churning, the king of elephants, named Airāvata, was generated. This elephant was 
white, and with its four tusks it defied the glo-
ries of Kail āsa Mountain, the glorious abode of 
Lord Śiva.  (4) Thereafter, O King , eight great 
elephants, which could go in any direction, 
were generated. They were headed by 
Airāvaṇa. Eight she -elephants, headed by Ab-
hramu, were also generated.  (5) Generated 
thereafter from the great ocean were the cele-
brated gems Kaustubha -maṇi and Padmar āga-
maṇi. Lord Vi ṣṇu, to decorate His chest, de-
sired to possess them. Generated next was the 
pārijāta flower, which decorates the celestial 
planets. O King, as you fulfill the desires of 
everyone on this planet by fulfilling all ambi-
tions, the p ārijāta fulfills the desires of every-
one.  (6) Next there appeared the Apsar ās [who 
are used as prostitutes on the heavenly planets]. 
They were fully decorated with golden orna-
ments and lockets and were dressed in fine and 
attractive clothing. The Apsar ās move very 
slowly in an attractive style that bewilders the 
inhabitants of the heavenly planets.  (7) Then 
there appeared the goddess of fortune, Ram ā, 
who is absolutely dedicated to being enjoyed 
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. She 
appeared like electric ity, surpassing the light-
ning that might illuminate a marble mountain.  
(8) Because of her exquisite beauty, her bodily 
features, her youth, her complexion and her 
glories, everyone, including the demigods, the 
demons and the human beings, desired her. 
They were attracted because she is the source 
of all opulences.  (9) The King of heaven, Indra, 
brought a suitable sitting place for the goddess 
of fortune. All the rivers of sacred water, such 
as the Ganges and Yamun ā, personified them-
selves, and each of them brought pure water in 
golden waterpots for mother Lak ṣmī, the god-
dess of fortune.  (10) The land became a person 
and collected all the drugs and herbs needed for 
installing the Deity. The cows delivered five 
products, namely milk, yogurt, ghee, urine and 
cow dung, and spring personified collected 
everything produced in spring, during the 
months of Caitra and Vai śākha [April and 
May].  (11) The great sages performed the bath-
ing ceremony of the goddess of fortune as  di-
rected in the authorized scriptures, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

485 
 Gandharvas chanted all -auspicious Vedic man-
tras, and the professional women dancers very 
nicely danced and sang authorized songs pre-
scribed in the Vedas.  (12) The clouds in per-
sonified form beat various types of  drums, 
known as m ṛdaṅgas, pa ṇavas, murajas and 
ānakas. They also blew conchshells and bugles 
known as gomukhas and played flutes and 
stringed instruments. The combined sound of 
these instruments was tumultuous.  (13) There-
after, the great elephants from a ll the directions 
carried big water jugs full of Ganges water and 
bathed the goddess of fortune, to the accompa-
niment of Vedic mantras chanted by learned 
brāhmaṇas. While thus being bathed, the god-
dess of fortune maintained her original style, 
with a lotus  flower in her hand, and she ap-
peared very beautiful. The goddess of fortune 
is the most chaste, for she does not know any-
one but the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  
(14) The ocean, which is the source of all valu-
able jewels, supplied the upper and lower por-
tions of a yellow silken garment. The predomi-
nating deity of the water, Varu ṇa, presented 
flower garlands surrounded by six -legged bum-
blebees, drunken with honey.  (15) 
Viśvakarm ā, one of the praj āpatis, supplied va-
rieties of decorated ornaments. The go ddess of 
learning, Sarasvat ī, supplied a necklace, Lord 
Brahm ā supplied a lotus flower, and the inhab-
itants of N āgaloka supplied earrings.  (16)  

Thereafter, mother Lak ṣmī, the goddess of 
fortune, having been properly celebrated with 
an auspicious rituali stic ceremony, began mov-
ing about, holding in her hand a garland of lotus 
flowers, which were surrounded by humming 
bumblebees. Smiling with shyness, her cheeks 
decorated by her earrings, she looked ex-
tremely beautiful.  (17) Her two breasts, which 
were sy mmetrical and nicely situated, were 
covered with sandalwood pulp and ku ṅkuma 
powder, and her waist was very thin. As she 
walked here and there, her ankle bells jingling 
softly, she appeared like a creeper of gold.  (18) 
While walking among the Gandharvas, Yakṣas, 
asuras, Siddhas, C āraṇas and denizens of 
heaven, Lak ṣmīdevī, the goddess of fortune, was scrutinizingly examining them, but she 
could not find anyone naturally endowed with 
all good qualities. None of them was devoid of 
faults, and therefore she co uld not take shelter 
of any of them.  (19) The goddess of fortune, 
examining the assembly, thought in this way: 
Someone who has undergone great austerity 
has not yet conquered anger. Someone pos-
sesses knowledge, but he has not conquered 
material desires. S omeone is a very great per-
sonality, but he cannot conquer lusty desires. 
Even a great personality depends on something 
else. How, then, can he be the supreme control-
ler?  (20) Someone may possess full knowledge 
of religion but still not be kind to all livi ng en-
tities. In someone, whether human or demigod, 
there may be renunciation, but that is not the 
cause of liberation. Someone may possess great 
power and yet be unable to check the power of 
eternal time. Someone else may have re-
nounced attachment to the m aterial world, yet 
he cannot compare to the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. Therefore, no one is completely 
freed from the influence of the material modes 
of nature.  (21) Someone may have longevity 
but not have auspiciousness or good behavior. 
Someone may  have both auspiciousness and 
good behavior, but the duration of his life is not 
fixed. Although such demigods as Lord Śiva 
have eternal life, they have inauspicious habits 
like living in crematoriums. And even if others 
are well qualified in all respects,  they are not 
devotees of the Supreme Personality of God-
head.  (22)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: In this way, 
after full deliberation, the goddess of fortune 
accepted Mukunda as her husband because alt-
hough He is independent and not in want of her, 
He pos sesses all transcendental qualities and 
mystic powers and is therefore the most desira-
ble.  (23) Approaching the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, the goddess of fortune placed upon 
His shoulders the garland of newly grown lotus 
flowers, which was surrounded  by humming 
bumblebees searching for honey. Then, expect-
ing to get a place on the bosom of the Lord, she 
remained standing by His side, her face smiling 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

486 
 in shyness.  (24) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is the father of the three worlds, and 
His bosom i s the residence of mother Lak ṣmī, 
the goddess of fortune, the proprietor of all op-
ulences. The goddess of fortune, by her favora-
ble and merciful glance, can increase the opu-
lence of the three worlds, along with their in-
habitants and their directors, the de migods.  
(25) The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka and 
Cāraṇaloka then took the opportunity to play 
their musical instruments, such as conchshells, 
bugles and drums. They began dancing and 
singing along with their wives.  (26) Lord 
Brahm ā, Lord Śiva, the great  sage A ṅgirā, and 
similar directors of universal management 
showered flowers and chanted mantras indicat-
ing the transcendental glories of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead.  (27) All the demi-
gods, along with the praj āpatis and their de-
scendants, being ble ssed by Lak ṣmījī’s 
glance upon them, were immediately enriched 
with good behavior and transcendental quali-
ties. Thus they were very much satisfied.  (28) 
O King, because of being neglected by the god-
dess of fortune, the demons and R ākṣasas were 
depressed, bewildered and frustrated, and thus 
they became shameless.  (29)  

Next appeared V āruṇī, the lotus -eyed god-
dess who controls drunkards. With the permis-
sion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa, the demons, headed by Bali Mah ārāja, 
took possession o f this young girl.  (30) O 
King, thereafter, while the sons of Ka śyapa, 
both demons and demigods, were engaged in 
churning the Ocean of Milk, a very wonderful 
male person appeared.  (31) He was strongly 
built; his arms were long, stout and strong; his 
neck , which was marked with three lines, re-
sembled a conchshell; his eyes were reddish; 
and his complexion was blackish. He was very 
young, he was garlanded with flowers, and his 
entire body was fully decorated with various 
ornaments.  (32) He was dressed in y ellow gar-
ments and wore brightly polished earrings 
made of pearls. The tips of his hair were 
anointed with oil, and his chest was very broad. 
His body had all good features, he was stout and strong like a lion, and he was decorated 
with bangles. In his han d he carried a jug filled 
to the top with nectar.  (33) This person was 
Dhanvantari, a plenary portion of a plenary por-
tion of Lord Vi ṣṇu. He was very conversant 
with the science of medicine, and as one of the 
demigods he was permitted to take a share in 
sacrifices.  (34) Upon seeing Dhanvantari car-
rying the jug of nectar, the demons, desiring the 
jug and its contents, immediately snatched it 
away by force.  (35) When the jug of nectar was 
carried off by the demons, the demigods were 
morose. Thus they sough t shelter at the lotus 
feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Hari.  (36) When the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who always desires to fulfill the am-
bitions of His devotees, saw that the demigods 
were morose, He said to them, “Do not be ag-
grieved. B y My own energy I shall bewilder the 
demons by creating a quarrel among them. In 
this way I shall fulfill your desire to have the 
nectar.”  (37)  

O King, a quarrel then arose among the de-
mons over who would get the nectar first. Each 
of them said, “You ca nnot drink it first. I must 
drink it first. Me first, not you!”  (38) Some of 
the demons said, “All the demigods have taken 
part in churning the Ocean of Milk. Now, as 
everyone has an equal right to partake in any 
public sacrifice, according to the eternal  reli-
gious system it is befitting that the demigods 
now have a share of the nectar.” O King, in this 
way the weaker demons forbade the stronger 
demons to take the nectar.  (39 -40) The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, who can 
counteract any unfavorabl e situation, then as-
sumed the form of an extremely beautiful 
woman. This incarnation as a woman, Mohin ī-
mūrti, was most pleasing to the mind. Her com-
plexion resembled in color a newly grown 
blackish lotus, and every part of Her body was 
beautifully situate d. Her ears were equally dec-
orated with earrings, Her cheeks were very 
beautiful, Her nose was raised and Her face full 
of youthful luster. Her large breasts made Her 
waist seem very thin. Attracted by the aroma of 
Her face and body, bumblebees hummed 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

487 
 around Her, and thus Her eyes were restless. 
Her hair, which was extremely beautiful, was 
garlanded with mallik ā flowers. Her attrac-
tively constructed neck was decorated with a 
necklace and other ornaments, Her arms were 
decorated with bangles, Her body was covered 
with a clean sari, and Her breasts seemed like 
islands in an ocean of beauty. Her legs were 
decorated  with ankle bells. Because of the 
movements of Her eyebrows as She smiled 
with shyness and glanced over the demons, all 
the demons were saturated with lusty desires, 
and every one of them desired to possess Her.  
(41-46)  

SB 8.9: The Lord Incarnates as Mo hinī-
Mūrti 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Thereafter, the de-
mons became inimical toward one another. 
Throwing and snatching the container of nec-
tar, they gave up their friendly relationship. 
Meanwhile, they saw a very beautiful young 
woman coming forward toward them .  (1) 
Upon seeing the beautiful woman, the demons 
said, “Alas, how wonderful is Her beauty, how 
wonderful the luster of Her body, and how 
wonderful the beauty of Her youthful age!” 
Speaking in this way, they quickly approached 
Her, full of lusty desires t o enjoy Her, and be-
gan to inquire from Her in many ways.  (2) O 
wonderfully beautiful girl, You have such nice 
eyes, resembling the petals of a lotus flower. 
Who are You? Where do You come from? 
What is Your purpose in coming here, and to 
whom do You belon g? O You whose thighs are 
extraordinarily beautiful, our minds are becom-
ing agitated simply because of seeing You.  (3) 
What to speak of human beings, even the dem-
igods, demons, Siddhas, Gandharvas, C āraṇas 
and the various directors of the universe, the 
Prajāpatis, have never touched You before. It is 
not that we are unable to understand Your iden-
tity.  (4) O beautiful girl with beautiful eye-
brows, certainly Providence, by His causeless 
mercy, has sent You to please the senses and 
minds of all of us. Is thi s not a fact?  (5) We are now all engaged in enmity among ourselves be-
cause of this one subject matterthe container of 
nectar. Although we have been born in the 
same family, we are becoming increasingly in-
imical. O thin -waisted woman, who are so 
beautiful in Your prestigious position, we 
therefore request You to favor us by settling our 
dispute.  (6) All of us, both demons and demi-
gods, have been born of the same father, 
Kaśyapa, and thus we are related as brothers. 
But now we are exhibiting our personal prow-
ess in dissension. Therefore we request You to 
settle our dispute and divide the nectar equally 
among us.  (7) Having thus been requested by 
the demons, the Supreme Pers onality of God-
head, who had assumed the form of a beautiful 
woman, began to smile. Looking at them with 
attractive feminine gestures, She spoke as fol-
lows.  (8)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the 
form of Mohin ī, told the demons: O sons of 
Kaśyapa  Muni, I am only a prostitute. How is 
it that you have so much faith in Me? A learned 
person never puts his faith in a woman.  (9) O 
demons, as monkeys, jackals and dogs are un-
steady in their sexual relationships and want 
newer and newer friends every day,  women 
who live independently seek new friends daily. 
Friendship with such a woman is never perma-
nent. This is the opinion of learned scholars.  
(10)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī continued: After the 
demons heard the words of Mohin ī-mūrti, who 
had spoken as if jokingly, they were all very 
confident. They laughed with gravity, and ulti-
mately they delivered the container of nectar 
into Her hands.  (11) Thereafter,  the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, having taken posses-
sion of the container of nectar, smiled slightly 
and spoke in attractive words. She said: My 
dear demons, if you accept whatever I may do, 
whether honest or dishonest, then I can take re-
sponsibility f or dividing the nectar among you.  
(12) The chiefs of the demons were not very 
expert in deciding things. Upon hearing the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

488 
 sweet words of Mohin ī-mūrti, they immedi-
ately assented. “Yes,” they answered. “What 
You have said is all right.” Thus the demons 
agreed to accept Her decision.  (13)  

The demigods and demons then observed a 
fast. After bathing, they offered clarified butter 
and oblations int o the fire and gave charity to 
the cows and to the br āhmaṇas and members of 
the other orders of society, namely the k ṣatri-
yas, vai śyas and śūdras, who were all rewarded 
as they deserved. Thereafter, the demigods and 
demons performed ritualistic ceremonies under 
the directions of the br āhmaṇas. Then they 
dressed themselves with new garments accord-
ing to their own choice, decorated their bodies 
with ornaments, and sat facing east on seats 
made of ku śa grass.  (14 -15) O King, as the 
demigods and demons sat fac ing east in an 
arena fully decorated with flower garlands and 
lamps and fragrant with the smoke of incense, 
that woman, dressed in a most beautiful sari, 
Her ankle bells tinkling, entered the arena, 
walking very slowly because of Her big, low 
hips. Her eye s were restless due to youthful 
pride, Her breasts were like water jugs, Her 
thighs resembled the trunks of elephants, and 
She carried a waterpot in Her hand.  (16 -17) 
Her attractive nose and cheeks and Her ears, 
adorned with golden earrings, made Her face  
very beautiful. As She moved, Her sari’s border 
on Her breasts moved slightly aside. When the 
demigods and demons saw these beautiful fea-
tures of Mohin ī-mūrti, who was glancing at 
them and slightly smiling, they were all com-
pletely enchanted.  (18) Demons  are by nature 
crooked like snakes. Therefore, to distribute a 
share of the nectar to them was not at all feasi-
ble, since this would be as dangerous as supply-
ing milk to a snake. Considering this, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who never falls 
down, d id not deliver a share of nectar to the 
demons.  (19) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead as Mohin ī-mūrti, the master of the 
universe, arranged separate lines of sitting 
places and seated the demigods and demons ac-
cording to their positions.  (20) Taking the con-tainer of nectar in Her hands, She first ap-
proached the demons, satisfied them with sweet 
words and thus cheated them of their share of 
the nectar. Then She administered the nectar to 
the demigods, who were sitting at a distant 
place, to make them free from invalidity, old 
age and death.  (21) O King, since the demons 
had promised to accept whate ver the woman 
did, whether just or unjust, now, to keep this 
promise, to show their equilibrium and to save 
themselves from fighting with a woman, they 
remained silent.  (22) The demons had devel-
oped affection for Mohin ī-mūrti and a kind of 
faith in Her, and they were afraid of disturbing 
their relationship. Therefore they showed re-
spect and honor to Her words and did not say 
anything that might disturb their friendship 
with Her.  (23)  

Rāhu, the demon who causes eclips es of the 
sun and moon, covered himself with the dress 
of a demigod and thus entered the assembly of 
the demigods and drank nectar without being 
detected by anyone, even by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. The moon and the sun, 
however, because of perma nent animosity to-
ward R āhu, understood the situation. Thus 
Rāhu was detected.  (24) The Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Hari, using His disc, which 
was sharp like a razor, at once cut off R āhu’s 
head. When R āhu’s head was severed from his 
body, the body, being untouched by the n ectar, 
could not survive.  (25) R āhu’s head, however, 
having been touched by the nectar, became im-
mortal. Thus Lord Brahm ā accepted R āhu’s 
head as one of the planets. Since R āhu is an 
eternal enemy of the moon and the sun, he al-
ways tries to attack them on  the nights of the 
full moon and the dark moon.  (26) The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead is the best friend 
and well -wisher of the three worlds. Thus when 
the demigods had almost finished drinking the 
nectar, the Lord, in the presence of all the de-
mons, di sclosed His original form.  (27) The 
place, the time, the cause, the purpose, the ac-
tivity and the ambition were all the same for 
both the demigods and the demons, but the 
demigods achieved one result and the demons 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

489 
 another. Because the demigods are always  un-
der the shelter of the dust of the Lord’s lotus 
feet, they could very easily drink the nectar and 
get its result. The demons, however, not having 
sought shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord, were 
unable to achieve the result they desired.  (28) 
In huma n society there are various activities 
performed for the protection of one’s wealth 
and life by one’s words, one’s mind and one’s 
actions, but they are all performed for one’s 
personal or extended sense gratification with 
reference to the body. All these a ctivities are 
baffled because of being separate from devo-
tional service. But when the same activities are 
performed for the satisfaction of the Lord, the 
beneficial results are distributed to everyone, 
just as water poured on the root of a tree is dis-
tribu ted throughout the entire tree.  (29)  

SB 8.10: The Battle Between the Demigods 
and the Demons  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King, the de-
mons and Daityas all engaged with full atten-
tion and effort in churning the ocean, but be-
cause they were not devotees of V āsudeva, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, they 
were not able to drink the nectar.  (1) O King, 
after the Supreme Personality of Godhead had 
brought to completion the affairs of churning 
the ocean and feeding the nectar to the demi-
gods, who are His dear devotees, He left the 
presence of them all and was carried by Garu ḍa 
to His own abode.  (2 ) Seeing the victory of the 
demigods, the demons became intolerant of 
their superior opulence. Thus they began to 
march toward the demigods with raised weap-
ons.  (3) Thereafter, being enlivened because of 
drinking the nectar, the demigods, who are al-
ways a t the shelter of the lotus feet of N ārāyaṇa, 
used their various weapons to counterattack the 
demons in a fighting spirit.  (4) O King, a fierce 
battle on the beach of the Ocean of Milk ensued 
between the demigods and the demons. The 
fighting was so terrible that simply hearing 
about it would  make the hair on one’s body 
stand on end.  (5) Both parties in that fight were 
extremely angry at heart, and in enmity they beat one another with swords, arrows and vari-
eties of other weapons.  (6) The sounds of the 
conchshells, bugles, drums, bher īs and ḍamar īs 
[kettledrums], as well as the sounds made by 
the elephants, horses and soldiers, who were 
both on chariots and on foot, were tumultuous.  
(7) On that battlefield, the charioteers fought 
with the opposing charioteers, the infantry sol-
diers with the o pposing infantry, the soldiers on 
horseback with the opposing soldiers on horse-
back, and the soldiers on the backs of elephants 
with the enemy soldiers on elephants. In this 
way, the fighting took place between equals.  
(8) Some soldiers fought on the back s of cam-
els, some on the backs of elephants, some on 
asses, some on white -faced and red -faced mon-
keys, some on tigers and some on lions. In this 
way, they all engaged in fighting.  (9) O King, 
some soldiers fought on the backs of vultures, 
eagles, ducks, h awks and bh āsa birds. Some 
fought on the backs of timi ṅgilas, which can 
devour huge whales, some on the backs of 
śarabhas, and some on buffalo, rhinoceroses, 
cows, bulls, jungle cows and aru ṇas. Others 
fought on the backs of jackals, rats, lizards, rab-
bits, human beings, goats, black deer, swans 
and boars. In this way, mounted on animals of 
the water, land and sky, including animals with 
deformed bodies, both armies faced each other 
and went forward.  (10 -12)  

O King, O descendant of Mah ārāja Pāṇḍu, 
the so ldiers of both the demigods and demons 
were decorated by canopies, colorful flags, and 
umbrellas with handles made of valuable jew-
els and pearls. They were further decorated by 
fans made of peacock feathers and by other fans 
also. The soldiers, their upper  and lower gar-
ments waving in the breeze, naturally looked 
very beautiful, and in the light of the glittering 
sunshine their shields, ornaments and sharp, 
clean weapons appeared dazzling. Thus the 
ranks of soldiers seemed like two oceans with 
bands of aqua tics.  (13 -15) For that battle the 
most celebrated commander in chief, Mah ārāja 
Bali, son of Virocana, was seated on a wonder-
ful airplane named Vaih āyasa. O King, this 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

490 
 beautifully decorated airplane had been manu-
factured by the demon Maya and was equipped 
with weapons for all types of combat. It was in-
conceivable and indescribable. Indeed, it was 
sometimes visible and sometimes not. Seated in 
this airplane under a beautiful protective um-
brella and being fanned by the best of c āmaras, 
Mahārāja Bali, surround ed by his captains and 
commanders, appeared just like the moon ris-
ing in the evening, illuminating all directions.  
(16-18) Surrounding Mah ārāja Bali on all sides 
were the commanders and captains of the de-
mons, sitting on their respective chariots. 
Among t hem were the following demons: Na-
muci, Śambara, B āṇa, Vipracitti, Ayomukha, 
Dvim ūrdhā, Kālanābha, Praheti, Heti, Ilvala, 
Śakuni, Bh ūtasant āpa, Vajrada ṁṣṭra, Virocana, 
Hayagr īva, Śaṅkuśirā, Kapila, Meghadun-
dubhi, T āraka, Cakrad ṛk, Śumbha, Ni śumbha, 
Jambha, Utkala, Ari ṣṭa, Ari ṣṭanemi, Tripu-
rādhipa, Maya, the sons of Puloma, the K āleyas 
and Niv ātakavaca. All of these demons had 
been deprived of their share of the nectar and 
had shared merely in the labor of churning the 
ocean. Now, they fought against the demi gods, 
and to encourage their armies, they made a tu-
multuous sound like the roaring of lions and 
blew loudly on conchshells. Balabhit, Lord In-
dra, upon seeing this situation of his ferocious 
rivals, became extremely angry.  (19 -24) Sit-
ting on Air āvata, an e lephant who can go any-
where and who holds water and wine in reserve 
for showering, Lord Indra looked just like the 
sun rising from Udayagiri, where there are res-
ervoirs of water.  (25) Surrounding Lord Indra, 
King of heaven, were the demigods, seated on 
various types of vehicles and decorated with 
flags and weapons. Present among them were 
Vāyu, Agni, Varu ṇa and other rulers of various 
planets, along with their associates.  (26)  

The demigods and demons came before 
each other and reproached one another with 
words piercing to the heart. Then they drew 
near and began fighting face to face in p airs.  
(27) O King, Mah ārāja Bali fought with Indra, 
Kārttikeya with T āraka, Varu ṇa with Heti, and 
Mitra with Praheti.  (28) Yamar āja fought with Kālanābha, Vi śvakarm ā with Maya D ānava, 
Tvaṣṭā with Śambara, and the sun -god with Vi-
rocana.  (29) The demigod Apar ājita fought 
with Namuci, and the two A śvinī-kumāra 
brothers fought with V ṛṣaparv ā. The sun -god 
fought with the one hundred sons of Mah ārāja 
Bali, headed by B āṇa, and the moon -god fought 
with R āhu. The demigod controlling air fought 
with Puloma, and Śumbha and Ni śumbha 
fought the supremely powerful material en-
ergy, Durg ādevī, who is called Bhadra K ālī.  
(30-31) O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, suppressor of en-
emies [Arindama], Lord Śiva fought with 
Jambha, and Vibh āvasu fought with 
Mahi ṣāsura. Ilvala, along with hi s brother 
Vātāpi, fought the sons of Lord Brahm ā. Dur-
marṣa fought with Cupid, the demon Utkala 
with the M ātṛkā demigoddesses, B ṛhaspati with 
Śukrācārya, and Śanaiścara [Saturn] with Na-
rakāsura. The Maruts fought Niv ātakavaca, the 
Vasus fought the K ālakeya demons, the 
Viśvedeva demigods fought the Pauloma de-
mons, and the Rudras fought the Krodhava śa 
demons, who were victims of anger.  (32 -34)  

All of these demigods and demons assem-
bled on the battlefield with a fighting spirit and 
attacked one another with great strength. All of 
them desiring victory, they fought in pairs, hit-
ting one another severely with sharpened ar-
rows, swords and lances.  (35) They severed 
one another’s heads, using weapons like 
bhuśuṇḍis, cakras, clubs, ṛṣṭis, pa ṭṭiśas, śaktis, 
ulmukas , pr āsas, para śvadhas, nistri ṁśas, 
lances, parighas, mudgaras and bhindip ālas.  
(36) The elephants, horses, chariots, chariot-
eers, infantry soldiers and various kinds of car-
riers, along with their riders, were slashed to 
pieces. The arms, thighs, necks and  legs of the 
soldiers were severed, and their flags, bows, ar-
mor and ornaments were torn apart.  (37) Be-
cause of the impact on the ground of the legs of 
the demons and demigods and the wheels of the 
chariots, particles of dust flew violently into the 
sky a nd made a dust cloud that covered all di-
rections of outer space, as far as the sun. But 
when the particles of dust were followed by 
drops of blood being sprinkled all over space, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

491 
 the dust cloud could no longer float in the sky.  
(38) In the course of the b attle, the warfield be-
came strewn with the severed heads of heroes, 
their eyes still staring and their teeth still 
pressed against their lips in anger. Helmets and 
earrings were scattered from these severed 
heads. Similarly, many arms, decorated with 
ornam ents and clutching various weapons, 
were strewn here and there, as were many legs 
and thighs, which resembled the trunks of ele-
phants.  (39) Many headless trunks were gener-
ated on that battlefield. With weapons in their 
arms, those ghostly trunks, which co uld see 
with the eyes in the fallen heads, attacked the 
enemy soldiers.  (40)  

Mahārāja Bali then attacked Indra with ten 
arrows and attacked Air āvata, Indra’s carrier 
elephant, with three arrows. With four arrows 
he attacked the four horsemen guarding 
Airāvata’s legs, and with one arrow he attacked 
the driver of the elephant.  (41) Before Bali 
Mahārāja’s arrows could reach him, Indra, 
King of heaven, who is expert in dealing with 
arrows, smiled and counteracted the arrows 
with arrows of another type, know n as bhalla, 
which were extremely sharp.  (42) When Bali 
Mahārāja saw the expert military activities of 
Indra, he could not restrain his anger. Thus he 
took up another weapon, known as śakti, which 
blazed like a great firebrand. But Indra cut that 
weapon t o pieces while it was still in Bali’s 
hand.  (43) Thereafter, one by one, Bali 
Mahārāja used a lance, pr āsa, tomara, ṛṣṭis and 
other weapons, but whatever weapons he took 
up, Indra immediately cut them to pieces.  (44)  

My dear King, Bali Mah ārāja then di sap-
peared and resorted to demoniac illusions. A gi-
ant mountain, generated from illusion, then ap-
peared above the heads of the demigod soldiers.  
(45) From that mountain fell trees blazing in a 
forest fire. Chips of stone, with sharp edges like 
picks, also fell and smashed the heads of the 
demigod soldiers.  (46) Scorpions, large snakes 
and many other poisonous animals, as well as 
lions, tigers, boars and great elephants, all be-
gan falling upon the demigod soldiers, crushing everything.  (47) O my King, many  hundreds of 
male and female carnivorous demons, com-
pletely naked and carrying tridents in their 
hands, then appeared, crying the slogans “Cut 
them to pieces! Pierce them!”  (48) Fierce 
clouds, harassed by strong winds, then ap-
peared in the sky. Rumbling v ery gravely with 
the sound of thunder, they began to shower live 
coals.  (49) A great devastating fire created by 
Bali Mah ārāja began burning all the soldiers of 
the demigods. This fire, accompanied by blast-
ing winds, seemed as terrible as the S āṁvartaka 
fire, which appears at the time of dissolution.  
(50) Thereafter, whirlpools and sea waves, ag-
itated by fierce blasts of wi nd, appeared every-
where, before everyone’s vision, in a furious 
flood.  (51) While this magical atmosphere in 
the fight was being created by the invisible de-
mons, who were expert in such illusions, the 
soldiers of the demigods became morose.  (52) 
O King, when the demigods could find no way 
to counteract the activities of the demons, they 
wholeheartedly meditated upon the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, the creator of the uni-
verse, who then immediately appeared.  (53) 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who se 
eyes resemble the petals of a newly blossomed 
lotus, sat on the back of Garu ḍa, spreading His 
lotus feet over Garu ḍa’s shoulders. Dressed in 
yellow, decorated by the Kaustubha gem and 
the goddess of fortune, and wearing an invalu-
able helmet and earrings , the Supreme Lord, 
holding various weapons in His eight hands, 
became visible to the demigods.  (54) As the 
dangers of a dream cease when the dreamer 
awakens, the illusions created by the jugglery 
of the demons were vanquished by the tran-
scendental prowes s of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead as soon as He entered the battle-
field. Indeed, simply by remembrance of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, one becomes 
free from all dangers.  (55) O King, when the 
demon K ālanemi, who was carried by a lion, 
saw tha t the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
carried by Garu ḍa, was on the battlefield, the 
demon immediately took his trident, whirled it 
and discharged it at Garu ḍa’s head. The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the master 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

492 
 of the three worlds, immediately ca ught the tri-
dent, and with the very same weapon he killed 
the enemy K ālanemi, along with his carrier, the 
lion.  (56) Thereafter, two very powerful de-
mons named M ālī and Sum ālī were killed by 
the Supreme Lord, who severed their heads 
with His disc. Then M ālyavān, another demon, 
attacked the Lord. With his sharp club, the de-
mon, who was roaring like a lion, attacked 
Garu ḍa, the lord of the birds, who are born from 
eggs. But the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the original person, used His disc to cut off the  
head of that enemy also.  (57)  

SB 8.11: King Indra Annihilates the De-
mons  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Thereafter, by the 
supreme grace of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Śrī Hari, all the demigods, headed by 
Indra and V āyu, were brought back to life. Be-
ing enlivened, the demigods began severely 
beating the very same demons who had de-
feated them before.  (1) When the most power-
ful Indra became angry and took his thunder-
bolt in hand to kill Mah ārāja Bali, the demons 
began lamenting, “Alas, alas!”  (2) Sobe r and 
tolerant and well equipped with paraphernalia 
for fighting, Bali Mah ārāja moved before Indra 
on the great battlefield. King Indra, who always 
carries the thunderbolt in his hand, rebuked 
Bali Mah ārāja as follows.  (3)  

Indra said: O rascal, as a che ater sometimes 
binds the eyes of a child and takes away his 
possessions, you are trying to defeat us by dis-
playing some mystic power, although you 
know that we are the masters of all such mystic 
powers.  (4) Those fools and rascals who want 
to ascend to th e upper planetary system by mys-
tic power or mechanical means, or who en-
deavor to cross even the upper planets and 
achieve the spiritual world or liberation, I cause 
to be sent to the lowest region of the universe.  
(5) Today, with my thunderbolt, which has  
hundreds of sharp edges, I, the same powerful 
person, shall sever your head from your body. Although you can produce so much jugglery 
through illusion, you are endowed with a poor 
fund of knowledge. Now, try to exist on this 
battlefield with your relative s and friends.  (6)  

Bali Mah ārāja replied: All those present on 
this battlefield are certainly under the influence 
of eternal time, and according to their pre-
scribed activities, they are destined to receive 
fame, victory, defeat and death, one after an-
other.  (7) Seeing the movements  of time, those 
who are cognizant of the real truth neither re-
joice nor lament for different circumstances. 
Therefore, because you are jubilant due to your 
victory, you should be considered not very 
learned.  (8) You demigods think that your own 
selves are  the cause of your attaining fame and 
victory. Because of your ignorance, saintly per-
sons feel sorry for you. Therefore, although 
your words afflict the heart, we do not accept 
them.  (9)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: After thus rebuk-
ing Indra, King of heaven, with sharp words, 
Bali Mah ārāja, who could subdue any other 
hero, drew back to his ear the arrows known as 
nārācas and attacked Indra with these arrows. 
Then he again chastised Indra with st rong 
words.  (10) Since Mah ārāja Bali’s rebukes 
were truthful, King Indra did not at all become 
sorry, just as an elephant beaten by its driver’s 
rod does not become agitated.  (11) When In-
dra, the defeater of enemies, released his infal-
lible thunderbolt s cepter at Bali Mah ārāja with 
a desire to kill him, Bali Mah ārāja indeed fell 
to the ground with his airplane, like a mountain 
with its wings cut off.  (12) When the demon 
Jambh āsura saw that his friend Bali had fallen, 
he appeared before Indra, the enemy, just to 
serve Bali Mah ārāja with friendly behavior.  
(13) The greatly powerful Jambh āsura, carried 
by a lion, approached Indra and forcefully 
struck him on the shoulder with his club. He 
also struck Indra’s elephant.  (14) Being beaten 
by Jambh āsura’s club , Indra’s elephant was 
confused and aggrieved. Thus it touched its 
knees to the ground and fell unconscious.  (15) 
Thereafter, M ātali, Indra’s chariot driver, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

493 
 brought Indra’s chariot, which was drawn by 
one thousand horses. Indra then left his ele-
phant and  got onto the chariot.  (16) Appreciat-
ing M ātali’s service, Jambh āsura, the best of 
the demons, smiled. Nonetheless, he struck 
Mātali in the battle with a trident of blazing fire.  
(17) Although the pain was extremely severe, 
Mātali tolerated it with great  patience. Indra, 
however, became extremely angry at 
Jambh āsura. He struck Jambh āsura with his 
thunderbolt and thus severed his head from his 
body.  (18)  

When N ārada Ṛṣi informed Jambh āsura’s 
friends and relatives that Jambh āsura had been 
killed, the thr ee demons named Namuci, Bala 
and P āka arrived on the battlefield in great 
haste.  (19) Rebuking Indra with harsh, cruel 
words that were piercing to the heart, these de-
mons showered him with arrows, just as tor-
rents of rain wash a great mountain.  (20) 
Quic kly handling the situation on the battle-
field, the demon Bala put all of Indra’s one 
thousand horses into tribulation by simultane-
ously piercing them all with an equal number 
of arrows.  (21) P āka, another demon, attacked 
both the chariot, with all its par aphernalia, and 
the chariot driver, M ātali, by fitting two hun-
dred arrows to his bow and releasing them all 
simultaneously. This was indeed a wonderful 
act on the battlefield.  (22) Then Namuci, an-
other demon, attacked Indra and injured him 
with fifteen ve ry powerful golden -feathered ar-
rows, which roared like a cloud full of water.  
(23) Other demons covered Indra, along with 
his chariot and chariot driver, with incessant 
showers of arrows, just as clouds cover the sun 
in the rainy season.  (24) The demigod s, being 
severely oppressed by their enemies and being 
unable to see Indra on the battlefield, were very 
anxious. Having no captain or leader, they be-
gan lamenting like traders in a wrecked vessel 
in the midst of the ocean.  (25) Thereafter, Indra 
released  himself from the cage of the network 
of arrows. Appearing with his chariot, flag, 
horses and chariot driver and thus pleasing the 
sky, the earth and all directions, he shone efful-
gently like the sun at the end of night. Indra was bright and beautiful in t he vision of everyone.  
(26) When Indra, who is known as Vajra -dhara, 
the carrier of the thunderbolt, saw his own sol-
diers so oppressed by the enemies on the battle-
field, he became very angry. Thus he took up 
his thunderbolt to kill the enemies.  (27) O Ki ng 
Parīkṣit, King Indra used his thunderbolt to cut 
off the heads of both Bala and P āka in the pres-
ence of all their relatives and followers. In this 
way he created a very fearful atmosphere on the 
battlefield.  (28)  

O King, when Namuci, another demon, s aw 
the killing of both Bala and P āka, he was full of 
grief and lamentation. Thus he angrily made a 
great attempt to kill Indra.  (29) Being angry 
and roaring like a lion, the demon Namuci took 
up a steel spear, which was bound with bells 
and decorated with  ornaments of gold. He 
loudly cried, “Now you are killed!” Thus com-
ing before Indra to kill him, Namuci released 
his weapon.  (30) O King, when Indra, King of 
heaven, saw this very powerful spear falling to-
ward the ground like a blazing meteor, he im-
mediat ely cut it to pieces with his arrows. Then, 
being very angry, he struck Namuci’s shoulder 
with his thunderbolt to cut off Namuci’s head.  
(31) Although King Indra hurled his thunder-
bolt at Namuci with great force, it could not 
even pierce his skin. It is v ery wonderful that 
the famed thunderbolt that had pierced the body 
of Vṛtrāsura could not even slightly injure the 
skin of Namuci’s neck.  (32) When Indra saw 
the thunderbolt return from the enemy, he was 
very much afraid. He began to wonder whether 
this h ad happened because of some miraculous 
superior power.  (33) Indra thought: Formerly, 
when many mountains flying in the sky with 
wings would fall to the ground and kill people, 
I cut their wings with this same thunderbolt.  
(34) V ṛtrāsura was the essence o f the austerities 
undergone by Tva ṣṭā, yet the thunderbolt killed 
him. Indeed, not only he but also many other 
stalwart heroes, whose very skin could not be 
injured even by all kinds of weapons, were 
killed by the same thunderbolt.  (35) But now, 
although the same thunderbolt has been re-
leased against a less important demon, it has 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

494 
 been ineffectual. Therefore, although it was as 
good as a brahm āstra, it has now become use-
less like an ordinary rod. I shall therefore hold 
it no longer.  (36) Śukadeva Gosv āmī contin-
ued: While the morose Indra was lamenting in 
this way, an ominous, unembodied voice said 
from the sky, “This demon Namuci is not to be 
annihilated by anything dry or moist.”  (37) The 
voice also said, “O Indra, because I have given 
this demon the ben ediction that he will never be 
killed by any weapon that is dry or moist, you 
have to think of another way to kill him.”  (38) 
After hearing the ominous voice, Indra, with 
great attention, began to meditate on how to kill 
the demon. He then saw that foam w ould be the 
means, for it is neither moist nor dry.  (39) Thus 
Indra, King of heaven, severed Namuci’s head 
with a weapon of foam, which was neither dry 
nor moist. Then all the sages satisfied Indra, the 
exalted personality, by showering flowers and 
garlan ds upon him, almost covering him.  (40) 
Viśvāvasu and Par āvasu, the two chiefs of the 
Gandharvas, sang in great happiness. The ket-
tledrums of the demigods sounded, and the Ap-
sarās danced in jubilation.  (41) V āyu, Agni, 
Varu ṇa and other demigods began killing the 
demons who opposed them, just as l ions kill 
deer in a forest.  (42) O King, when Lord 
Brahm ā saw the imminent total annihilation of 
the demons, he sent a message with N ārada, 
who went before the demigods to make them 
stop fighting.  (43)  

The great sage N ārada said: All of you dem-
igods ar e protected by the arms of N ārāyaṇa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and by 
His grace you have gotten the nectar. By the 
grace of the goddess of fortune, you are glori-
ous in every way. Therefore, please stop this 
fighting.  (44)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī said: Accepting the 
words of N ārada, the demigods gave up their 
anger and stopped fighting. Being praised by 
their followers, they returned to their heavenly 
planets.  (45) Following the order of N ārada 
Muni, whatever demons remained on the bat-tlefield took  Bali Mah ārāja, who was in a pre-
carious condition, to the hill known as Astagiri.  
(46) There, on that hill, Śukrācārya brought to 
life all the dead demoniac soldiers who had not 
lost their heads, trunks and limbs. He achieved 
this by his own mantra, known  as Sa ṁjīvanī.  
(47) Bali Mah ārāja was very experienced in 
universal affairs. When he regained his senses 
and memory by the grace of Śukrācārya, he 
could understand everything that had hap-
pened. Therefore, although he had been de-
feated, he did not lament.  (48)  

SB 8.12: The Mohin ī-mūrti Incarnation Be-
wilders Lord Śiva 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Hari, in the form of a 
woman, captivated the demons and enabled the 
demigods to drink the nectar. After hearing of 
these pastimes,  Lord Śiva, who is carried by a 
bull, went to the place where Madhus ūdana, the 
Lord, resides. Accompanied by his wife, Um ā, 
and surrounded by his companions, the ghosts, 
Lord Śiva went there to see the Lord’s form as 
a woman.  (1 -2) The Supreme Personality  of 
Godhead welcomed Lord Śiva and Um ā with 
great respect, and after being seated comforta-
bly, Lord Śiva duly worshiped the Lord and 
smilingly spoke as follows.  (3)  

Lord Mah ādeva said: O chief demigod 
among the demigods, O all -pervading Lord, 
master of the universe, by Your energy You are 
transformed into the creation. You are the root 
and efficient cause of everything. You are not 
material. Indeed, You are the Supersoul or su-
preme living force of everything. Therefore, 
You are Parame śvara, the supreme c ontroller of 
all controllers.  (4) The manifest, the unmani-
fest, false ego and the beginning, maintenance 
and annihilation of this cosmic manifestation 
all come from You, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. But because You are the Absolute 
Truth, the supre me absolute spirit soul, the Su-
preme Brahman, such changes as birth, death 
and sustenance do not exist in You.  (5) Pure 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

495 
 devotees or great saintly persons who desire to 
achieve the highest goal in life and who are 
completely free from all material desires for 
sense gratification engage constantly in the 
transcendental service of Your lotus feet.  (6) 
My Lord, You are the Supreme Brahman, com-
plete in everything. Being completely spiritual, 
You are eternal, free from the material modes 
of nature, and full of transcendental bliss. In-
deed, for You there is no question of lamenta-
tion. Since You are the supreme cause, the 
cause of all causes, nothing can exist without 
You. Yet we are different from You in a rela-
tionship of cause and effect, for in one sense the 
cause and effect are different. You are the orig-
inal cause of creation, manifestation and anni-
hilation, and You bestow benedictions upon all 
living entities. Everyone depends upon You for 
the results of his activities, but You are always 
independent.  (7) My  dear Lord, Your Lordship 
alone is the cause and the effect. Therefore, alt-
hough You appear to be two, You are the abso-
lute one. As there is no difference between the 
gold of a golden ornament and the gold in a 
mine, there is no difference between cause an d 
effect; both of them are the same. Only because 
of ignorance do people concoct differences and 
dualities. You are free from material contami-
nation, and since the entire cosmos is caused by 
You and cannot exist without You, it is an ef-
fect of Your transce ndental qualities. Thus the 
conception that Brahman is true and the world 
false cannot be maintained.  (8) Those who are 
known as the impersonalist Ved āntists regard 
You as the impersonal Brahman. Others, 
known as the M īmāṁsaka philosophers, regard 
You as religion. The S āṅkhya philosophers re-
gard You as the transcendental person who is 
beyond prak ṛti and puru ṣa and who is the con-
troller of even the demig ods. The followers of 
the codes of devotional service known as the 
Pañcar ātras regard You as being endowed with 
nine different potencies. And the Patañjala phi-
losophers, the followers of Patañjali Muni, re-
gard You as the supreme independent Person-
ality of Godhead, who has no equal or superior.  
(9) O my Lord, I, who am considered to be the 
best of the demigods, and Lord Brahm ā and the 
great ṛṣis, headed by Mar īci, are born of the mode of goodness. Nonetheless, we are bewil-
dered by Your illusory energy and c annot un-
derstand what this creation is. Aside from us, 
what is to be said of others, like the demons and 
human beings, who are in the base modes of 
material nature [rajo -guṇa and tamo -guṇa]? 
How will they know You?  (10) My Lord, You 
are the supreme knowle dge personified. You 
know everything about this creation and its be-
ginning, maintenance and annihilation, and 
You know all the endeavors made by the living 
entities, by which they are either implicated in 
this material world or liberated from it. As the 
air enters the vast sky and also enters the bodies 
of all moving and nonmoving entities, You are 
present everywhere, and therefore You are the 
knower of all.  (11) My Lord, I have seen all 
kinds of incarnations You have exhibited by 
Your transcendental quali ties, and now that 
You have appeared as a beautiful young 
woman, I wish to see that form of Your Lord-
ship.  (12) My Lord, we have come here desir-
ing to see that form of Your Lordship which 
You showed to the demons to captivate them 
completely and in this w ay enable the demi-
gods to drink nectar. I am very eager to see that 
form.  (13)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmīsaid: When Lord Vi ṣṇu 
was thus requested by Lord Śiva, who carries a 
trident in his hand, He smiled with gravity and 
replied to Lord Śiva as follows.  (14)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
When the demons took away the jug of nect ar, 
I assumed the form of a beautiful woman to be-
wilder them by directly cheating them and thus 
to act in the interest of the demigods.  (15) O 
best of the demigods, I shall now show you My 
form that is very much appreciated by those 
who are lusty. Since y ou want to see that form, 
I shall reveal it in your presence.  (16)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: After speak-
ing in this way, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, immediately disappeared, and 
Lord Śiva remained there with Um ā, looking 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

496 
 for Him all around with moving eyes.  (17) 
Thereafter, in a nice forest nearby, full of trees 
with reddish -pink leaves and varieties of flow-
ers, Lord Śiva saw a beautiful woman playing 
with a ball. Her hips were covered with a shin-
ing sari and ornamented with a belt.  (18) Be-
cause the ball was falling down and bouncing 
up, as She played wi th it Her breasts trembled, 
and because of the weight of those breasts and 
Her heavy flower garlands, Her waist appeared 
to be all but breaking at every step, as Her two 
soft feet, which were reddish like coral, moved 
here and there.  (19) The woman’s face  was 
decorated by broad, beautiful, restless eyes, 
which moved as the ball bounced here and there 
from Her hand. The two brilliant earrings on 
Her ears decorated Her shining cheeks like blu-
ish reflections, and the hair scattered on Her 
face made Her even m ore beautiful to see.  (20) 
As She played with the ball, the sari covering 
Her body became loose, and Her hair scattered. 
She tried to bind Her hair with Her beautiful 
left hand, and at the same time She played with 
the ball by striking it with Her right h and. This 
was so attractive that the Supreme Lord, by His 
internal potency, in this way captivated every-
one.  (21) While Lord Śiva observed the beau-
tiful woman playing with the ball, She some-
times glanced at him and slightly smiled in 
bashfulness. As he looked at the beautiful 
woman and She watched him, he forgot both 
himself and Um ā, his most beautiful wife, as 
well as his assoc iates nearby.  (22) When the 
ball leaped from Her hand and fell at a distance, 
the woman began to follow it, but as Lord Śiva 
observed these activities, a breeze suddenly 
blew away the fine dress and belt that covered 
her.  (23) Thus Lord Śiva saw the woma n, 
every part of whose body was beautifully 
formed, and the beautiful woman also looked at 
him. Therefore, thinking that She was attracted 
to him, Lord Śiva became very much attracted 
to Her.  (24) Lord Śiva, his good sense taken 
away by the woman because of lusty desires to 
enjoy with Her, became so mad for Her that 
even in the presence of Bhav ānī he did not hes-
itate to approach Her.  (25)  
 The beautiful woman was already naked, 
and when She saw Lord Śiva coming toward 
Her, She became extremely bashful. T hus She 
kept smiling, but She hid Herself among the 
trees and did not stand in one place.  (26) His 
senses being agitated, Lord Śiva, victimized by 
lusty desires, began to follow Her, just as a 
lusty elephant follows a she -elephant.  (27) Af-
ter following H er with great speed, Lord Śiva 
caught Her by the braid of Her hair and dragged 
Her near him. Although She was unwilling, he 
embraced Her with his arms.  (28) Being em-
braced by Lord Śiva like a female elephant em-
braced by a male, the woman, whose hair was 
scattered, swirled like a snake. O King, this 
woman, who had large, high hips, was a woman 
of yoga -māyā presented by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. She released Herself 
somehow or other from the fond embrace of 
Lord Śiva’s arms and ran away.  (29 -30) A s if 
harassed by an enemy in the form of lusty de-
sires, Lord Śiva followed the path of Lord 
Viṣṇu, who acts very wonderfully and who had 
taken the form of Mohin ī.  (31) Just as a mad-
dened bull elephant follows a female elephant 
who is able to conceive preg nancy, Lord Śiva 
followed the beautiful woman and discharged 
semen, even though his discharge of semen 
never goes in vain.  (32) O King, wheresoever 
on the surface of the globe fell the semen of the 
great personality of Lord Śiva, mines of gold 
and silver later appeared.  (33) Following Moh-
inī, Lord Śiva went everywherenear the shores 
of the rivers and lakes, near the mountains, near 
the forests, near the gardens, and wherever 
there lived great sages.  (34) O Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, best of kings, when Lord Śiva had 
fully discharged semen, he could see how he 
himself had been victimized by the illusion cre-
ated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Thus he restrained himself from any further 
māyā.  (35) Thus Lord Śiva could understand 
his position and that of the  Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, who has unlimited potencies. Hav-
ing reached this understanding, he was not at 
all surprised by the wonderful way Lord Vi ṣṇu 
had acted upon him.  (36) Seeing Lord Śiva 
unagitated and unashamed, Lord Vi ṣṇu 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

497 
 [Madhus ūdana] was v ery pleased. Thus He re-
sumed His original form and spoke as follows.  
(37)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
O best of the demigods, although you have 
been amply harassed because of My potency in 
assuming the form of a woman, you are estab-
lished i n your position. Therefore, may all good 
fortune be upon you.  (38) My dear Lord 
Śambhu, who within this material world but 
you can surpass My illusory energy? People are 
generally attached to sense enjoyment and con-
quered by its influence. Indeed, the influence of 
material nature is very difficult for them to sur-
mount.  (39) The mater ial, external energy 
[māyā], who cooperates with Me in creation 
and who is manifested in the three modes of na-
ture, will not be able to bewilder you any 
longer.  (40)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King, having 
thus been praised by the Supreme Personality, 
who bears the mark of Śrīvatsa on His chest, 
Lord Śiva circumambulated Him. Then, after 
taking permission from Him, Lord Śiva re-
turned to his abode, Kail āsa, along with his as-
sociates.  (41) O descendant of Bharata 
Mahārāja, Lord Śiva, in jubilation, then ad-
dressed his wife, Bhav ānī, who is accepted by 
all authorities as the potency of Lord Vi ṣṇu.  
(42)  

Lord Śiva said: O Goddess, you have now 
seen the illusory energy of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, who is the unborn master of 
everyone. Although I am o ne of the principal 
expansions of His Lordship, even I was illu-
sioned by His energy. What then is to be said 
of others, who are fully dependent on m āyā?  
(43) When I finished performing mystic yoga 
for one thousand years, you asked me upon 
whom I was medit ating. Now, here is that Su-
preme Person to whom time has no entrance 
and who the Vedas cannot understand.  (44)  
 Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: My dear King, the 
person who bore the great mountain on His 
back for the churning of the Ocean of Milk is 
the same Supr eme Personality of Godhead, 
known as Śārṅga-dhanv ā. I have now described 
to you His prowess.  (45) The endeavor of one 
who constantly hears or describes this narration 
of the churning of the Ocean of Milk will never 
be fruitless. Indeed, chanting the glori es of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the only 
means to annihilate all sufferings in this mate-
rial world.  (46) Assuming the form of a young 
woman and thus bewildering the demons, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead distributed to 
His devotees, the de migods, the nectar pro-
duced from the churning of the Ocean of Milk. 
Unto that Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who always fulfills the desires of His devotees, 
I offer my respectful obeisances.  (47)  

SB 8.13: Description of Future Manus  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: The present Manu, 
who is named Śrāddhadeva, is the son of Vi-
vasvān, the predominating deity on the sun 
planet. Śrāddhadeva is the seventh Manu. Now 
please hear from me as I describe his sons.  (1) 
O King Par īkṣit, among the ten sons of Manu 
are Ik ṣvāku, Nabhaga, Dh ṛṣṭa, Śaryāti, Nar-
iṣyanta and N ābhāga. The seventh son is known 
as Di ṣṭa. Then come Tar ūṣa and P ṛṣadhra, and 
the tenth son is known as Vasum ān.  (2 -3) In 
this manvantara, O King, the Ādityas, the Va-
sus, the Rudras, the Vi śvedevas, the Maruts, the 
two A śvinī-kumāra brothers and the Ṛbhus are 
the demigods. Their head king [Indra] is Pu-
randara.  (4) Ka śyapa, Atri, Vasi ṣṭha, 
Viśvāmitra, Gautama, Jamadagni and Bha-
radvāja are known as the seven sages.  (5) In 
this manvantara, the S upreme Personality of 
Godhead appeared as the youngest of all the 
Ādityas, known as V āmana, the dwarf. His fa-
ther was Ka śyapa and His mother Aditi.  (6)  

I have briefly explained to you the position 
of the seven Manus. Now I shall describe the 
future Manu s, along with the incarnations of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

498 
 Lord Vi ṣṇu.  (7)  

O King, I have previously described [in the 
Sixth Canto] the two daughters of Vi śvakarm ā, 
named Sa ṁjñā and Ch āyā, who were the first 
two wives of Vivasv ān.  (8) It is said that the 
sun-god had a third wi fe, named Va ḍavā. Of the 
three wives, the wife named Sa ṁjñā had three 
childrenYama, Yam ī and Śrāddhadeva. Now 
let me describe the children of Ch āyā.  (9) 
Chāyā had a son named S āvarṇi and a daughter 
named Tapat ī, who later became the wife of 
King Sa ṁvaraṇa. Ch āyā’s third child is 
known as Śanaiścara [Saturn]. Va ḍavā gave 
birth to two sons, namely the A śvinī brothers.  
(10) O King, when the period of the eighth 
Manu arrives, S āvarṇi will become the Manu. 
Nirmoka and Virajaska will be among his sons.  
(11) In  the period of the eighth Manu, among 
the demigods will be the Sutap ās, the Virajas 
and the Am ṛtaprabhas. The king of the demi-
gods, Indra, will be Bali Mah ārāja, the son of 
Virocana.  (12)  

Bali Mah ārāja gave a gift of three paces of 
land to Lord Vi ṣṇu, and because of this charity 
he lost all the three worlds. Later, however, 
when Lord Vi ṣṇu is pleased because of Bali’s 
giving everything to Him, Bali Mah ārāja will 
achieve the perfection of life.  (13) With great 
affection, the Personality of Godhead bound 
Bali and then installed him in the kingdom of 
Sutala, which is more opulent than the heavenly 
planets. Mah ārāja Bali now resides on that 
planet and is more comfortably situated than 
Indra.  (14) O King, during the eighth manvan-
tara, the great personalities  Gālava, D īptimān, 
Paraśurāma, A śvatth āmā, K ṛpācārya, 
Ṛṣyaśṛṅga and our father, Vy āsadeva, the in-
carnation of N ārāyaṇa, will be the seven sages. 
For the present, they are all residing in their re-
spective āśramas.  (15 -16) In the eighth man-
vantara, the grea tly powerful Personality of 
Godhead S ārvabhauma will take birth. His fa-
ther will be Devaguhya, and His mother will be 
Sarasvat ī. He will take the kingdom away from 
Purandara [Lord Indra] and give it to Bali Mahārāja.  (17)  

O King, the ninth Manu will be Dakṣa-
sāvarṇi, who is born of Varu ṇa. Among his 
sons will be Bh ūtaketu, and D īptaketu.  (18) In 
this ninth manvantara, the P āras and 
Marīcigarbhas will be among the demigods. 
The king of heaven, Indra, will be named 
Adbhuta, and Dyutim ān will be among the 
seven sages.  (19) Ṛṣabhadeva, a partial incar-
nation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
will take birth from his father, Āyuṣmān, and 
his mother, Ambudh ārā. He will enable the In-
dra named Adbhuta to enjoy the opulence of the 
three worlds.  (20)  

The s on of Upa śloka known as Brahma -
sāvarṇi will be the tenth Manu. Bh ūriṣeṇa will 
be among his sons, and the br āhmaṇas headed 
by Havi ṣmān will be the seven sages.  (21) 
Havi ṣmān, Suk ṛta, Satya, Jaya, M ūrti and oth-
ers will be the seven sages, the Suv āsanas and 
Viruddhas will be among the demigods, and 
Śambhu will be their king, Indra.  (22) In the 
home of Vi śvasra ṣṭā, a plenary portion of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead will appear 
from the womb of Vi ṣūcī as the incarnation 
known as Vi ṣvaksena. He will make f riends 
with Śambhu.  (23)  

In the eleventh manvantara, the Manu will 
be Dharma -sāvarṇi, who will be extremely 
learned in spiritual knowledge. From him there 
will come ten sons, headed by Satyadharma.  
(24) The Viha ṅgamas, K āmagamas, Nir-
vāṇarucis and other s will be the demigods. The 
king of the demigods, Indra, will be Vaidh ṛta, 
and the seven sages will be headed by Aru ṇa.  
(25) The son of Āryaka known as Dharmasetu, 
a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, will appear from the womb of 
Vaidhṛtā, the wife of Āryaka, and will rule the 
three worlds.  (26)  

O King, the twelfth Manu will be named Ru-
dra-sāvarṇi. Devav ān, Upadeva and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

499 
 Deva śreṣṭha will be among his sons.  (27) In 
this manvantara, the name of Indra will be 
Ṛtadhāmā, and the demigo ds will be headed by 
the Haritas. Among the sages will be Tapo-
mūrti, Tapasv ī and Āgnīdhraka.  (28) From the 
mother named Sun ṛtā and the father named 
Satyasah ā will come Svadh āmā, a partial incar-
nation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
He will rule tha t manvantara.  (29)  

The thirteenth Manu will be named Deva -
sāvarṇi, and he will be very advanced in spir-
itual knowledge. Among his sons will be Cit-
rasena and Vicitra.  (30) In the thirteenth man-
vantara, the Sukarm ās and Sutr āmas will be 
among the demigod s, Divaspati will be the king 
of heaven, and Nirmoka and Tattvadar śa will 
be among the seven sages.  (31) The son of 
Devahotra known as Yoge śvara will appear as 
a partial incarnation of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. His mother’s name will be B ṛhatī. 
He will perform activities for the welfare of Di-
vaspati.  (32)  

The name of the fourteenth Manu will be In-
dra-sāvarṇi. He will have sons like Uru, Gam-
bhīra and Budha.  (33) The Pavitras and 
Cākṣuṣas will be among the demigods, and 
Śuci will be Indra, the king of heaven. Agni, 
Bāhu, Śuci, Śuddha, M āgadha and others of 
great austerity will be the seven sages.  (34) O 
King Par īkṣit, in the fourteenth manvantara the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead will appear 
from the womb of Vit ānā, and His father’s 
name will be Satr āyaṇa. This incarnation will 
be celebrated as B ṛhadbh ānu, and He will ad-
minister spiritual activities.  (35)  

O King, I have now described to you the 
fourteen Manus appearing in the past, present 
and future. The total duration of time ruled by 
these Manus is one thousand yuga cycles. This 
is called a kalpa, or one day of Lord Brahm ā.  
(36)  
 SB 8.14: The System of Universal Manage-
ment  

Mahārāja Par īkṣit inquired: O most opulent 
Śukadeva Gosv āmī, please explain to me how 
Manu and the others in each m anvantara are en-
gaged in their respective duties, and by whose 
order they are so engaged.  (1)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: The Manus, the 
sons of Manu, the great sages, the Indras and 
all the demigods, O King, are appointed by the 
Supreme Personality of Godhe ad in His various 
incarnations such as Yajña.  (2) O King, I have 
already described to you various incarnations 
of the Lord, such as Yajña. The Manus and oth-
ers are chosen by these incarnations, under 
whose direction they conduct the universal af-
fairs.  (3 ) At the end of every four yugas, the 
great saintly persons, upon seeing that the eter-
nal occupational duties of mankind have been 
misused, reestablish the principles of religion.  
(4) Thereafter, O King, the Manus, being fully 
engaged according to the ins tructions of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, directly 
reestablish the principles of occupational duty 
in its full four parts.  (5) To enjoy the results of 
sacrifices [yajñas], the rulers of the world, 
namely the sons and grandsons of Manu, dis-
charge th e orders of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead until the end of Manu’s reign. The 
demigods also share the results of these sacri-
fices.  (6) Indra, King of heaven, receiving ben-
edictions from the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and thus enjoying highly devel oped 
opulences, maintains the living entities all over 
the three worlds by pouring sufficient rain on 
all the planets.  (7) In every yuga, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Hari, assumes the 
form of Siddhas such as Sanaka to preach tran-
scendental knowled ge, He assumes the form of 
great saintly persons such as Y ājñavalkya to 
teach the way of karma, and He assumes the 
form of great yog īs such as Datt ātreya to teach 
the system of mystic yoga.  (8) In the form of 
Prajāpati Mar īci, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead creates progeny; becoming the king, 
He kills the th ieves and rogues; and in the form 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

500 
 of time, He annihilates everything. All the dif-
ferent qualities of material existence should be 
understood to be qualities of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead.  (9) People in general are 
bewildered by the illusory energy , and there-
fore they try to find the Absolute Truth, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, through various 
types of research and philosophical specula-
tion. Nonetheless, they are unable to see the Su-
preme Lord.  (10)  

In one kalpa, or one day of Brahm ā, there 
take place the many changes called vikalpas. O 
King, all of these have been previously de-
scribed to you by me. Learned scholars who 
know the past, present and future have ascer-
tained that in one day of Brahm ā there are four-
teen Manus.  (11)  

SB 8 .15: Bali Mah ārāja Conquers the Heav-
enly Planets  

Mahārāja Par īkṣit inquired: The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is the proprietor of eve-
rything. Why did He beg three paces of land 
from Bali Mah ārāja like a poor man, and when 
He got the gift for which He h ad begged, why 
did He nonetheless arrest Bali Mah ārāja? I am 
very much anxious to know the mystery of 
these contradictions.  (1 -2)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King, when Bali 
Mahārāja lost all his opulence and died in the 
fight, Śukrācārya, a descendant of Bhṛgu Muni, 
brought him back to life. Because of this, the 
great soul Bali Mah ārāja became a disciple of 
Śukrācārya and began to serve him with great 
faith, offering everything he had.  (3) The 
brāhmaṇa descendants of Bh ṛgu Muni were 
very pleased with Bali  Mahārāja, who desired 
to conquer the kingdom of Indra. Therefore, af-
ter purifying him and properly bathing him ac-
cording to regulative principles, they engaged 
him in performing the yajña known as Vi śvajit.  
(4) When ghee [clarified butter] was offered in  
the fire of sacrifice, there appeared from the fire a celestial chariot covered with gold and silk. 
There also appeared yellow horses like those of 
Indra, and a flag marked with a lion.  (5) A 
gilded bow, two quivers of infallible arrows, 
and celestial ar mor also appeared. Bali 
Mahārāja’s grandfather Prahl āda Mah ārāja of-
fered Bali a garland of flowers that would never 
fade, and Śukrācārya gave him a conchshell.  
(6) When Mah ārāja Bali had thus performed 
the special ritualistic ceremony advised by the 
brāhmaṇas and had received, by t heir grace, the 
equipment for fighting, he circumambulated 
the br āhmaṇas and offered them obeisances. He 
also saluted Prahl āda Mah ārāja and offered 
obeisances to him.  (7) Then, after getting on 
the chariot given by Śukrācārya, Bali Mah ārāja, 
decorated wit h a nice garland, put protective ar-
mor on his body, equipped himself with a bow, 
and took up a sword and a quiver of arrows. 
When he sat down on the seat of the chariot, his 
arms decorated with golden bangles and his 
ears with sapphire earrings, he shone l ike a 
worshipable fire.  (8 -9) When he assembled 
with his own soldiers and the demon chiefs, 
who were equal to him in strength, opulence 
and beauty, they appeared as if they would 
swallow the sky and burn all directions with 
their vision. After thus gather ing the demoniac 
soldiers, Bali Mah ārāja departed for the opulent 
capital of Indra. Indeed, he seemed to make the 
entire surface of the world tremble.  (10 -11)  

King Indra’s city was full of pleasing or-
chards and gardens, such as the Nandana gar-
den. Becau se of the weight of the flowers, 
leaves and fruit, the branches of the eternally 
existing trees were bending down. The gardens 
were visited by pairs of chirping birds and sing-
ing bees. The entire atmosphere was celestial.  
(12) Beautiful women protected by  the demi-
gods sported in the gardens, which had lotus 
ponds full of swans, cranes, cakrav ākas and 
ducks.  (13) The city was surrounded by 
trenches full of Ganges water, known as Ākāśa-
gaṅgā, and by a high wall, which was the color 
of fire. Upon this wall were parapets for 
fighting.  (14) The doors were made of solid 
gold plates, and the gates were of excellent 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

501 
 marble. These were linked by various public 
roads. The entire city had been constructed by 
Viśvakarm ā.  (15) The city was full of court-
yards, wide roads, assembly houses, and not 
less than one hundred million airplanes. The 
crossroads wer e made of pearl, and there were 
sitting places made of diamond and coral.  (16) 
Everlastingly beautiful and youthful women, 
who were dressed with clean garments, glit-
tered in the city like fires with flames. They all 
possessed the quality of śyāmā.  (17)  

The breezes blowing in the streets of the city 
bore the fragrance of the flowers falling from 
the hair of the women of the demigods.  (18) 
Apsar ās passed on the streets, which were cov-
ered with the white, fragrant smoke of aguru in-
cense emanating from win dows with golden 
filigree.  (19) The city was shaded by canopies 
decorated with pearls, and the domes of the pal-
aces had flags of pearl and gold. The city al-
ways resounded with the vibrations of pea-
cocks, pigeons and bees, and above the city 
flew airplanes  full of beautiful women who 
constantly chanted auspicious songs that were 
very pleasing to the ear.  (20) The city was 
filled with the sounds of m ṛdaṅgas, 
conchshells, kettledrums, flutes and well -tuned 
stringed instruments all playing in concert. 
There w as constant dancing and the Gandhar-
vas sang. The combined beauty of Indrapur ī de-
feated beauty personified.  (21) No one who 
was sinful, envious, violent toward other living 
entities, cunning, falsely proud, lusty or greedy 
could enter that city. The people  who lived 
there were all devoid of these faults.  (22) Bali 
Mahārāja, who was the commander of number-
less soldiers, gathered his soldiers outside this 
abode of Indra and attacked it from all direc-
tions. He sounded the conchshell given him by 
his spiritual  master, Śukrācārya, thus creating a 
fearful situation for the women protected by In-
dra.  (23)  

Seeing Bali Mah ārāja’s indefatigable en-
deavor and understanding his motive, King In-
dra, along with the other demigods, approached 
his spiritual master, B ṛhaspa ti, and spoke as follows.  (24) My lord, our old enemy Bali 
Mahārāja now has new enthusiasm, and he has 
obtained such astonishing power that we think 
that perhaps we cannot resist his prowess.  (25) 
No one anywhere can counteract this military 
arrangement of Bali’s. It now appears that Bali 
is trying to drink up the entire universe with his 
mouth, lick up the ten directions with his 
tongue, and raise fire in every direction with his 
eyes. Indeed, he has arisen like the annihilating 
fire known as sa ṁvartaka.   (26) Kindly inform 
me. What is the cause for Bali Mah ārāja’s 
strength, endeavor, influence and victory? How 
has he become so enthusiastic?  (27)  

Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demi-
gods, said: O Indra, I know the cause for your 
enemy’s becoming so powerful. The br āhmaṇa 
descendants of Bh ṛgu Muni, being pleased by 
Bali Mah ārāja, their disciple, endowed him 
with such extraordinary power.  (28) Neither 
you nor your men can conquer the most power-
ful Bali. Indeed, no one but the Supreme Per-
sonality of  Godhead can conquer him, for he is 
now equipped with the supreme spiritual power 
[brahma -tejas]. As no one can stand before 
Yamar āja, no one can now stand before Bali 
Mahārāja.  (29) Therefore, waiting until the sit-
uation of your enemies is reversed, you should 
all leave this heavenly planet and go elsewhere, 
where you will not be seen.  (30) Bali Mah ārāja 
has now become extremely powerful because 
of the benedictions given him by the 
brāhmaṇas, but when he later insults the 
brāhmaṇas, he will be vanquished , along with 
his friends and assistants.  (31) Śukadeva 
Gosv āmī continued: The demigods, being thus 
advised by B ṛhaspati for their benefit, immedi-
ately accepted his words. Assuming forms ac-
cording to their desire, they left the heavenly 
kingdom and scatter ed, without being observed 
by the demons.  (32) When the demigods had 
disappeared, Bali Mah ārāja, the son of Vi-
rocana, entered the heavenly kingdom, and 
from there he brought the three worlds under 
his control.  (33) The br āhmaṇa descendants of 
Bhṛgu, bein g very pleased with their disciple, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

502 
 who had conquered the entire universe, now en-
gaged him in performing one hundred a śva-
medha sacrifices.  (34) When Bali Mah ārāja 
performed these sacrifices, he gained a great 
reputation in all directions, throughout the t hree 
worlds. Thus he shone in his position, like the 
brilliant moon in the sky.  (35) Because of the 
favor of the br āhmaṇas, the great soul Bali 
Mahārāja, thinking himself very satisfied, be-
came very opulent and prosperous and began to 
enjoy the kingdom.  (36)  

SB 8.16: Executing the Payo -vrata Process 
of Worship  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King, when 
Aditi’s sons, the demigods, had thus disap-
peared from heaven and the demons had occu-
pied their places, Aditi began lamenting, as if 
she had no protector.  (1) After many, many 
days, the great powerful sage Ka śyapa Muni 
arose from a trance of meditation and returned 
home to see the āśrama of Aditi neither jubilant 
nor festive.  (2) O best of the Kurus, when 
Kaśyapa Muni had been properly received and 
welcomed, he  took his seat and then spoke as 
follows to his wife, Aditi, who was very mo-
rose.  (3) O most gentle one, I wonder whether 
anything inauspicious has now taken place in 
regard to religious principles, the br āhmaṇas or 
the people in general, who are subject to the 
whims of death.  (4) O my wife, who are very 
much attached to household life, if the princi-
ples of religion, economic development and 
satisfaction of the senses are properly followed 
in household life, one’s activities are as good as 
those of a tran scendentalist. I wonder whether 
there have been any discrepancies in following 
these principles.  (5) I wonder whether because 
of being too attached to the members of your 
family, you failed to properly receive uninvited 
guests, who therefore were not welc omed and 
went away.  (6) Homes from which guests go 
away without having been received even with 
an offering of a little water are like those holes 
in the field which are the homes of jackals.  (7) 
O chaste and auspicious woman, when I left 
home for other p laces, were you in so much anxiety that you did not offer oblations of ghee 
into the fire?  (8) By worshiping the fire and the 
brāhmaṇas, a householder can achieve the de-
sired goal of residing in the higher planets, for 
the sacrificial fire and the br āhmaṇas are to be 
considered the mouth of Lord Vi ṣṇu, who is the 
Supersoul of all the demigods.  (9) O great -
minded lady, are all your  sons faring well? See-
ing your withered face, I can perceive that your 
mind is not tranquil. How is this so?  (10)  

Aditi said: O my respected br āhmaṇa hus-
band, all is well with the br āhmaṇas, the cows, 
religion and the welfare of other people. O mas-
ter of the house, the three principles of dharma, 
artha and k āma flourish in household life, 
which is consequently full of good fortune.  
(11) O beloved husband, the fires, guests, serv-
ants and beggars are all being properly cared 
for by me. Because I always th ink of you, there 
is no possibility that any of the religious princi-
ples will be neglected.  (12) O my lord, since 
you are a Praj āpati and are personally my in-
structor in the principles of religion, where is 
the possibility that all my desires will not be 
fulfilled?  (13) O son of Mar īci, because you 
are a great personality you are equal toward all 
the demons and demigods, who are born either 
from your body or from your mind and who 
possess one or another of the three qualities-
sattva -guṇa, rajo -guṇa or tamo -guṇa. But alt-
hough the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the supreme controller, is equal toward all liv-
ing entities, He is especially favorable to the 
devotees.  (14) Therefore, most gentle lord, 
kindly favor your maidservant. We have now 
been deprived of our opulence and residence by 
our competitors, the demons. Kindly give us 
protection.  (15) The demons, our formidably 
powerful enemies, have taken away our opu-
lence, our beauty, our fame and even our resi-
dence. Indeed, we have now been exiled, and 
we are drowning in an ocean of trouble.  (16) O 
best of sages, best of all those who grant auspi-
cious benedictions, please consider our situa-
tion and bestow upon my sons the benedictions 
by which they can regain what they have lost.  
(17)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

503 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: When 
Kaśyapa Muni was thus requested by Aditi, he 
slightly smiled. “Alas,” he said, “how powerful 
is the illusory energy of Lord Vi ṣṇu, by which 
the entire world is bound by affection for chil-
dren!”  (18) Ka śyapa Muni continued:  What is 
this material body, made of five elements? It is 
different from the spirit soul. Indeed, the spirit 
soul is completely different from the material 
elements from which the body is made. But be-
cause of bodily attachment, one is regarded as 
a husband  or son. These illusory relationships 
are caused by misunderstanding.  (19) My dear 
Aditi, engage in devotional service to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is the mas-
ter of everything, who can subdue everyone’s 
enemies, and who sits within everyone’ s heart. 
Only that Supreme PersonK ṛṣṇa, or 
Vāsudevacan bestow all auspicious benedic-
tions upon everyone, for He is the spiritual 
master of the universe.  (20) The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is very merciful to 
the poor, will fulfill all of your de sires, for de-
votional service unto Him is infallible. Any 
method other than devotional service is useless. 
That is my opinion.  (21)  

Śrīmatī Aditi said: O br āhmaṇa, tell me the 
regulative principles by which I may worship 
the supreme master of the world so that He will 
be pleased with me and fulfill all my desires.  
(22) O best of the br āhmaṇas, kindly instruct 
me in the perfect method of worshiping the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead in devotional 
service, by which the Lord may very soon be 
pleased with m e and save me, along with my 
sons, from this most dangerous condition.  (23)  

Śrī Kaśyapa Muni said: When I desired off-
spring, I placed inquiries before Lord Brahm ā, 
who is born from a lotus flower. Now I shall 
explain to you the same process Lord Brahm ā 
instructed me, by which Ke śava, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, is satisfied.  (24) In the 
bright fortnight of the month of Ph ālguna [Feb-
ruary and March], for twelve days ending with Dvādaśī, one should observe the vow of sub-
sisting only on milk and sh ould worship the lo-
tus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead with 
all devotion.  (25) If dirt dug up by a boar is 
available, on the day of the dark moon one 
should smear this dirt on his body and then 
bathe in a flowing river. While bathing, one 
should chant  the following mantra.  (26) O 
mother earth, you were raised by the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead in the form of a boar 
because of your desiring to have a place to stay. 
I pray that you kindly vanquish all the reactions 
of my sinful life. I offer my respe ctful obei-
sances unto you.  (27) Thereafter, one should 
perform his daily spiritual duties and then, with 
great attention, offer worship to the Deity of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and also to 
the altar, the sun, water, fire and the spiritual 
maste r.  (28) O Supreme Personality of God-
head, greatest of all, who lives in everyone’s 
heart and in whom everyone lives, O witness of 
everything, O V āsudeva, supreme and all -per-
vading person, I offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You.  (29) I offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You, the Supreme Person. Being very sub-
tle, You are never visible to material eyes. You 
are the knower of the twenty -four elem ents, and 
You are the inaugurator of the s āṅkhya -yoga 
system.  (30) I offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who have two heads [pr āyaṇīya and 
udāyanīya], three legs [savana -traya], four 
horns [the four Vedas] and seve n hands [the 
seven chandas, such as G āyatrī]. I offer my 
obeisances unto You, whose heart and soul are 
the three Vedic rituals [karma -kāṇḍa, Jnana -
kāṇḍa and up āsanā-kāṇḍa] and who expand 
these rituals in the form of sacrifice.  (31) I of-
fer my respectful o beisances unto You, Lord 
Śiva, or Rudra, who are the reservoir of all po-
tencies, the reservoir of all knowledge, and the 
master of everyone.  (32) I offer my respectful 
obeisances unto You, who are situated as 
Hiraṇyagarbha, the source of life, the Superso ul 
of every living entity. Your body is the source 
of the opulence of all mystic power. I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto You.  (33) I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto You, who are the 
original Personality of Godhead, the witness in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

504 
 everyone’s heart , and the incarnation of Nara -
Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi in the form of a human being. O 
Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful 
obeisances unto You.  (34) My Lord, I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto You, who are 
dressed in yellow garments, whose bodily hue 
resembles the marakata gem, and wh o have full 
control over the goddess of fortune. O my Lord 
Keśava, I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
You.  (35) O most exalted and worshipable 
Lord, best of those who bestow benediction, 
You can fulfill the desires of everyone, and 
therefore those who are sober, for their own 
welfare, worship the dust of Your lotus feet.  
(36) All the demigods, as well as the goddess 
of fortune, engage in the service of His lotus 
feet. Indeed, they respect the fragrance of those 
lotus feet. May the Supreme Personality o f 
Godhead be pleased with me.  (37) Ka śyapa 
Muni continued: By chanting all these mantras, 
welcoming the Supreme Personality of God-
head with faith and devotion, and offering Him 
items of worship [such as p ādya and arghya], 
one should worship Ke śava, H ṛṣīkeśa, Kṛṣṇa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  (38) In 
the beginning, the devotee should chant the 
dvādaśākṣara-mantra and offer flower gar-
lands, incense and so on. After worshiping the 
Lord in this way, one should bathe the Lord 
with milk and dress Him with proper garments, 
a sacred thread, and ornaments. After offering 
water to wash the Lord’s feet, one should again 
worship the Lord with fragrant flowers, incense 
and other paraphernalia.  (39) If one can afford 
to, one should offer the Deity fine rice boiled in 
milk with clarified butter and  molasses. While 
chanting the same original mantra, one should 
offer all this to the fire.  (40) One should offer 
all the pras āda to a Vai ṣṇava or offer him some 
of the pras āda and then take some oneself. Af-
ter this, one should offer the Deity ācamana and 
then betel nut and then again worship the Lord.  
(41) Thereafter, one should silently murmur the 
mantra 108 times and offer pr ayers to the Lord 
for His glorification. Then one should circum-
ambulate the Lord and finally, with great de-
light and satisfaction, offer obeisances, falling 
straight like a rod [da ṇḍavat].  (42) After touch-ing to one’s head all the flowers and water of-
fered to the Deity, one should throw them into 
a sacred place. Then one should feed at least 
two br āhmaṇas with sweet rice.  (43) One 
should perfectly honor the respectable 
brāhmaṇas one has fed, and then, after taking 
their permission, one should take pras āda with 
his friends and relatives. For that night, one 
should observe strict celibacy, and the next 
morning, after bathing again, with purity and 
attention one should bathe the Deity of Vi ṣṇu 
with milk and worship Him according to the 
methods formerly stated  in detail.  (44 -45)  

Worshiping Lord Vi ṣṇu with great faith and 
devotion and living only by drinking milk, one 
should follow this vow. One should also offer 
oblations to the fire and feed the br āhmaṇas as 
mentioned before.  (46) In this way, until 
twelve  days have passed, one should observe 
this payo -vrata, worshiping the Lord every day, 
executing the routine duties, performing sacri-
fices and feeding the br āhmaṇas.  (47)  

From pratipat until the thirteenth day of the 
next bright moon [ śukla-trayoda śī], one should 
observe complete celibacy, sleep on the floor, 
bathe three times a day and thus execute the 
vow.  (48) During this period, one should not 
unnecessarily talk of material subjects or topics 
of sense gratification, one should be completely 
free from  envy of all living entities, and one 
should be a pure and simple devotee of Lord 
Vāsudeva.  (49) Thereafter, following the di-
rections of the śāstra with help from br āhmaṇas 
who know the śāstra, on the thirteenth day of 
the moon one should bathe Lord Vi ṣṇu with 
five substances [milk, yogurt, ghee, sugar and 
honey].  (50) Giving up the mi serly habit of not 
spending money, one should arrange for the 
gorgeous worship of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, who is situated in the heart 
of every living entity. With great attention, one 
must prepare an oblation of grains boiled in 
ghee an d milk and must chant the Puru ṣa-sūkta 
mantra. The offerings of food should be of va-
rieties of tastes. In this way, one should worship 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.  (51 -52) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

505 
 One should satisfy the spiritual master [ ācārya], 
who is very learned in Ved ic literature, and 
should satisfy his assistant priests [known as 
hotā, udg ātā, adhvaryu and brahma]. One 
should please them by offering them clothing, 
ornaments and cows. This is the ceremony 
called vi ṣṇu-ārādhana, or worship of Lord 
Viṣṇu.  (53) O most a uspicious lady, one should 
perform all the ceremonies under the direction 
of learned ācāryas and should satisfy them and 
their priests. By distributing pras āda, one 
should also satisfy the br āhmaṇas and others 
who have assembled.  (54) One should satisfy 
the spiritual master and assistant priests by giv-
ing them cloth, ornaments, cows and also some 
monetary contribution. And by distributing 
prasāda one should satisfy everyone assem-
bled, including even the lowest of men, the 
caṇḍālas [eaters of dog flesh].  ( 55) One should 
distribute vi ṣṇu-prasāda to everyone, including 
the poor man, the blind man, the nondevotee 
and the non -brāhmaṇa. Knowing that Lord 
Viṣṇu is very pleased when everyone is sump-
tuously fed with vi ṣṇu-prasāda, the performer 
of yajña should then  take pras āda with his 
friends and relatives.  (56) Every day from 
pratipat to trayoda śī, one should continue the 
ceremony, to the accompaniment of dancing, 
singing, the beating of a drum, the chanting of 
prayers and all -auspicious mantras, and recita-
tion of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In this way, one 
should worship the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.  (57)  

This is the religious ritualistic ceremony 
known as payo -vrata, by which one may wor-
ship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I re-
ceived this information from Brahm ā, my 
grandfather, and now I have described it to you 
in all details.  (58) O most fortunate lady, estab-
lishing your mind in a good spirit, execute this 
process of payo -vrata and thus worship the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Ke śava, who is 
inexhaus tible.  (59) This payo -vrata is also 
known as sarva -yajña. In other words, by per-
forming this sacrifice one can perform all other 
sacrifices automatically. This is also acknowl-edged to be the best of all ritualistic ceremo-
nies. O gentle lady, it is the ess ence of all aus-
terities, and it is the process of giving charity 
and pleasing the suprem e controller.  (60) This 
is the best process for pleasing the transcenden-
tal Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as 
Adhok ṣaja. It is the best of all regulative prin-
ciples, the best austerity, the best process of 
giving charity, and the best process of sa crifice.  
(61) Therefore, my dear gentle lady, follow this 
ritualistic vow, strictly observing the regulative 
principles. By this process, the Supreme Person 
will very soon be pleased with you and will sat-
isfy all your desires.  (62)  

SB 8.17: The Supreme  Lord Agrees to Be-
come Aditi’s Son  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King, after Aditi 
was thus advised by her husband, Ka śyapa 
Muni, she strictly followed his instructions 
without laziness and in this way performed the 
payo -vrata ritualistic ceremony.  (1) With full, 
undiverted attention, Aditi tho ught of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead and in this way 
brought under full control her mind and senses, 
which resembled forceful horses. She concen-
trated her mind upon the Supreme Lord, 
Vāsudeva. Thus she performed the ritualistic 
ceremony known as payo -vrata.  (2 -3) My dear 
King, the original Supreme Personality of God-
head, dressed in yellow garments and bearing a 
conchshell, disc, club and lotus in His four 
hands, then appeared before Aditi.  (4) When 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead became 
visible t o Aditi’s eyes, Aditi was so over-
whelmed by transcendental bliss that she at 
once stood up and then fell to the ground like a 
rod to offer the Lord her respectful obeisances.  
(5) Aditi stood silently with folded hands, una-
ble to offer prayers to the Lord.  Because of 
transcendental bliss, tears filled her eyes, and 
the hairs on her body stood on end. Because she 
could see the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
face to face, she felt ecstasy, and her body trem-
bled.  (6) O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, the demigoddess 
Aditi  then began offering her prayers to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead in a faltering 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

506 
 voice and with great love. She appeared as 
though drinking through her eyes the Supreme 
Lord, who is the husband of the goddess of for-
tune, the enjoyer of all sacrificial  ceremonies, 
and the master and Lord of the entire universe.  
(7)  

The goddess Aditi said: O master and en-
joyer of all sacrificial ceremonies, O infallible 
and most famous person, whose name, when 
chanted, spreads all good fortune! O original 
Supreme Pers onality of Godhead, supreme 
controller, shelter of all holy places, You are 
the shelter of all poor, suffering living entities, 
and You have appeared to diminish their suf-
fering. Please be kind to us and spread our good 
fortune.  (8) My Lord, You are the a ll-pervad-
ing universal form, the fully independent crea-
tor, maintainer and destroyer of this universe. 
Although You engage Your energy in matter, 
You are always situated in Your original form 
and never fall from that position, for Your 
knowledge is infalli ble and always suitable to 
any situation. You are never bewildered by il-
lusion. O my Lord, let me offer my respectful 
obeisances unto You.  (9) O unlimited one, if 
Your Lordship is satisfied, one can very easily 
obtain a lifetime as long as that of Lord 
Brahmā, a body either in the upper, lower or 
middle planetary systems, unlimited material 
opulence, religion, economic development and 
satisfaction of the senses, full transcendental 
knowledge, and the eight yogic perfections, 
what to speak of such petty achiev ements as 
conquering one’s rivals.  (10)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King Par īkṣit, 
best of the Bharata dynasty, when the lotus -
eyed Lord, the Supersoul of all living entities, 
was thus worshiped by Aditi, He replied as fol-
lows.  (11)  

The Supreme Personal ity of Godhead said: 
O mother of the demigods, I have already un-
derstood your long -cherished desires for the 
welfare of your sons, who have been deprived 
of all opulences and driven from their residence by their enemies.  (12) O Dev ī, O goddess, I can 
unde rstand that you want to regain your sons 
and be together with them to worship Me, after 
defeating the enemies in battle and retrieving 
your abode and opulences.  (13) You want to 
see the wives of the demons lamenting for the 
death of their husbands when th ose demons, the 
enemies of your sons, are killed in battle by the 
demigods, of whom Indra is the chief.  (14) 
You want your sons to regain their lost reputa-
tion and opulence and live again on their heav-
enly planet as usual.  (15) O mother of the dem-
igods, in My opinion almost all the chiefs of the 
demons are now unconquerable, for they are 
being protected by br āhmaṇas, whom the Su-
preme Lord always favors. Thus the use of 
power against them now will not at all be a 
source of happiness.  (16) Yet because I ha ve 
been satisfied by the activities of your vow, O 
goddess Aditi, I must find some means to favor 
you, for worship of Me never goes in vain but 
certainly gives the desired result according to 
what one deserves.  (17) You have prayed to 
Me and properly wors hiped Me by performing 
the great payo -vrata ceremony for the sake of 
protecting your sons. Because of Ka śyapa 
Muni’s austerities, I shall agree to become your 
son and thus protect your other sons.  (18) Al-
ways thinking of Me as being situated within 
the body of your husband, Ka śyapa, go worship 
your husband, who has been purified by his 
austerity.  (19) O la dy, even if someone in-
quires, you should not disclose this fact to any-
one. That which is very confidential is success-
ful if kept secret.  (20)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: After speaking in 
this way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
disappeared from that ver y spot. Aditi, having 
received the extremely valuable benediction 
that the Lord would appear as her son, consid-
ered herself very successful, and with great de-
votion she approached her husband.  (21) Being 
situated in a meditational trance, Ka śyapa 
Muni, wh ose vision is never mistaken, could 
see that a plenary portion of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead had entered within him.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

507 
 (22) O King, as the wind promotes friction be-
tween two pieces of wood and thus gives rise to 
fire, Ka śyapa Muni, whose transcenden tal po-
sition was fully absorbed in the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, transferred his potency 
into the womb of Aditi.  (23) When Lord 
Brahm ā understood that the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead was now within the womb of 
Aditi, he began to offer prayers to the Lord by 
reciting transcendental names.  (24)  

Lord Brahm ā said: O Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, all glories unto You, who are glo-
rified by all and whose activities are all uncom-
mon. I offer my respectful obeisances unto 
You, O Lord of the transcende ntalists, control-
ler of the three modes of nature. I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You again and again.  
(25) I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, 
the all -pervading Lord Vi ṣṇu, who have en-
tered the cores of the hearts of all living entities. 
All the three worlds reside within Your navel, 
yet You are above the three worlds. Formerly 
You appeared as the son of P ṛśni. To You, the 
supreme creator, who are understood only 
through Vedic knowledge, I offer my respectful 
obeisances.  (26) O my Lord, You  are the be-
ginning, the manifestation and the ultimate dis-
solution of the three worlds, and You are cele-
brated in the Vedas as the reservoir of unlimited 
potencies, the Supreme Person. O my Lord, as 
waves attract branches and leaves that have 
fallen into d eep water, You, the supreme eter-
nal time factor, attract everything in this uni-
verse.  (27) My Lord, You are the original gen-
erator of all living entities, stationary or mov-
ing, and You are also the generator of the 
Prajāpatis. O my Lord, as a boat is the only 
hope for a person drowning in the water, You 
are the only shelter for the demigods, who are 
now bereft of their heavenly position.  (28)  

SB 8.18: Lord V āmanadeva, the Dwarf In-
carnation  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Afte r Lord Brahm ā 
had thus spoken, glorifying the Supreme Lord’s activities and prowess, the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, who is never subject to death 
like an ordinary living being, appeared from the 
womb of Aditi. His four hands were decorated 
with a conc hshell, club, lotus and disc, He was 
dressed in yellow garments, and His eyes ap-
peared like the petals of a blooming lotus.  (1) 
The body of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, blackish in complexion, was free from all 
inebrieties. His lotus face, decorate d with ear-
rings resembling sharks, appeared very beauti-
ful, and on His bosom was the mark of Śrīvatsa. 
He wore bangles on His wrists, armlets on His 
arms, a helmet on His head, a belt on His waist, 
a sacred thread across His chest, and ankle bells 
decorating His lotus feet.  (2) An uncommonly 
beautiful garland of flowers decorated His 
bosom, and b ecause the flowers were ex-
tremely fragrant, a large group of bees, making 
their natural humming sounds, invaded them 
for honey. When the Lord appeared, wearing 
the Kaustubha gem on His neck, His effulgence 
vanquished the darkness in the home of the 
Prajāpati Ka śyapa.  (3) At that time, there was 
happiness in all directions, in the reservoirs of 
water like the rivers and oceans, and in the core 
of everyone’s heart. The various seasons dis-
played their respective qualities, and all living 
entities in the upper  planetary system, in outer 
space and on the surface of the earth were jubi-
lant. The demigods, the cows, the br āhmaṇas 
and the hills and mountains were all filled with 
joy.  (4)  

On the day of Śravaṇa-dvādaśī [the twelfth 
day of the bright fortnight in th e month of 
Bhādra], when the moon came into the lunar 
mansion Śravaṇa, at the auspicious moment of 
Abhijit, the Lord appeared in this universe. 
Considering the Lord’s appearance very auspi-
cious, all the stars and planets, from the sun to 
Saturn, were munif icently charitable.  (5) O 
King, when the Lord appearedon dv ādaśī, the 
twelfth day of the moonthe sun was at the me-
ridian, as every learned scholar knows. This 
dvādaśī is called Vijay ā.  (6) Conchshells, ket-
tledrums, drums, pa ṇavas and ānakas vibrated 
in concert. The sound of these and various other 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

508 
 instruments was tumultuous.  (7) Being very 
pleased, the celestial dancing girls [Apsar ās] 
danced in jubilation, the best of the Gandharvas 
sang songs, and the great sages, demigods, Ma-
nus, Pit ās and fire -gods o ffered prayers to sat-
isfy the Lord.  (8) The Siddhas, Vidy ādharas, 
Kimpuru ṣas, Kinnaras, C āraṇas, Yak ṣas, 
Rākṣasas, Supar ṇas, the best of serpents, and 
the followers of the demigods all showered 
flowers on Aditi’s residence, covering the en-
tire house, whil e glorifying and praising the 
Lord and dancing.  (9 -10)  

When Aditi saw the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who had appeared from her own 
womb, having accepted a transcendental body 
by His own spiritual potency, she was struck 
with wonder and was very hap py. Upon seeing 
the child, Praj āpati Ka śyapa exclaimed, “Jaya! 
Jaya!” in great happiness and wonder.  (11) The 
Lord appeared in His original form, with orna-
ments and weapons in His hands. Although this 
ever-existing form is not visible in the material 
world, He nonetheless appeared in t his form. 
Then, in the presence of His father and mother, 
He assumed the form of V āmana, a br āhmaṇa-
dwarf, a brahmac ārī, just like a theatrical actor.  
(12)  

When the great sages saw the Lord as the 
brahmac ārī-dwarf V āmana, they were certainly 
very please d. Thus they placed before them 
Kaśyapa Muni, the Praj āpati, and performed all 
the ritualistic ceremonies, such as the birthday 
ceremony.  (13) At the sacred thread ceremony 
of Vāmanadeva, the sun -god personally uttered 
the G āyatrī mantra, B ṛhaspati offere d the sa-
cred thread, and Ka śyapa Muni offered a straw 
belt.  (14) Mother earth gave Him a deerskin, 
and the demigod of the moon, who is the king 
of the forest, gave Him a brahma -daṇḍa [the 
rod of a brahmac ārī]. His mother, Aditi, gave 
Him cloth for underwe ar, and the deity presid-
ing over the heavenly kingdom offered Him an 
umbrella.  (15) O King, Lord Brahm ā offered a 
waterpot to the inexhaustible Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, the seven sages offered Him 
kuśa grass, and mother Sarasvat ī gave Him a string of Rudr ākṣa beads.  (16) When V āmana-
deva had thus been given the sacred thread, Ku-
vera, King of the Yak ṣas, gave Him a pot for 
begging alms, and mother Bhagavat ī, the wife 
of Lord Śiva and most chaste mother of the en-
tire universe, gave Him His first alms.   (17) 
Having thus been welcomed by everyone, Lord 
Vāmanadeva, the best of the brahmac ārīs, ex-
hibited His Brahman effulgence. Thus He sur-
passed in beauty that entire assembly, which 
was filled with great saintly br āhmaṇas.  (18) 
After Lord Śrī Vāmanadeva s et a sacrificial 
fire, He offered worship and performed a fire 
sacrifice on the sacrificial field.  (19)  

When the Lord heard that Bali Mah ārāja was 
performing a śvamedha sacrifices under the pat-
ronage of br āhmaṇas belonging to the Bh ṛgu 
dynasty, the Supre me Lord, who is full in every 
respect, proceeded there to show His mercy to 
Bali Mah ārāja. By His weight, He pushed down 
the earth with every step.  (20) While engaged 
in performing the sacrifice in the field known 
as Bh ṛgukaccha, on the northern bank of t he 
Narmad ā River, the brahminical priests, the de-
scendants of Bh ṛgu, saw V āmanadeva to be like 
the sun rising nearby.  (21) O King, because of 
Vāmanadeva’s bright effulgence, the priests, 
along with Bali Mah ārāja and all the members 
of the assembly, were r obbed of their splendor. 
Thus they began to ask one another whether the 
sun-god himself, Sanat -kumāra or the fire -god 
had personally come to see the sacrificial cere-
mony.  (22) While the priests of the Bh ṛgu dyn-
asty and their disciples talked and argued in  
various ways, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, V āmanadeva, holding in His hands the 
rod, the umbrella and a waterpot full of water, 
entered the arena of the a śvamedha sacrifice.  
(23) Appearing as a br āhmaṇa boy, wearing a 
belt of straw, a sacred threa d, an upper garment 
of deerskin, and matted locks of hair, Lord 
Vāmanadeva entered the arena of sacrifice. His 
brilliant effulgence diminished the brilliance of 
all the priests and their disciples, who thus 
stood from their seats and welcomed the Lord 
properly by offering obeisances.  (24 -25) Bali 
Mahārāja, jubilant at seeing Lord V āmanadeva, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

509 
 whose beautiful limbs contributed equally to 
the beauty of His entire body, offered Him a 
seat with great satisfaction.  (26) Thus offering 
a proper reception to the S upreme Personality 
of Godhead, who is always beautiful to the lib-
erated souls, Bali Mah ārāja worshiped Him by 
washing His lotus feet.  (27) Lord Śiva, the best 
of demigods, who carries on his forehead the 
emblem of the moon, receives on his head with 
great  devotion the Ganges water emanating 
from the toe of Vi ṣṇu. Being aware of religious 
principles, Bali Mah ārāja knew this. Conse-
quently, following in the footsteps of Lord 
Śiva, he also placed on his head the water that 
had washed the Lord’s lotus feet.  (2 8)  

Bali Mah ārāja then said to Lord V āmana-
deva: O br āhmaṇa, I offer You my hearty wel-
come and my respectful obeisances. Please let 
us know what we may do for You. We think of 
You as the personified austerity of the great 
brāhmaṇa-sages.  (29) O my Lord, b ecause You 
have kindly arrived at our home, all my forefa-
thers are satisfied, our family and entire dyn-
asty have been sanctified, and the sacrifice we 
are performing is now complete because of 
Your presence.  (30) O son of a br āhmaṇa, to-
day the fire of sac rifice is ablaze according to 
the injunction of the śāstra, and I have been 
freed from all the sinful reactions of my life by 
the water that has washed Your lotus feet. O my 
Lord, by the touch of Your small lotus feet the 
entire surface of the world has be en sanctified.  
(31) O son of a br āhmaṇa, it appears that You 
have come here to ask me for something. 
Therefore, whatever You want You may take 
from me. O best of those who are worshipable. 
You may take from me a cow, gold, a furnished 
house, palatable foo d and drink, the daughter of 
a brāhmaṇa for Your wife, prosperous villages, 
horses, elephants, chariots or whatever You de-
sire.  (32)  

SB 8.19: Lord V āmanadeva Begs Charity 
from Bali Mah ārāja 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: When the Supreme Personality of Go dhead, V āmana-
deva, heard Bali Mah ārāja speaking in this 
pleasing way, He was very satisfied, for Bali 
Mahārāja had spoken in terms of religious prin-
ciples. Thus the Lord began to praise him.  (1)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
O King, you are i ndeed exalted because your 
present advisors are the br āhmaṇas who are de-
scendants of Bh ṛgu and because your instructor 
for your future life is your grandfather, the 
peaceful and venerable Prahl āda Mah ārāja. 
Your statements are very true, and they com-
pletel y agree with religious etiquette. They are 
in keeping with the behavior of your family, 
and they enhance your reputation.  (2) I know 
that even until now, no one taking birth in your 
family has been poor -minded or miserly. No 
one has refused to give charit y to br āhmaṇas, 
nor after promising to give charity has anyone 
failed to fulfill his promise.  (3) O King Bali, 
never in your dynasty has the low -minded king 
been born who upon being requested has re-
fused charity to br āhmaṇas in holy places or a 
fight to k ṣatriya s on a battlefield. And your 
dynasty is even more glorious due to the pres-
ence of Prahl āda Mah ārāja, who is like the 
beautiful moon in the sky.  (4) It was in your 
dynasty that Hira ṇyākṣa was born. Carrying 
only his own club, he wandered the globe 
alone, w ithout assistance, to conquer all direc-
tions, and no hero he met could rival him.  (5) 
When delivering the earth from the 
Garbhodaka Sea, Lord Vi ṣṇu, in His incarna-
tion as a boar, killed Hira ṇyākṣa, who had ap-
peared before Him. The fight was severe, and 
the Lord killed Hira ṇyākṣa with great diffi-
culty. Later, as the Lord thought about the un-
common prowess of Hira ṇyākṣa, He felt Him-
self victorious indeed.  (6) When 
Hiraṇyaka śipu heard the news of his brother’s 
being killed, with great anger he went to the 
residence of Vi ṣṇu, the killer of his brother, 
wanting to kill Lord Vi ṣṇu.  (7) Seeing 
Hiraṇyaka śipu coming forward bearing a tri-
dent in his hand like personified death, Lord 
Viṣṇu, the best of all mystics and the knower of 
the progress of time, thought as f ollows.  (8) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

510 
 Wheresoever I go, Hira ṇyaka śipu will follow 
Me, as death follows all living entities. There-
fore it is better for Me to enter the core of his 
heart, for then, because of his power to see only 
externally, he will not see Me.  (9) Lord V āma-
nadeva  continued: O King of the demons, after 
Lord Vi ṣṇu made this decision, He entered the 
body of His enemy Hira ṇyaka śipu, who was 
running after Him with great force. In a subtle 
body inconceivable to Hira ṇyaka śipu, Lord 
Viṣṇu, who was in great anxiety, entere d 
Hiraṇyaka śipu’s nostril along with his breath.  
(10) Upon seeing that the residence of Lord 
Viṣṇu was vacant, Hira ṇyaka śipu began 
searching for Lord Vi ṣṇu everywhere. Angry at 
not seeing Him, Hira ṇyaka śipu screamed 
loudly and searched the entire universe , includ-
ing the surface of the earth, the higher planetary 
systems, all directions and all the caves and 
oceans. But Hira ṇyaka śipu, the greatest hero, 
did not see Vi ṣṇu anywhere.  (11) Unable to see 
Him, Hira ṇyaka śipu said, “I have searched the 
entire univ erse, but I could not find Vi ṣṇu, who 
has killed my brother. Therefore, He must cer-
tainly have gone to that place from which no 
one returns. [In other words, He must now be 
dead.]”  (12) Hira ṇyaka śipu’s anger against 
Lord Vi ṣṇu persisted until his death. O ther peo-
ple in the bodily concept of life maintain anger 
only because of false ego and the great influ-
ence of ignorance.  (13) Your father, Virocana, 
the son of Mah ārāja Prahl āda, was very affec-
tionate toward br āhmaṇas. Although he knew 
very well that it w as the demigods who had 
come to him in the dress of br āhmaṇas, at their 
request he delivered to them the duration of his 
life.  (14) You also have observed the principles 
followed by great personalities who are house-
holder br āhmaṇas, by your forefathers an d by 
great heroes who are extremely famous for 
their exalted activities.  (15) O King of the 
Daityas, from Your Majesty, who come from 
such a noble family and who are able to give 
charity munificently, I ask only three paces of 
land, to the measurement of My steps.  (16) O 
King, controller of the entire universe, although 
you are very munificent and are able to give Me 
as much land as I want, I do not want anything 
from you that is unnecessary. If a learned brāhmaṇa takes charity from others only ac-
cording to his needs, he does not become entan-
gled in sinful activities.  (17)  

Bali Mah ārāja said: O son of a br āhmaṇa, 
Your instructions are as good as those of 
learned and elderly persons. Nonetheless, You 
are a boy, and Your intelligence is insufficient. 
Thus You are not very prudent in regard to 
Your self -interest.  (18) I am able to give You 
an entire island because I am the proprietor of 
the three divisions of the universe. You have 
come to take something from  me and have 
pleased me by Your sweet words, but You are 
asking only three paces of land. Therefore You 
are not very intelligent.  (19) O small boy, one 
who approaches me to beg something should 
not have to ask anything more, anywhere. 
Therefore, if You wi sh, You may ask from me 
as much land as will suffice to maintain You 
according to Your needs.  (20)  

The Personality of Godhead said: O my dear 
King, even the entirety of whatever there may 
be within the three worlds to satisfy one’s 
senses cannot satisfy  a person whose senses are 
uncontrolled.  (21) If I were not satisfied with 
three paces of land, then surely I would not be 
satisfied even with possessing one of the seven 
islands, consisting of nine var ṣas. Even if I pos-
sessed one island, I would hope to get others.  
(22) We have heard that although powerful 
kings like Mah ārāja Pṛthu and Mah ārāja Gaya 
achieved proprietorship over the seven dv īpas, 
they could not achieve satisfaction or find the 
end of their ambitions.  (23) One should be sat-
isfied with wha tever he achieves by his previ-
ous destiny, for discontent can never bring hap-
piness. A person who is not self -controlled will 
not be happy even with possessing the three 
worlds.  (24) Material existence causes discon-
tent in regard to fulfilling one’s lusty  desires 
and achieving more and more money. This is 
the cause for the continuation of material life, 
which is full of repeated birth and death. But 
one who is satisfied by that which is obtained 
by destiny is fit for liberation from this material 
existence .  (25) A br āhmaṇa who is satisfied 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

511 
 with whatever is providentially obtained is in-
creasingly enlightened with spiritual power, 
but the spiritual potency of a dissatisfied 
brāhmaṇa decreases, as fire diminishes in po-
tency when water is sprinkled upon it.  ( 26) 
Therefore, O King, from you, the best of those 
who give charity, I ask only three paces of land. 
By such a gift I shall be very pleased, for the 
way of happiness is to be fully satisfied to re-
ceive that which is absolutely needed.  (27)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: When the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead had thus spo-
ken to Bali Mah ārāja, Bali smiled and told Him, 
“All right. Take whatever You like.” To con-
firm his promise to give V āmanadeva the de-
sired land, he then took up his waterpot.  (28) 
Understa nding Lord Vi ṣṇu’s purpose, 
Śukrācārya, the best of the learned, immedi-
ately spoke as follows to his disciple, who was 
about to offer everything to Lord V āmanadeva.  
(29)  

Śukrācārya said: O son of Virocana, this 
brahmac ārī in the form of a dwarf is direc tly the 
imperishable Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Viṣṇu. Accepting Ka śyapa Muni as His father 
and Aditi as His mother, He has now appeared 
in order to fulfill the interests of the demigods.  
(30) You do not know what a dangerous posi-
tion you have accept ed by promising to give 
Him land. I do not think that this promise is 
good for you. It will bring great harm to the de-
mons.  (31) This person falsely appearing as a 
brahmac ārī is actually the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Hari, who has come in this form to 
take away all your land, wealth, beauty, power, 
fame and education. After taking everything 
from you, He will deliver it to Indra, your en-
emy.  (32) You have promised to give Him 
three steps of land in charity, but when you give 
it He will occupy the th ree worlds. You are a 
rascal! You do not know what a great mistake 
you have made. After giving everything to Lord 
Viṣṇu, you will have no means of livelihood. 
How then shall you live?  (33) V āmanadeva 
will first occupy the three worlds with one step, 
then He will take His second step and occupy everything in outer space, and then He will ex-
pand His universal body to occupy everything. 
Where will you offer Him the third step?  (34) 
You will certainly be unable to fulfill your 
promise, and I think that because o f this inabil-
ity your eternal residence will be in hell.  (35) 
Learned scholars do not praise that charity 
which endangers one’s own livelihood. Char-
ity, sacrifice, austerity and fruitive activities are 
possible for one who is competent to earn his 
livelih ood properly. [They are not possible for 
one who cannot maintain himself.]  (36) There-
fore one who is in full knowledge should divide 
his accumulated wealth in five partsfor reli-
gion, for reputation, for opulence, for sense 
gratification and for the mainte nance of his 
family members. Such a person is happy in this 
world and in the next.  (37) One might argue 
that since you have already promised, how can 
you refuse? O best of the demons, just take 
from me the evidence of the Bahv ṛca-śruti, 
which says that a promise is truthful preceded 
by the word om and untruthful if not.  (38) The 
Vedas enjoin that the factual result of the tree 
of the body is the good fruits and flowers de-
rived from it. But if the bodily tree does not ex-
ist, there is no possibility of fact ual fruits and 
flowers. Even if the body is based on untruth, 
there cannot be factual fruits and flowers with-
out the help of the bodily tree.  (39) When a tree 
is uprooted it immediately falls down and be-
gins to dry up. Similarly, if one doesn’t take 
care of the body, which is supposed to be un-
truthin other words, if the untruth is uproot-
edthe body undoubtedly becomes dry.  (40) The 
utterance of the word om signifies separation 
from one’s monetary assets. In other words, by 
uttering this word one becomes fr ee from at-
tachment to money because his money is taken 
away from him. To be without money is not 
very satisfactory, for in that position one cannot 
fulfill one’s desires. In other words, by using 
the word om one becomes poverty -stricken. Es-
pecially when on e gives charity to a poor man 
or beggar, one remains unfulfilled in self -reali-
zation and in sense gratification.  (41) There-
fore, the safe course is to say no. Although it is 
a falsehood, it protects one completely, it draws 
the compassion of others toward  oneself, and it 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

512 
 gives one full facility to collect money from 
others for oneself. Nonetheless, if one always 
pleads that he has nothing, he is condemned, for 
he is a dead body while living, or while still 
breathing he should be killed.  (42) In flattering  
a woman to bring her under control, in joking, 
in a marriage ceremony, in earning one’s live-
lihood, when one’s life is in danger, in protect-
ing cows and brahminical culture, or in protect-
ing a person from an enemy’s hand, falsity is 
never condemned.  (43)   

SB 8.20: Bali Mah ārāja Surrenders the Uni-
verse  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King Par īkṣit, 
when Bali Mah ārāja was thus advised by his 
spiritual master, Śukrācārya, his family priest, 
he remained silent for some time, and then, af-
ter full deliberation, he replied to his spi ritual 
master as follows.  (1)  

Bali Mah ārāja said: As you have already 
stated, the principle of religion that does not 
hinder one’s economic development, sense 
gratification, fame and means of livelihood is 
the real occupational duty of the householder. I 
also think that this religious principle is correct.  
(2) I am the grandson of Mah ārāja Prahl āda. 
How can I withdraw my promise because of 
greed for money when I have already said that 
I shall give this land? How can I behave like an 
ordinary cheater, es pecially toward a 
brāhmaṇa?  (3) There is nothing more sinful 
than untruthfulness. Because of this, mother 
earth once said, “I can bear any heavy thing ex-
cept a person who is a liar.”  (4) I do not fear 
hell, poverty, an ocean of distress, falldown 
from my  position or even death itself as much 
as I fear cheating a br āhmaṇa.  (5) My lord, you 
can also see that all the material opulences of 
this world are certainly separated from their 
possessor at death. Therefore, if the br āhmaṇa 
Vāmanadeva is not satisfied  by whatever gifts 
one has given, why not please Him with the 
riches one is destined to lose at death?  (6) Dadh īci, Śibi and many other great personali-
ties were willing to sacrifice even their lives for 
the benefit of the people in general. This is the 
evidence of history. So why not give up this in-
significant land? What is the serious consider-
ation against it?  (7) O best of the br āhmaṇas, 
certainly the great demoniac kings who were 
never reluctant to fight enjoyed this world, but 
in due course of time ev erything they had was 
taken away, except their reputation, by which 
they continue to exist. In other words, one 
should try to achieve a good reputation instead 
of anything else.  (8) O best of the br āhmaṇas, 
many men have laid down their lives on the bat-
tlefield, being unafraid of fighting, but rarely 
has one gotten the chance to give his accumu-
lated wealth faithfully to a saintly person who 
creates holy places.  (9) By giving charity, a be-
nevolent and merciful person undoubtedly be-
comes even more auspiciou s, especially when 
he gives charity to a person like your good self. 
Under the circumstances, I must give this little 
brahmac ārī whatever charity He wants from 
me.  (10) O great sage, great saintly persons 
like you, being completely aware of the Vedic 
principles for performing ritualistic ceremonies 
and yajñas, worship Lord Vi ṣṇu in all circum-
stances. Therefore, whether that sam e Lord 
Viṣṇu has come here to give me all benedic-
tions or to punish me as an enemy, I must carry 
out His order and give Him the requested tract 
of land without hesitation.  (11) Although He is 
Viṣṇu Himself, out of fear He has covered 
Himself in the form o f a br āhmaṇa to come to 
me begging. Under the circumstances, because 
He has assumed the form of a br āhmaṇa, even 
if He irreligiously arrests me or even kills me, I 
shall not retaliate, although He is my enemy.  
(12) If this br āhmaṇa really is Lord Vi ṣṇu, who 
is worshiped by Vedic hymns, He would never 
give up His widespread reputation; either He 
would lie down having been killed by me, or 
He would kill me in a fight.  (13)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī continued: Thereaf-
ter, the spiritual master, Śukrācārya, being in-
spired by the Supreme Lord, cursed his exalted 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

513 
 disciple Bali Mah ārāja, who was so magnani-
mous and fixed in truthfulness that instead of 
respecting his spiritual master’s instructions, he 
wanted to disobey his order.  (14) Although you 
have no knowledge, you have become a so -
called learned person, and therefore you dare be 
so impudent as to disobey my order. Because 
of disobeying me, you shall very soon be bereft 
of all your opulence.  (15) Śukadeva Gosv āmī 
continued: Even after being cursed in this way 
by his own spiritual master, Bali Mah ārāja, be-
ing a great personality, never deviated from his 
determination. Therefore, according to custom, 
he first offered water to V āmanadeva and then 
offered Him the gift of land he had promised.  
(16) Bali Mah ārāja’s wi fe, known as Vin-
dhyāvali, who was decorated with a necklace of 
pearls, immediately came and had a large 
golden waterpot brought there, full of water 
with which to worship the Lord by washing His 
feet.  (17) Bali Mah ārāja, the worshiper of Lord 
Vāmanadeva, jubilantly washed the Lord’s lo-
tus feet and then took the water on his head, for 
that water delivers the entire universe.  (18) At 
that time, the residents of the higher planetary 
system, namely the demigods, the Gandharvas, 
the Vidy ādharas, the Siddhas an d the C āraṇas, 
all being very pleased by Bali Mah ārāja’s sim-
ple, nonduplicitous act, praised his qualities 
and showered upon him millions of flowers.  
(19) The Gandharvas, the Kimpuru ṣas and the 
Kinnaras sounded thousands and thousands of 
kettledrums and t rumpets again and again, and 
they sang in great jubilation, declaring, “How 
exalted a person is Bali Mah ārāja, and what a 
difficult task he has performed! Even though he 
knew that Lord Vi ṣṇu was on the side of his en-
emies, he nonetheless gave the Lord the entire 
three worlds in charity.”  (20)  

The unlimited Supreme Personality of God-
head, who had assumed the form of V āmana, 
then began increasing in size, acting in terms of 
the material energy, until everything in the uni-
verse was within His body, includin g the earth, 
the planetary systems, the sky, the directions, 
the various holes in the universe, the seas, the 
oceans, the birds, beasts, human beings, the demigods and the great saintly persons.  (21) 
Bali Mah ārāja, along with all the priests, 
ācāryas and members of the assembly, ob-
served the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s 
universal body, which was full of six opu-
lences. That body contained everything within 
the universe, including all the gross material el-
ements, the senses, the sense objects, the mind, 
intelligence and false ego, the various kinds of 
living entities, and the actions and reactions of 
the three modes of material nature.  (22) There-
after, Bali Mah ārāja, who was occupying the 
seat of King Indra, could see the lower plane-
tary systems, such as Ras ātala, on the soles of 
the feet of the Lord’s universal form. He saw 
on the Lord’s feet the surface of the globe, on 
the surface of His calves all the mounta ins, on 
His knees the various birds, and on His thighs 
the varieties of air.  (23) Bali Mah ārāja saw be-
neath the garments of the Lord, who acts won-
derfully, the evening twilight. In the Lord’s pri-
vate parts he saw the Praj āpatis, and in the 
round portion o f the waist he saw himself with 
his confidential associates. In the Lord’s navel 
he saw the sky, on the Lord’s waist he saw the 
seven oceans, and on the Lord’s bosom he saw 
all the clusters of stars.  (24) My dear King, on 
the heart of Lord Mur āri he saw r eligion; on the 
chest, both pleasing words and truthfulness; in 
the mind, the moon; on the bosom, the goddess 
of fortune, with a lotus flower in her hand; on 
the neck, all the Vedas and all sound vibrations; 
on the arms, all the demigods, headed by King 
Indra; in both ears, all the directions; on the 
head, the upper planetary systems; on the hair, 
the clouds; in the nostrils, the wind; on the eyes, 
the sun; and in the mouth, fire. From His words 
came all the Vedic mantras, on His tongue was 
the demigod of w ater, Varu ṇadeva, on His eye-
brows were the regulative principles, and on 
His eyelids were day and night. [When His eyes 
were open it was daytime, and when they were 
closed it was night.] On His forehead was an-
ger, and on His lips was greed. O King, in His 
touch were lusty desires, in His semen were all 
the waters, on His back was irreligion, and in 
His wonderful activities or steps was the fire of 
sacrifice. On His shadow was death, in His 
smile was the illusory energy, and on the hairs 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

514 
 of His body were all  the drugs and herbs. In His 
veins were all the rivers, on His nails were all 
the stones, in His intelligence were Lord 
Brahm ā, the demigods and the great saintly per-
sons, and throughout His entire body and 
senses were all living entities, moving and sta-
tionary. Bali Mah ārāja thus saw everything in 
the gigantic body of the Lord.  (25 -29)  

O King, when all the demons, the follow ers 
of Mah ārāja Bali, saw the universal form of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who held 
everything within His body, when they saw in 
the Lord’s hand His disc, known as the Sudar-
śana cakra, which generates intolerable heat, 
and when they heard the tumu ltuous sound of 
His bow, all of these caused lamentation within 
their hearts.  (30) The Lord’s conchshell, 
named P āñcajanya, which made sounds like 
that of a cloud; the very forceful club named 
Kaumodak ī; the sword named Vidy ādhara, 
with a shield decorated  with hundreds of moon-
like spots; and also Ak ṣayasāyaka, the best of 
quiversall of these appeared together to offer 
prayers to the Lord.  (31) These associates, 
headed by Sunanda and other chief associates 
and accompanied by all the predominating dei-
ties o f the various planets, offered prayers to 
the Lord, who wore a brilliant helmet, brace-
lets, and glittering earrings that resembled fish. 
On the Lord’s bosom were the lock of hair 
called Śrīvatsa and the transcendental jewel 
named Kaustubha. He wore a yello w garment, 
covered by a belt, and He was decorated by a 
flower garland, surrounded by bees. Manifest-
ing Himself in this way, O King, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, whose activities are 
wonderful, covered the entire surface of the 
earth with one footst ep, the sky with His body, 
and all directions with His arms.  (32 -33) As 
the Lord took His second step, He covered the 
heavenly planets. And not even a spot remained 
for the third step, for the Lord’s foot extended 
higher and higher, beyond Maharloka, Ja-
naloka, Tapoloka and even Satyaloka.  (34)  

SB 8.21: Bali Mah ārāja Arrested by the 
Lord   
Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: When Lord 
Brahm ā, who was born of a lotus flower, saw 
that the effulgence of his residence, Brah-
maloka, had been reduced by the glaring effu l-
gence from the toenails of Lord V āmanadeva, 
he approached the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. Lord Brahm ā was accompanied by 
all the great sages, headed by Mar īci, and by 
yogīs like Sanandana, but in the presence of 
that glaring effulgence, O King, even L ord 
Brahm ā and his associates seemed insignifi-
cant.  (1) Among the great personalities who 
came to worship the lotus feet of the Lord were 
those who had attained perfection in self -con-
trol and regulative principles, as well as experts 
in logic, history, ge neral education and the Ve-
dic literature known as kalpe [dealing with old 
historical incidents]. Others were experts in the 
Vedic corollaries like Brahma -saṁhitā, all the 
other knowledge of the Vedas [S āma, Yajur, 
Ṛg and Atharva], and also the supplementar y 
Vedic knowledge [ Āyurveda, Dhanurveda, 
etc.]. Others were those who had been freed of 
the reactions to fruitive activities by transcen-
dental knowledge awakened by practice of 
yoga. And still others were those who had at-
tained residence in Brahmaloka not by ordinary 
karma but by advanced Vedic knowledge. Af-
ter devotedly worshiping the upraised lotus feet 
of the Supreme Lord with oblations of water, 
Lord Brahm ā, who was born of the lotus ema-
nating from Lord Vi ṣṇu’s navel, offered pray-
ers to the Lord.  (2 -3) O King, the water from 
Lord Brahm ā’s kama ṇḍalu washed the lotus 
feet of Lord V āmanadeva, who is known as 
Urukrama, the wonderful actor. Thus that water 
became so pure that it was transformed into the 
water of the Ganges, which went flowing down 
from the s ky, purifying the three worlds like the 
pure fame of the Supreme Personality of God-
head.  (4) Lord Brahm ā and all the predominat-
ing deities of the various planetary systems be-
gan to worship Lord V āmanadeva, their su-
preme master, who had reduced Himself fro m 
His all -pervading form to His original form. 
They collected all the ingredients and parapher-
nalia for this worship.  (5) They worshiped the 
Lord by offering fragrant flowers, water, p ādya 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

515 
 and arghya, sandalwood pulp and aguru pulp, 
incense, lamps, fused rice, unbroken grains, 
fruits, roots and sprouts. While so doing, they 
offered prayers indicating the glorious activi-
ties of the Lord and shouted “Jaya! Jaya!” They 
also danced, played instruments, sang, sounded 
conchshells and beat kettledrums, in this wa y 
worshiping the Lord.  (6 -7) Jāmbav ān, king of 
the bears, also joined in the ceremony. Sound-
ing his bugle in all directions, he declared a 
great festival for Lord V āmanadeva’s victory.  
(8)  

When the demoniac followers of Mah ārāja 
Bali saw that their master, who had been deter-
mined in  performing sacrifice, had lost all his 
possessions to V āmanadeva, who had taken 
them away on the plea of begging three paces 
of land, they were very angry and spoke as fol-
lows.  (9) “This V āmana is certainly not a 
brāhmaṇa but the best of cheaters, Lord V iṣṇu. 
Assuming the form of a br āhmaṇa, He has cov-
ered His own form, and thus He is working for 
the interests of the demigods.  (10) “Our lord, 
Bali Mah ārāja, because of his position in per-
forming the yajña, has given up the power to 
punish. Taking advantag e of this, our eternal 
enemy, Vi ṣṇu, dressed in the form of a brah-
macārī beggar, has taken away all his posses-
sions.  (11) “Our lord, Bali Mah ārāja, is always 
fixed in truthfulness, and this is especially so at 
present, since he has been initiated into per-
forming a sacrifice. He is always kind and mer-
ciful toward the br āhmaṇas, and he cannot at 
any time speak lies.  (12) “Therefore it is our 
duty to kill this V āmanadeva, Lord Vi ṣṇu. It is 
our religious principle and the way to serve our 
master.” After makin g this decision, the demo-
niac followers of Mah ārāja Bali took up their 
various weapons with a view to killing V āma-
nadeva.  (13) O King, the demons, aggravated 
by their usual anger, took their lances and tri-
dents in hand, and against the will of Bali 
Mahārāja they pushed forward to kill Lord 
Vāmanadeva.  (14) O King, when the associ-
ates of Lord Vi ṣṇu saw the soldiers of the de-
mons coming forward in violence, they smiled. Taking up their weapons, they forbade the de-
mons to continue their attempt.  (15) Nanda,  
Sunanda, Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, Bala, Kumuda, 
Kumud ākṣa, Vi ṣvaksena, Patattrir āṭ [Garu ḍa], 
Jayanta, Śrutadeva, Pu ṣpadanta and S ātvata 
were all associates of Lord Vi ṣṇu. They were 
as powerful as ten thousand elephants, and now 
they began killing the soldie rs of the demons.  
(16-17) When Bali Mah ārāja saw that his own 
soldiers were being killed by the associates of 
Lord Vi ṣṇu, he remembered the curse of 
Śukrācārya and forbade his soldiers to continue 
fighting.  (18) O Vipracitti, O R āhu, O Nemi, 
please hear my words! Don’t fight. Stop imme-
diately, for the present time is not in our favor.  
(19) O Daityas, by human efforts no one can 
supersede the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who can bring happiness and distress to 
all living entities.  (20) The supreme tim e fac-
tor, which represents the Supreme Person, was 
previously in our favor and not in favor of the 
demigods, but now that same time factor is 
against us.  (21) No one can surpass the time 
representation of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead by material pow er, by the counsel of 
ministers, by intelligence, by diplomacy, by 
fortresses, by mystic mantras, by drugs, by 
herbs or by any other means.  (22) Previously, 
being empowered by providence, you defeated 
a great number of such followers of Lord 
Viṣṇu. But to day those same followers, having 
defeated us, are roaring in jubilation like lions.  
(23) Unless providence is in our favor, we shall 
not be able to gain victory. Therefore we must 
wait for that favorable time when our defeating 
them will be possible.  (24 )  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: O King, in 
accordance with the order of their master, Bali 
Mahārāja, all the chiefs of the demons and the 
Daityas entered the lower regions of the uni-
verse, to which they were driven by the soldiers 
of Vi ṣṇu.  (25) Thereafter, o n the day of soma -
pāna, after the sacrifice was finished, Garu ḍa, 
king of the birds, understanding the desire of 
his master, arrested Bali Mah ārāja with the 
ropes of Varu ṇa.  (26) When Bali Mah ārāja was 
thus arrested by Lord Vi ṣṇu, who is the most 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

516 
 powerful , there was a great roar of lamentation 
in all directions throughout the upper and lower 
planetary systems of the universe.  (27) O King, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, V āmana-
deva, then spoke to Bali Mah ārāja, the most lib-
eral and celebrated personali ty whom He had 
arrested with the ropes of Varu ṇa. Bali 
Mahārāja had lost all bodily luster, but he was 
nonetheless fixed in his determination.  (28) O 
King of the demons, you have promised to give 
Me three steps of land, but I have occupied the 
entire univ erse with two steps. Now think about 
where I should put My third.  (29) As far as the 
sun and moon shine with the stars and as far as 
the clouds pour rain, all the land throughout the 
universe is in your possession.  (30) Of these 
possessions, with one ste p I have occupied 
Bhūrloka, and with My body I have occupied 
the entire sky and all directions. And in your 
presence, with My second step, I have occupied 
the upper planetary system.  (31) Because you 
have been unable to give charity according to 
your promise, the rule is tha t you should go 
down to live in the hellish planets. Therefore, 
in accordance with the order of Śukrācārya, 
your spiritual master, now go down and live 
there.  (32) Far from being elevated to the heav-
enly planets or fulfilling one’s desire, one who 
does no t properly give a beggar what he has 
promised falls down to a hellish condition of 
life.  (33) Being falsely proud of your posses-
sions, you promised to give Me land, but you 
could not fulfill your promise. Therefore, be-
cause your promise was false, you mus t live for 
a few years in hellish life.  (34)  

SB 8.22: Bali Mah ārāja Surrenders His Life  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King, although 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead was su-
perficially seen to have acted mischievously to-
ward Bali Mah ārāja, Bali Mah ārāja was fixed 
in his determination. Considering himself not 
to have ful filled his promise, he spoke as fol-
lows.  (1)  

Bali Mah ārāja said: O best Personality of Godhead, most worshipable for all the demi-
gods, if You think that my promise has become 
false, I shall certainly rectify matters to make it 
truthful. I cannot allow m y promise to be false. 
Please, therefore, place Your third lotus foot-
step on my head.  (2) I do not fear being de-
prived of all my possessions, living in hellish 
life, being arrested for poverty by the ropes of 
Varu ṇa or being punished by You as much as I 
fear defamation.  (3) Although a father, mother, 
brother or friend may sometimes punish one as 
a well -wisher, they never punish their subordi-
nate like this. But because You are the most 
worshipable Lord, I regard the punishment You 
have given me as most exa lted.  (4) Since Your 
Lordship is indirectly the greatest well -wisher 
of us demons, You act for our best welfare by 
posing as if our enemy. Because demons like us 
always aspire for a position of false prestige, by 
chastising us You give us the eyes by whic h to 
see the right path.  (5) Many demons who were 
continuously inimical toward You finally 
achieved the perfection of great mystic yog īs. 
Your Lordship can perform one work to serve 
many purposes, and consequently, although 
You have punished me in many wa ys, I do not 
feel ashamed of having been arrested by the 
ropes of Varu ṇa, nor do I feel aggrieved.  (6 -7) 
My grandfather Prahl āda Mah ārāja is famous, 
being recognized by all Your devotees. Alt-
hough harassed in many ways by his father, 
Hiraṇyaka śipu, he sti ll remained faithful, tak-
ing shelter at Your lotus feet.  (8) What is the 
use of the material body, which automatically 
leaves its owner at the end of life? And what is 
the use of all one’s family members, who are 
actually plunderers taking away money that  is 
useful for the service of the Lord in spiritual 
opulence? What is the use of a wife? She is only 
the source of increasing material conditions. 
And what is the use of family, home, country 
and community? Attachment for them merely 
wastes the valuable en ergy of one’s lifetime.  
(9) My grandfather, the best of all men, who 
achieved unlimited knowledge and was wor-
shipable for everyone, was afraid of the com-
mon men in this world. Being fully convinced 
of the substantiality afforded by shelter at Your 
lotus f eet, He took shelter of Your lotus feet, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

517 
 against the will of his father and demoniac 
friends, who were killed by Your own self.  
(10) Only by providence have I been forcibly 
brought under Your lotus feet and deprived of 
all my opulence. Because of the illu sion created 
by temporary opulence, people in general, who 
live under material conditions, facing acci-
dental death at every moment, do not under-
stand that this life is temporary. Only by provi-
dence have I been saved from that condition.  
(11)  

Śukadeva Go svāmī said: O best of the Ku-
rus, while Bali Mah ārāja was describing his 
fortunate position in this way, the most dear 
devotee of the Lord, Prahl āda Mah ārāja, ap-
peared there, like the moon rising in the 
nighttime.  (12) Then Bali Mah ārāja saw his 
grandfathe r Prahl āda Mah ārāja, the most fortu-
nate personality, whose dark body resembled 
black ointment for the eyes. His tall, elegant 
figure was dressed in yellow garments, he had 
long arms, and his beautiful eyes were like the 
petals of a lotus. He was very dear and pleasing 
to everyone.  (13) Being bound by the ropes of 
Varu ṇa, Bali Mah ārāja could not offer befitting 
respect to Prahl āda Mah ārāja as he had before. 
Rather, he simply offered respectful obeisances 
with his head, his eyes being inundated with 
tears an d his face lowered in shame.  (14) When 
the great personality Prahl āda Mah ārāja saw 
that the Supreme Lord was sitting there, sur-
rounded and worshiped by His intimate associ-
ates like Sunanda, he was overwhelmed with 
tears of jubilation. Approaching the Lord  and 
falling to the ground, he offered obeisances to 
the Lord with his head.  (15)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja said: My Lord, it is Your 
Lordship who gave this Bali the very great op-
ulence of the post of heavenly king, and now, 
today, it is You who have taken it a ll away. I 
think You have acted with equal beauty in both 
ways. Because his exalted position as King of 
heaven was putting him in the darkness of ig-
norance, You have done him a very merciful 
favor by taking away all his opulence.  (16) Ma-
terial opulence is  so bewildering that it makes even a learned, self -controlled man forget to 
search for the goal of self -realization. But the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, N ārāyaṇa, 
the Lord of the universe, can see everything by 
His will. Therefore I offer my respectful obei-
sances unto Him.  (17)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: O King 
Parīkṣit, Lord Brahm ā then began to speak to 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, within 
the h earing of Prahl āda Mah ārāja, who stood 
nearby with folded hands.  (18) But Bali 
Mahārāja’s chaste wife, afraid and aggrieved at 
seeing her husband arrested, immediately of-
fered obeisances to Lord V āmanadeva [Upen-
dra]. She folded her hands and spoke as fol-
lows.  (19)  

Śrīmatī Vindhy āvali said: O my Lord, You 
have created the entire universe for the enjoy-
ment of Your personal pastimes, but foolish, 
unintelligent men have claimed proprietorship 
for material enjoyment. Certainly they are 
shameless agnostics. F alsely claiming proprie-
torship, they think they can give charity and en-
joy. In such a condition, what good can they do 
for You, who are the independent creator, 
maintainer and annihilator of this universe?  
(20)  

Lord Brahm ā said: O well -wisher and mas-
ter of all living entities, O worshipable Deity of 
all the demigods, O all -pervading Personality 
of Godhead, now this man has been sufficiently 
punished, for You have taken everything. Now 
You can release him. He does not deserve to be 
punished more.  (21) Ba li Mah ārāja had already 
offered everything to Your Lordship. Without 
hesitation, he has offered his land, the planets 
and whatever else he earned by his pious activ-
ities, including even his own body.  (22) By of-
fering even water, newly grown grass, or 
flower bud s at Your lotus feet, those who main-
tain no mental duplicity can achieve the most 
exalted position within the spiritual world. This 
Bali Mah ārāja, without duplicity, has now of-
fered everything in the three worlds. How then 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

518 
 can he deserve to suffer from arr est?  (23)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
My dear Lord Brahm ā, because of material op-
ulence a foolish person becomes dull -witted 
and mad. Thus he has no respect for anyone 
within the three worlds and defies even My au-
thority. To such a person I  show special favor 
by first taking away all his possessions.  (24) 
While rotating in the cycle of birth and death 
again and again in different species because of 
his own fruitive activities, the dependent living 
entity, by good fortune, may happen to beco me 
a human being. This human birth is very rarely 
obtained.  (25) If a human being is born in an 
aristocratic family or a higher status of life, if 
he performs wonderful activities, if he is youth-
ful, if he has personal beauty, a good education 
and good we alth, and if he is nonetheless not 
proud of his opulences, it is to be understood 
that he is especially favored by the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead.  (26) Although aristo-
cratic birth and other such opulences are im-
pediments to advancement in devotional s er-
vice because they are causes of false prestige 
and pride, these opulences never disturb a pure 
devotee of the Supreme Personality of God-
head.  (27) Bali Mah ārāja has become the most 
famous among the demons and nonbelievers, 
for in spite of being bereft of all material opu-
lences, he is fixed in his devotional service.  
(28) Although bereft of his riches, fallen from 
his original position, defeated and arrested  by 
his enemies, rebuked and deserted by his rela-
tives and friends, although suffering the pain of 
being bound and although rebuked and cursed 
by his spiritual master, Bali Mah ārāja, being 
fixed in his vow, did not give up his truthful-
ness. It was certainl y with pretension that I 
spoke about religious principles, but he did not 
give up religious principles, for he is true to his 
word.  (29 -30) The Lord continued: Because of 
his great tolerance, I have given him a place not 
obtainable even by the demigods. H e will be-
come King of the heavenly planets during the 
period of the Manu known as S āvarṇi.  (31) Un-
til Bali Mah ārāja achieves the position of King 
of heaven, he shall live on the planet Sutala, which was made by Vi śvakarm ā according to 
My order. Because it is especially protected by 
Me, it is free from mental and bodily miseries, 
fatigue , dizziness, defeat and all other disturb-
ances. Bali Mah ārāja, you may now go live 
there peacefully.  (32) O Bali Mah ārāja [In-
drasena], now you may go to the planet Sutala, 
which is desired even by the demigods. Live 
there peacefully, surrounded by your fr iends 
and relatives. All good fortune unto you.  (33) 
On the planet Sutala, not even the predominat-
ing deities of other planets, what to speak of or-
dinary people, will be able to conquer you. As 
far as the demons are concerned, if they trans-
gress your rule , My disc will kill them.  (34) O 
great hero, I shall always be with you and give 
you protection in all respects along with your 
associates and paraphernalia. Moreover, you 
will always be able to see Me there.  (35) Be-
cause there you will see My supreme pr owess, 
your materialistic ideas and anxieties that have 
arisen from your association with the demons 
and D ānavas will immediately be vanquished.  
(36)  

SB 8.23: The Demigods Regain the Heav-
enly Planets  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: When the supreme, 
ancient, et ernal Personality of Godhead had 
thus spoken to Bali Mah ārāja, who is univer-
sally accepted as a pure devotee of the Lord and 
therefore a great soul, Bali Mah ārāja, his eyes 
filled with tears, his hands folded and his voice 
faltering in devotional ecstasy, responded as 
follows.  (1)  

Bali Mah ārāja said: What a wonderful effect 
there is in even attempting to offer respectful 
obeisances to You! I merely endeavored to of-
fer You obeisances, but nonetheless the attempt 
was as successful as those of pure devotees . 
The causeless mercy You have shown to me, a 
fallen demon, was never achieved even by the 
demigods or the leaders of the various planets.  
(2)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

519 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: After speak-
ing in this way, Bali Mah ārāja offered his obei-
sances first to the Supr eme Personality of God-
head, Hari, and then to Lord Brahm ā and Lord 
Śiva. Thus he was released from the bondage 
of the n āga-pāśa [the ropes of Varu ṇa], and in 
full satisfaction he entered the planet known as 
Sutala.  (3) Thus having delivered the proprie-
torship of the heavenly planets to Indra and 
having fulfilled the desire of Aditi, mother of 
the demigods, the Supreme Personality of God-
head ruled the affairs of the universe.  (4) When 
Prahl āda Mah ārāja heard how Bali Mah ārāja, 
his grandson and descendant, had been released 
from bondage and had achieved the benediction 
of the Lord, he spoke as follows in a tone of 
greatly ecstatic devotion.  (5)  

Prahl āda Mah ārāja said: O Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, You are universally wor-
shiped; even Lord Brahm ā and Lo rd Śiva wor-
ship Your lotus feet. Yet although You are such 
a great personality, You have kindly promised 
to protect us, the demons. I think that such 
kindness has never been achieved even by Lord 
Brahm ā, Lord Śiva or the goddess of fortune, 
Lakṣmī, what to  speak of other demigods or 
common people.  (6) O supreme shelter of eve-
ryone, great personalities like Brahm ā enjoy 
their perfection simply by tasting the honey of 
rendering service at Your lotus feet. But as for 
us, who are all rogues and debauchees born  of 
an envious family of demons, how have we re-
ceived Your mercy? It has been possible only 
because Your mercy is causeless.  (7) O my 
Lord, Your pastimes are all wonderfully per-
formed by Your inconceivable spiritual energy; 
and by her perverted reflection , the material en-
ergy, You have created all the universes. As the 
Supersoul of all living entities, You are aware 
of everything, and therefore You are certainly 
equal toward everyone. Nonetheless, You favor 
Your devotees. This is not partiality, however, 
for Your characteristic is just like that of a de-
sire tree, which yields everything according to 
one’s desire.  (8)  
 The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
My dear son Prahl āda, all good fortune unto 
you. For the time being, please go to the place 
known as Sutala and there enjoy happiness with 
your grandson and your other relatives and 
friends.  (9) The Supreme Personality of God-
head assured Prahl āda Mah ārāja: You shall be 
able to see Me there in My usual feature with 
conchshell, disc, club and lotus in M y hand. 
Because of your transcendental bliss due to al-
ways personally seeing Me, you will have no 
further bondage to fruitive activities.  (10)  

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Accompanied 
by Bali Mah ārāja, my dear King Par īkṣit, Prah-
lāda Mah ārāja, the maste r of all the chiefs of 
the demons, took the Supreme Lord’s order on 
his head with folded hands. After saying yes to 
the Lord, circumambulating Him and offering 
Him respectful obeisances, he entered the 
lower planetary system known as Sutala.  (11 -
12) Hari,  the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāyaṇa, thereafter addressed Śukrācārya, 
who was sitting nearby in the midst of the as-
sembly with the priests [brahma, hot ā, 
udgātāand adhvaryu]. O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, 
these priests were all brahma -vādīs, followers 
of the Vedic principles for performing sa cri-
fices.  (13) O best of the br āhmaṇas, 
Śukrācārya, please describe the fault or dis-
crepancy in your disciple Bali Mah ārāja, who 
engaged in performing sacrifices. This fault 
will be nullified when judged in the presence of 
qualified br āhmaṇas.  (14)  

Śukrācārya said: My Lord, You are the en-
joyer and lawgiver in all performances of sac-
rifice, and You are the yajña -puruṣa, the person 
to whom all sacrifices are offered. If one has 
fully satisfied You, where is the chance of dis-
crepancies or faults in his per formances of sac-
rifice?  (15) There may be discrepancies in pro-
nouncing the mantras and observing the regu-
lative principles, and, moreover, there may be 
discrepancies in regard to time, place, person 
and paraphernalia. But when Your Lordship’s 
holy name is  chanted, everything becomes 
faultless.  (16) Lord Vi ṣṇu, I must nonetheless 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

520 
 act in obedience to Your order because obeying 
Your order is most auspicious and is the first 
duty of everyone.  (17)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: In this way, 
the most powerful Śukrācārya accepted the or-
der of the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
with full respect. Along with the best 
brāhmaṇas, he began to compensate for the dis-
crepancies in the sacrifices performed by Bali 
Mahārāja.  (18) O King Par īkṣit, thus having 
taken all th e land of Bali Mah ārāja by begging, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Vāmanadeva, delivered to His brother Indra all 
the land taken away by Indra’s enemy.  (19) 
Lord Brahm ā [the master of King Dak ṣa and all 
other Praj āpatis], accompanied by all the dem-
igods, the great saintly persons, the inhabitants 
of Pit ṛloka, the Manus, the munis, and such 
leaders as Dak ṣa, Bh ṛgu and A ṅgirā, as well as 
Kārttikeya and Lord Śiva, accepted Lord 
Vāmanadeva as the protector of everyone. He 
did this for the pleasure of  Kaśyapa Muni and 
his wife Aditi and for the welfare of all the in-
habitants of the universe, including their vari-
ous leaders.  (20 -21)  

O King Par īkṣit, Indra was considered the 
King of all the universe, but the demigods, 
headed by Lord Brahm ā, wanted Upe ndra, 
Lord V āmanadeva, as the protector of the Ve-
das, the principles of religion, fame, opulence, 
auspiciousness, vows, elevation to the higher 
planetary system, and liberation. Thus they ac-
cepted Upendra, Lord V āmanadeva, as the su-
preme master of everythi ng. This decision 
made all living entities extremely happy.  (22 -
23) Thereafter, along with all the leaders of the 
heavenly planets, Indra, the King of heaven, 
placed Lord V āmanadeva before him and, with 
the approval of Lord Brahm ā, brought Him to 
the heav enly planet in a celestial airplane.  (24) 
Indra, King of heaven, being protected by the 
arms of V āmanadeva, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, thus regained his rule of the three 
worlds and was reinstated in his own position, 
supremely opulent, fearless and fully satisfied.  
(25) Lord Brahm ā, Lord Śiva, Lord K ārttikeya, the great sage Bh ṛgu, other saintly persons, the 
inhabitants of Pit ṛloka and all other living enti-
ties present, including the inhabitants of Sid-
dhaloka and living entities who travel in ou ter 
space by airplane, all glorified the uncommon 
activities of Lord V āmanadeva. O King, while 
chanting about and glorifying the Lord, they re-
turned to their respective heavenly planets. 
They also praised the position of Aditi.  (26 -27)  

O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, pleasure of your dyn-
asty, I have now described to you everything 
about the wonderful activities of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead V āmanadeva. Those 
who hear about this are certainly freed from all 
the results of sinful activities.  (28) One who is 
subject to death cannot measure the glories of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Trivikrama, Lord Vi ṣṇu, any more than he can 
count the number of atoms on the entire planet 
earth. No one, whether born already or destined 
to take birth, is able to do this . This has been 
sung by the great sage Vasi ṣṭha.  (29) If one 
hears about the uncommon activities of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead in His various 
incarnations, he is certainly elevated to the 
higher planetary system or even brought back 
home, back to Godhead.  (30) Whenever the ac-
tivities of V āmanadeva are described in the 
course of a ritualistic ceremony, whether the 
ceremony be performed to please the demi-
gods, to please one’s forefathers in Pit ṛloka, or 
to celebrate a social event like a marriage, t hat 
ceremony should be understood to be ex-
tremely auspicious.  (31)  

SB 8.24: Matsya, the Lord’s Fish Incarna-
tion 

Mahārāja Par īkṣit said: The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Hari, is eternally situated 
in His transcendental position, yet He descends 
to this material world and manifests Himself in 
various incarnations. His first incarnation was 
that of a great fish. O most powerful Śukadeva 
Gosv āmī, I wish to hear from you the pastimes 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

521 
 of that fish incarnation.  (1) What was the pur-
pose for which the Supre me Personality of 
Godhead accepted the abominable form of a 
fish, exactly as an ordinary living being accepts 
different forms under the laws of karma? The 
form of a fish is certainly condemned and full 
of terrible pain. O my lord, what was the pur-
pose of t his incarnation? Kindly explain this to 
us, for hearing about the pastimes of the Lord 
is auspicious for everyone.  (2 -3)  

Sūta Gosv āmī said: When Par īkṣit Mah ārāja 
thus inquired from Śukadeva Gosv āmī, that 
most powerful saintly person began describing 
the pastimes of the Lord’s incarnation as a fish.  
(4)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King, for the 
sake of protecting the cows,  brāhmaṇas, demi-
gods, devotees, the Vedic literature, religious 
principles, and principles to fulfill the purpose 
of life, the Supreme Personality of Godhead ac-
cepts the forms of incarnations.  (5) Like the air 
passing through different types of atmosphere , 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although 
appearing sometimes as a human being and 
sometimes as a lower animal, is always tran-
scendental. Because He is above the material 
modes of nature, He is unaffected by higher and 
lower forms.  (6) O King Par īkṣit, at the end of 
the past millennium, at the end of Brahm ā’s 
day, because Lord Brahm ā sleeps during the 
night, annihilation took place, and the three 
worlds were covered by the water of the ocean.  
(7) At the end of Brahm ā’s day, when Brahm ā 
felt sleepy an d desired to lie down, the Vedas 
were emanating from his mouth, and the great 
demon named Hayagr īva stole the Vedic 
knowledge.  (8) Understanding the acts of the 
great demon Hayagr īva, the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, Hari, who is full of all opu-
lences,  assumed the form of a fish and saved 
the Vedas by killing the demon.  (9)  

During the C ākṣuṣa-manvantara there was a 
great king named Satyavrata who was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Satyavrata performed austerities by sub-
sisting  only on water.  (10) In this [the present] 
millennium King Satyavrata later became the 
son of Vivasv ān, the king of the sun planet, and 
was known as Śrāddhadeva. By the mercy of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was 
given the post of Manu.  (11) One day while 
King Satyavrata was performing austerities by 
offering water on the bank of the river 
Kṛtamālā, a small fish appeared in the water in 
his palms.  (12) Satyavrata, the King of Dra-
viḍadeśa, threw the fish into the water of the 
river along with the water in his palm, O King 
Parīkṣit, descendant of Bharata.  (13) With an 
appealing voice, the poor small fish said to 
King Satyavrata, who was very merciful: My 
dear King, protector of the poor, why are you 
throwing Me in the water of the river, where 
there are other aquatics who can kill Me? I am 
very much afraid of them.  (14) To please him-
self, King Satyavrata, not knowing that the fish 
was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, de-
cided with great pleasure to give the fish pro-
tection.  (15) The merciful Kin g, being moved 
by the pitiable words of the fish, placed the fish 
in a water jug and brought Him to his own res-
idence.  (16) But in one night that fish grew so 
much that He could not move His body com-
fortably in the water of the pot. He then spoke 
to the K ing as follows.  (17) O My dear King, I 
do not like living in this waterpot with such 
great difficulty. Therefore, please find some 
better reservoir of water where I can live com-
fortably.  (18) Then, taking the fish out of the 
waterpot, the King threw Him in a large well. 
But within a moment the fish developed to the 
length of three cubits.  (19) The fish then said: 
My dear King, this reservoir of water is not fit 
for My happy residence. Please give Me a more 
extensive pool of water, for I have taken shelte r 
of you.  (20) O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, the King took 
the fish from the well and threw Him in a lake, 
but the fish then assumed a gigantic form ex-
ceeding the extent of the water.  (21) The fish 
then said: O King, I am a large aquatic, and this 
water is not at  all suitable for Me. Now kindly 
find some way to save Me. It would be better to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

522 
 put Me in the water of a lake that will never re-
duce.  (22) When thus requested, King 
Satyavrata took the fish to the largest reservoir 
of water. But when that also proved ins uffi-
cient, the King at last threw the gigantic fish 
into the ocean.  (23) While being thrown in the 
ocean, the fish said to King Satyavrata: O hero, 
in this water there are very powerful and dan-
gerous sharks that will eat Me. Therefore you 
should not throw  Me in this place.  (24)  

After hearing these sweet words from the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of 
a fish, the King, being bewildered, asked Him: 
Who are You, sir? You simply bewilder us.  
(25) My Lord, in one day You have expanded 
Yourself for hundreds of miles, covering the 
water of the river and the ocean. Before this I 
had never seen or heard of such an aquatic ani-
mal.  (26) My Lord, You are certainly the inex-
haustible Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Hari. It is to show Your mercy to 
the living entities that You have now assumed 
the form of an aquatic.  (27) O my Lord, master 
of creation, maintenance and annihilation, O 
best of enjoyers, Lord Vi ṣṇu, You are the leader 
and destination of su rrendered devotees like us. 
Therefore let me offer my respectful obeisances 
unto You.  (28) All Your pastimes and incarna-
tions certainly appear for the welfare of all liv-
ing entities. Therefore, my Lord, I wish to 
know the purpose for which You have assume d 
this form of a fish.  (29) O my Lord, possessing 
eyes like the petals of a lotus, the worship of the 
demigods, who are in the bodily concept of life, 
is fruitless in all respects. But because You are 
the supreme friend and dearmost Supersoul of 
everyone,  worship of Your lotus feet is never 
useless. You have therefore manifested Your 
form as a fish.  (30)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: When King 
Satyavrata spoke in this way, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who at the end of the yuga 
had assumed the form of a  fish to benefit His 
devotee and enjoy His pastimes in the water of 
inundation, responded as follows.  (31) The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead said: O King, who can subdue your enemies, on the seventh 
day from today the three worldsBh ūḥ, Bhuva ḥ 
and Sva ḥwill all merge into the water of inun-
dation.  (32) When all the three worlds merge 
into the water, a large boat sent by Me will ap-
pear before you.  (33) Thereafter, O King, you 
shall collect all types of herbs and seeds and 
load them on that great boat. Then,  accompa-
nied by the seven ṛṣis and surrounded by all 
kinds of living entities, you shall get aboard 
that boat, and without moroseness you shall 
easily travel with your companions on the 
ocean of inundation, the only illumination be-
ing the effulgence of the  great ṛṣis.  (34 -35) 
Then, as the boat is tossed about by the power-
ful winds, attach the vessel to My horn by 
means of the great serpent V āsuki, for I shall be 
present by your side.  (36) Pulling the boat, 
with you and all the ṛṣis in it, O King, I shall 
travel in the water of devastation until the night 
of Lord Brahm ā’s slumber is over.  (37) You 
will be thoroughly advised and favored by Me, 
and because of your inquiries, everything about 
My glories, which are known as para ṁ brahma, 
will be manifest withi n your heart. Thus you 
will know everything about Me.  (38) After 
thus instructing the King, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead immediately disappeared. 
Then King Satyavrata began to wait for that 
time of which the Lord had instructed.  (39) Af-
ter spreadin g ku śa with its tips pointing east, 
the saintly King, himself facing the northeast, 
sat down on the grass and began to meditate 
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Viṣṇu, who had assumed the form of a fish.  
(40) Thereafter, gigantic clouds pouring inces-
sant water swelled the ocean more and more. 
Thus the ocean began to overflow onto the land 
and inundate the entire world.  (41) As 
Satyavrata remembered the order of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, he saw a boat 
coming near him. Thus he collected herbs and 
creepers, and, accompanied by saintly 
brāhmaṇas, he got aboard the boat.  (42) The 
saintly br āhmaṇas, being pleased with the 
King, said to him: O King, please meditate 
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Keśava. He will save us from this impending 
danger and arrange for our well -being.  (43 ) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

523 
 Then, while the King constantly meditated 
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a 
large golden fish appeared in the ocean of inun-
dation. The fish had one horn and was eight 
million miles long.  (44) Following the instruc-
tions formerly given by the Sup reme Personal-
ity of Godhead, the King anchored the boat to 
the fish’s horn, using the serpent V āsuki as a 
rope. Thus being satisfied, he began offering 
prayers to the Lord.  (45)  

The King said: By the grace of the Lord, 
those who have lost their self -knowledge since 
time immemorial, and who because of this ig-
norance are involved in a material, con ditional 
life full of miseries, obtain the chance to meet 
the Lord’s devotee. I accept that Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead as the supreme spiritual 
master.  (46) In hopes of becoming happy in 
this material world, the foolish conditioned 
soul performs fruit ive activities that result only 
in suffering. But by rendering service to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, one becomes 
free from such false desires for happiness. May 
my supreme spiritual master cut the knot of 
false desires from the core of my heart.  (47) 
One who wants to be free of material entangle-
ment should take to the service of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead and give up the con-
tamination of ignorance, involving pious and 
impious activities. Thus one regains his origi-
nal identity, just as a bl ock of gold or silver 
sheds all dirt and becomes purified when 
treated with fire. May that inexhaustible Su-
preme Personality of Godhead become our 
spiritual master, for He is the original spiritual 
master of all other spiritual masters.  (48) Nei-
ther all t he demigods, nor the so -called gurus 
nor all other people, either independently or to-
gether, can offer mercy that equals even one 
ten-thousandth of Yours. Therefore I wish to 
take shelter of Your lotus feet.  (49) As a blind 
man, being unable to see, accep ts another blind 
man as his leader, people who do not know the 
goal of life accept someone as a guru who is a 
rascal and a fool. But we are interested in self -
realization. Therefore we accept You, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, as our spiritual master , for You are able to see in all directions 
and are omniscient like the sun.  (50) A materi-
alistic so -called guru instructs his materialistic 
disciples about economic development and 
sense gratification, and because of such instruc-
tions the foolish discipl es continue in the mate-
rialistic existence of ignorance. But Your Lord-
ship gives knowledge that is eternal, and the in-
telligent person receiving such knowledge is 
quickly situated in his original constitutional 
position.  (51) My Lord, You are the supreme 
well-wishing friend of everyone, the dearmost 
friend, the controller, the Supersoul, the su-
preme instructor and the giver of supreme 
knowledge and the fulfillment of all desires. 
But although You are within the heart, the fool-
ish, because of lusty desires in the heart, cannot 
understand You.  (52) O Supreme Lord, for 
self-realization I surrender unto You, who are 
worshiped by the demigods as the supreme 
controller of everything. By Your instructions, 
exposing life’s purpose, kindly cut the knot 
from the cor e of my heart and let me know the 
destination of my life.  (53)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: When 
Satyavrata had thus prayed to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who had assumed the 
form of a fish, the Lord, while moving in the 
water of inundation, expl ained to him the Ab-
solute Truth.  (54) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead thus explained to King Satyavrata the 
spiritual science known as s āṅkhya -yoga, the 
science by which one distinguishes between 
matter and spirit [in other words, bhakti -yoga], 
along w ith the instructions contained in the 
Purāṇas [the old histories] and the sa ṁhitās. 
The Lord explained Himself in all these litera-
tures.  (55) While sitting in the boat, King 
Satyavrata, accompanied by the great saintly 
persons, listened to the instruction s of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead in regard to self -
realization. These instructions were all from the 
eternal Vedic literature [brahma]. Thus the 
King and sages had no doubt about the Abso-
lute Truth.  (56) At the end of the last inunda-
tion [during th e period of Sv āyambhuva Manu] 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead killed the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

524 
 demon named Hayagr īva and delivered all the 
Vedic literatures to Lord Brahm ā when Lord 
Brahm ā awakened from sleeping.  (57) King 
Satyavrata was illuminated with all Vedic 
knowledge by the mercy of Lord Vi ṣṇu, and in 
this period he has now taken birth as 
Vaivasvata Manu, the son of the sun -god.  (58) 
This story concerning the great King Satyavrata 
and the fish incarnation of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, is a great transcenden-
tal narr ation. Anyone who hears it is delivered 
from the reactions of sinful life.  (59) One who 
narrates this description of the Matsya incarna-
tion and King Satyavrata will certainly have all 
his ambitions fulfilled, and he will undoubtedly 
return home, back to G odhead.  (60) I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who pretended to be a gi-
gantic fish, who restored the Vedic literature to 
Lord Brahm ā when Lord Brahm ā awakened 
from sleep, and who explained the essence of 
Vedic literature to King Satyavrata and the 
great saintly persons.  (61)  

SB 9.1: King Sudyumna Becomes a Woman  

King Par īkṣit said: My lord, Śukadeva 
Gosv āmī, you have elaborately d escribed all 
the periods of the various Manus and, within 
those periods, the wonderful activities of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has un-
limited potency. I am fortunate to have heard 
all of this from you.  (1) Satyavrata, the saintly 
king of Drav iḍadeśa who received spiritual 
knowledge at the end of the last millennium by 
the grace of the Supreme, later became 
Vaivasvata Manu, the son of Vivasv ān, in the 
next manvantara [period of Manu]. I have re-
ceived this knowledge from you. I also under-
stand t hat such kings as Ik ṣvāku were his sons, 
as you have already explained.  (2 -3) O greatly 
fortunate Śukadeva Gosv āmī, O great 
brāhmaṇa, kindly describe to us separately the 
dynasties and characteristics of all those kings, 
for we are always eager to hear su ch topics 
from you.  (4) Kindly tell us about the abilities 
of all the celebrated kings born in the dynasty 
of Vaivasvata Manu, including those who have already passed, those who may appear in the fu-
ture, and those who exist at present.  (5)  

Sūta Gosv āmī said: When Śukadeva 
Gosv āmī, the greatest knower of religious prin-
ciples, was thus requested by Mah ārāja Par īkṣit 
in the assembly of all the scholars learned in 
Vedic knowledge, he then proceeded to speak.  
(6)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: O King, sub-
duer of your enemies, now hear from me in 
great detail about the dynasty of Manu. I shall 
explain as much as possible, although one 
could not say everything about it, even in hun-
dreds of years.  (7) The transcendental Supreme 
Person, the Supersoul of all livi ng entities, who 
are in different statuses of life, high and low, 
existed at the end of the millennium, when nei-
ther this manifested cosmos nor anything else 
but Him existed.  (8) O King Par īkṣit, from the 
navel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
was generated a golden lotus, on which the 
four-faced Lord Brahm ā took his birth.  (9) 
From the mind of Lord Brahm ā, Mar īci took 
birth, from the semen of Mar īci, Ka śyapa ap-
peared, and from Ka śyapa , by the womb of 
Dakṣa’s daughter Aditi, Vivasv ān took birth.  
(10) O King, best of the Bh ārata dynasty, from 
Vivasv ān, by the womb of Sa ṁjñā, Śrād-
dhadeva Manu was born. Śrāddhadeva Manu, 
having conquered his senses, begot ten sons in 
the womb of his wife,  Śraddh ā. The names of 
these sons were Ik ṣvāku, N ṛga, Śaryāti, Di ṣṭa, 
Dhṛṣṭa, Kar ūṣaka, Nari ṣyanta, P ṛṣadhra, 
Nabhaga and Kavi.  (11 -12)  

Manu at first had no sons. Therefore, in or-
der to get a son for him, the great saint Vasi ṣṭha, 
who was very powerful in spiritual knowledge, 
performed a sacrifice to satisfy the demigods 
Mitra and Varu ṇa.  (13) During that sacrifice, 
Śraddh ā, Manu’s wife, who was observing the 
vow of subsisting only by drinking milk, ap-
proached the priest offering the sacrifice, of-
fered obeisances to him and begged for a 
daughter.  (14) Told by the chief priest “Now 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

525 
 offer oblations,” the person in charge of obla-
tions took clarified butter to offer. He then re-
membered the request of Manu’s wife and per-
formed the sacrifice while chanting th e word 
“vaṣaṭ.”  (15) Manu had begun that sacrifice for 
the sake of getting a son, but because the priest 
was diverted by the request of Manu’s wife, a 
daughter named Il ā was born. Upon seeing the 
daughter, Manu was not very satisfied. Thus he 
spoke to his  guru, Vasi ṣṭha, as follows.  (16) 
My lord, all of you are expert in chanting the 
Vedic mantras. How then has the result been 
opposite to the one desired? This is a matter for 
lamentation. There should not have been such 
a reversal of the results of the Ve dic mantras.  
(17) You are all self -controlled, well balanced 
in mind, and aware of the Absolute Truth. And 
because of austerities and penances you are 
completely cleansed of all material contamina-
tion. Your words, like those of the demigods, 
are never baf fled. Then how is it possible that 
your determination has failed?  (18)  

The most powerful grea t-grandfather Va-
siṣṭha, after hearing these words of Manu, un-
derstood the discrepancy on the part of the 
priest. Thus he spoke as follows to the son of 
the sun -god.  (19) This discrepancy in the ob-
jective is due to your priest’s deviation from the 
original  purpose. However, by my own prow-
ess I shall give you a good son.  (20)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King Par īkṣit, 
after the most famous and powerful Vasi ṣṭha 
made this decision, he offered prayers to the 
Supreme Person, Vi ṣṇu, to transform Il ā into a 
male.   (21) The Supreme Personality of God-
head, the supreme controller, being pleased 
with Vasi ṣṭha, gave him the benediction he de-
sired. Thus Il ā was transformed into a very fine 
male named Sudyumna.  (22)  

O King Par īkṣit, that hero Sudyumna, ac-
companied by a few ministers and associates 
and riding on a horse brought from Sindhupra-
deśa, once went into the forest to hunt. He wore armor and was decorated with bows and ar-
rows, and he was very beautiful. While follow-
ing the animals and killing them, he reached th e 
northern part of the forest.  (23 -24) There in the 
north, at the bottom of Mount Meru, is a forest 
known as Sukum āra where Lord Śiva always 
enjoys with Um ā. Sudyumna entered that for-
est.  (25) O King Par īkṣit, as soon as 
Sudyumna, who was expert in subdu ing ene-
mies, entered the forest, he saw himself trans-
formed into a female and his horse transformed 
into a mare.  (26) When his followers also saw 
their identities transformed and their sex re-
versed, they were all very morose and just 
looked at one another .  (27)  

Mahārāja Par īkṣit said: O most powerful 
brāhmaṇa, why was this place so empowered, 
and who made it so powerful? Kindly answer 
this question, for I am very eager to hear about 
this.  (28)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī answered: Great saintly 
persons who strictly observed  the spiritual rules 
and regulations and whose own effulgence dis-
sipated all the darkness of all directions once 
came to see Lord Śiva in that forest.  (29) When 
the goddess Ambik ā saw the great saintly per-
sons, she was very much ashamed because at 
that ti me she was naked. She immediately got 
up from the lap of her husband and tried to 
cover her breast.  (30)  

Seeing Lord Śiva and P ārvatī engaged in 
sexual affairs, all the great saintly persons im-
mediately desisted from going further and de-
parted for the āśrama of Nara -Nārāyaṇa.  (31) 
Thereupon, just to please his wife, Lord Śiva 
said, “Any male entering this place shall imme-
diately become a female!”  (32) Since that time, 
no male had entered that forest. But now King 
Sudyumna, having been transformed into a fe-
male, began to walk with his associates from 
one forest to another.  (33)  

Sudyumna had been transformed into the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

526 
 best of beautiful women who excite sexual de-
sire and was surrounded by other women. Upon 
seeing this beautiful woman loitering near his 
āśrama, Budha, the son of the moon, immedi-
ately desired to enjoy her.  (34) The beautiful 
woman also desired to accept Budha, the son of 
the king of the moon, as her husband. Thus 
Budha begot in her womb a son named 
Purūravā.  (35) I heard from reliable sou rces 
that King Sudyumna, the son of Manu, having 
thus achieved femininity, remembered his fa-
milial spiritual master, Vasi ṣṭha.  (36)  

Upon seeing Sudyumna’s deplorable condi-
tion, Vasi ṣṭha was very much aggrieved. Desir-
ing for Sudyumna to regain his malene ss, Va-
siṣṭha again began to worship Lord Śaṅkara 
[Śiva].  (37) O King Par īkṣit, Lord Śiva was 
pleased with Vasi ṣṭha. Therefore, to satisfy him 
and to keep his own word to P ārvatī, Lord Śiva 
said to that saintly person, “Your disciple 
Sudyumna may remain a male for one month 
and a female for the next. In this way he may 
rule the world as he likes.”  (38 -39)  

Thus being favored by the spiritual master, 
according to the words of Lord Śiva, Sudyumna 
regained his desired maleness every alternate 
month and in th is way ruled the kingdom, alt-
hough the citizens were not satisfied with this.  
(40) O King, Sudyumna had three very pious 
sons, named Utkala, Gaya and Vimala, who be-
came the kings of the Dak ṣiṇā-patha.  (41) 
Thereafter, when the time was ripe, when 
Sudyumn a, the king of the world, was suffi-
ciently old, he delivered the entire kingdom to 
his son Pur ūravā and entered the forest.  (42)  

SB 9.2: The Dynasties of the Sons of Manu  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Thereafter, when 
his son Sudyumna had thus gone to the for est 
to accept the order of v ānaprastha, Vaivasvata 
Manu [ Śrāddhadeva], being desirous of getting 
more sons, performed severe austerities on the 
bank of the Yamun ā for one hundred years.  (1) Then, because of this desire for sons, the Manu 
known as Śrāddhad eva worshiped the Supreme 
Lord, the Personality of Godhead, the Lord of 
the demigods. Thus he got ten sons exactly like 
himself. Among them all, Ik ṣvāku was the eld-
est.  (2)  

Among these sons, P ṛṣadhra, following the 
order of his spiritual master, was eng aged as a 
protector of cows. He would stand all night 
with a sword to give the cows protection.  (3) 
Once at night, while it was raining, a tiger en-
tered the land of the cowshed. Upon seeing the 
tiger, all the cows, who were lying down, got 
up in fear and scattered here and there on the 
land.  (4) When the very strong tiger seized the 
cow, the cow screamed in distress and fear, and 
Pṛṣadhra, hearing the screaming, immediately 
followed the sound. He took up his sword, but 
because the stars were covered by cl ouds, he 
mistook the cow for the tiger and mistakenly 
cut off the cows’ head with great force.  (5 -6) 
Because the tiger’s ear had been cut by the edge 
of the sword, the tiger was very afraid, and it 
fled from that place, while bleeding on the 
street.  (7) In the morning, when P ṛṣadhra, who 
was quite able to subdue his enemy, saw that he 
had killed the cow although at night he thought 
he had killed the tiger, he was very unhappy.  
(8) Although P ṛṣadhra had committed the sin 
unknowingly, his family priest, Va siṣṭha, 
cursed him, saying, “In your next life you shall 
not be able to become a k ṣatriya. Instead, you 
shall take birth as a śūdra because of killing the 
cow.”  (9) When the hero P ṛṣadhra was thus 
cursed by his spiritual master, he accepted the 
curse with  folded hands. Then, having con-
trolled his senses, he took the vow of brahmac-
arya, which is approved by all great sages.  (10) 
Thereafter, P ṛṣadhra gained relief from all re-
sponsibilities, became peaceful in mind, and 
established control over all his sense s. Being 
unaffected by material conditions, being 
pleased with whatever was available by the 
grace of the Lord to maintain body and soul to-
gether, and being equal toward everyone, he 
gave full attention to the Supreme Personality 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

527 
 of Godhead, V āsudeva, who is the transcenden-
tal Supersoul, free from material contamina-
tion. Thus P ṛṣadhra, fully satisfied in pure 
knowledge, always keeping his mind on the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, achieved pure 
devotional service to the Lord and began trav-
eling all over th e world, without affection for 
material activities, as if he were deaf, dumb and 
blind.  (11 -13) With this attitude, P ṛṣadhra be-
came a great saint, and when he entered the for-
est and saw a blazing forest fire, he took this 
opportunity to burn his body in t he fire. Thus 
he achieved the transcendental, spiritual world.  
(14)  

Being reluctant to accept material enjoy-
ment, Manu’s youngest son, whose name was 
Kavi, gave up the kingdom before attaining full 
youth. Accompanied by his friends, he went to 
the fores t, always thinking of the self -effulgent 
Supreme Personality of Godhead within the 
core of his heart. Thus he attained perfection.  
(15)  

From Kar ūṣa, another son of Manu, came 
the K ārūṣa dynasty, a family of k ṣatriyas. The 
Kārūṣa kṣatriyas were the kings of the northern 
direction. They were celebrated protectors of 
brahminical culture and were all firmly reli-
gious.  (16) From the son of Manu named 
Dhṛṣṭa came a k ṣatriya caste called Dh ārṣṭa, 
whose members achieved the position of 
brāhmaṇas in this world. Then, from the son of 
Manu named N ṛga came Sumati. From Sumati 
came Bh ūtajyoti, and from Bh ūtajyoti came 
Vasu.  (17) The son of Vasu was Prat īka, w hose 
son was Oghav ān. Oghav ān’s son was also 
known as Oghav ān, and his daughter was Og-
havat ī. Sudar śana married that daughter.  (18) 
From Nari ṣyanta came a son named Citrasena 
and from him a son named Ṛkṣa. From Ṛkṣa 
came M īḍhvān, from M īḍhvān came P ūrṇa, 
and from P ūrṇa came Indrasena.  (19) From In-
drasena came V ītihotra, from V ītihotra came 
Satya śravā, from Satya śravā came the son 
named Uru śravā, and from Uru śravā came 
Devadatta.  (20)   
From Devadatta came a son known as Ag-
niveśya, who was the fire -god Ag ni himself. 
This son, who was a celebrated saint, was well 
known as K ānīna and J ātūkarṇya.  (21) O King, 
from Agnive śya came a brahminical dynasty 
known as Āgnive śyāyana. Now that I have de-
scribed the descendants of Nari ṣyanta, let me 
describe the descenda nts of Di ṣṭa. Please hear 
from me.  (22)  

Diṣṭa had a son by the name N ābhāga. This 
Nābhāga, who was different from the N ābhāga 
described later, became a vai śya by occupa-
tional duty. The son of N ābhāga was known as 
Bhalandana, the son of Bhalandana was 
Vatsapr īti, and his son was Pr āṁśu. Pr āṁśu’s 
son was Pramati, Pramati’s son was Khanitra, 
Khanitra’s son was C ākṣuṣa, and his son was 
Viviṁśati.  (23 -24) The son of Vivi ṁśati was 
Rambha, whose son was the great and religious 
King Khan īnetra. O King, the son of 
Khan īnetra was King Karandhama.  (25) From 
Karandhama came a son named Av īkṣit, and 
from Av īkṣit a son named Marutta, who was 
the emperor. The great mystic Sa ṁvarta, the 
son of A ṅgirā, engaged Marutta in performing 
a sacrifice [yajña].  (26) The sacrifi cial para-
phernalia of King Marutta was extremely beau-
tiful, for everything was made of gold. Indeed, 
no other sacrifice could compare to his.  (27) In 
that sacrifice, King Indra became intoxicated 
by drinking a large quantity of soma -rasa. The 
brāhmaṇas re ceived ample contributions, and 
therefore they were satisfied. For that sacrifice, 
the various demigods who control the winds of-
fered foodstuffs, and the Vi śvedevas were 
members of the assembly.  (28)  

Marutta’s son was Dama, Dama’s son was 
Rājyavardhana,  Rājyavardhana’s son was 
Sudh ṛti, and his son was Nara.  (29) The son of 
Nara was Kevala, and his son was Dhund-
humān, whose son was Vegav ān. Vegav ān’s 
son was Budha, and Budha’s son was T ṛṇa-
bindu, who became the king of this earth.  (30) 
The best of the Ap sarās, the highly qualified 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

528 
 girl named Alambu ṣā, accepted the similarly 
qualified T ṛṇabindu as her husband. She gave 
birth to a few sons and a daughter known as 
Ilavil ā.  (31) After the great saint Vi śravā, the 
master of mystic yoga, received absolute 
know ledge from his father, he begot in the 
womb of Ilavil ā the greatly celebrated son 
known as Kuvera, the giver of money.  (32) 
Tṛṇabindu had three sons, named Vi śāla, 
Śūnyabandhu and Dh ūmraketu. Among these 
three, Vi śāla created a dynasty and constructed 
a palace called Vai śālī.  (33) The son of Vi śāla 
was known as Hemacandra, his son was 
Dhūmrākṣa, and his son was Sa ṁyama, whose 
sons were Devaja and K ṛśāśva.  (34) The son of 
Kṛśāśva was Somadatta, who performed a śva-
medha sacrifices and thus satisfied the Sup reme 
Personality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu. By worshiping 
the Supreme Lord, he achieved the most ex-
alted post, a residence on the planet to which 
great mystic yog īs are elevated. The son of 
Somadatta was Sumati, whose son was Ja-
namejaya. All these kings appearing in the dyn-
asty of Vi śāla properly maintained the cele-
brated position of King T ṛṇabindu.  (35 -36)  

SB 9.3: The Marriage of Sukany āand Cya-
vana Muni  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī continued: O King, 
Śaryāti, another son of Manu, was a ruler com-
pletely aware of Vedic k nowledge. He gave in-
structions about the functions for the second 
day of the yajña to be performed by the de-
scendants of A ṅgirā.  (1) Śaryāti had a beautiful 
lotus -eyed daughter named Sukany ā, with 
whom he went to the forest to see the āśrama of 
Cyavana Mu ni.  (2) While that Sukany ā, sur-
rounded by her friends, was collecting various 
types of fruits from the trees in the forest, she 
saw within the hole of an earthworm two things 
glowing like luminaries.  (3) As if induced by 
providence, the girl ignorantly p ierced those 
two glowworms with a thorn, and when they 
were pierced, blood began to ooze out of them.  
(4) Thereupon, all the soldiers of Śaryāti were 
immediately obstructed from passing urine and 
stool. Upon perceiving this, Śaryāti spoke to his associate s in surprise.  (5) How strange it is that 
one of us has attempted to do something wrong 
to Cyavana Muni, the son of Bh ṛgu. It certainly 
appears that someone among us has polluted 
this āśrama.  (6) Being very much afraid, the 
girl Sukany ā said to her fathe r: I have done 
something wrong, for I have ignorantly pierced 
these two luminous substances with a thorn.  
(7) After hearing this statement by his daughter, 
King Śaryāti was very much afraid. In various 
ways, he tried to appease Cyavana Muni, for it 
was he  who sat within the hole of the earth-
worm.  (8) King Śaryāti, being very contempla-
tive and thus understanding Cyavana Muni’s 
purpose, gave his daughter in charity to the 
sage. Thus released from danger with great dif-
ficulty, he took permission from Cyavana  Muni 
and returned home.  (9)  

Cyavana Muni was very irritable, but since 
Sukany ā had gotten him as her husband, she 
dealt with him carefully, according to his 
mood. Knowing his mind, she performed ser-
vice to him without being bewildered.  (10) 
Thereafter , some time having passed, the 
Aśvinī-kumāra brothers, the heavenly physi-
cians, happened to come to Cyavana Muni’s 
āśrama. After offering them respectful obei-
sances, Cyavana Muni requested them to give 
him youthful life, for they were able to do so.  
(11)  

Cyavana Muni said: Although you are ineli-
gible to drink soma -rasa in sacrifices, I promise 
to give you a full pot of it. Kindly arrange 
beauty and youth for me, because they are at-
tractive to young women.  (12) The great phy-
sicians, the A śvinī-kumāras, v ery gladly ac-
cepted Cyavana Muni’s proposal. Thus they 
told the br āhmaṇa, “Just dive into this lake of 
successful life.” [One who bathes in this lake 
has his desires fulfilled.]  (13) After saying this, 
the A śvinī-kumāras caught hold of Cyavana 
Muni, who w as an old, diseased invalid with 
loose skin, white hair, and veins visible all over 
his body, and all three of them entered the lake.  
(14) Thereafter, three men with very beautiful 
bodily features emerged from the lake. They 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

529 
 were nicely dressed and decora ted with ear-
rings and garlands of lotuses. All of them were 
of the same standard of beauty.  (15) The chaste 
and very beautiful Sukany ā could not distin-
guish her husband from the two A śvinī-
kumāras, for they were equally beautiful. Not 
understanding who her real husband was, she 
took shelter of the A śvinī-kumāras.  (16) The 
Aśvinī-kumāras were very pleased to see 
Sukany ā’s chastity and f aithfulness. Thus 
they showed her Cyavana Muni, her husband, 
and after taking permission from him, they re-
turned to the heavenly planets in their plane.  
(17)  

Thereafter, King Śaryāti, desiring to per-
form a sacrifice, went to the residence of Cya-
vana Mun i. There he saw by the side of his 
daughter a very beautiful young man, as bright 
as the sun.  (18) After receiving obeisances 
from his daughter, the King, instead of offering 
blessings to her, appeared very displeased and 
spoke as follows.  (19) O unchast e girl, what is 
this that you have desired to do? You have 
cheated the most respectable husband, who is 
honored by everyone, for I see that because he 
was old, diseased and therefore unattractive, 
you have left his company to accept as your 
husband this yo ung man, who appears to be a 
beggar from the street.  (20) O my daughter, 
who were born in a respectable family, how 
have you degraded your consciousness in this 
way? How is it that you are shamelessly main-
taining a paramour? You will thus degrade the 
dyna sties of both your father and your husband 
to hellish life.  (21) Sukany ā, however, being 
very proud of her chastity, smiled upon hearing 
the rebukes of her father. She smilingly told 
him, “My dear father, this young man by my 
side is your actual son -in-law, the great sage 
Cyavana, who was born in the family of 
Bhṛgu.”  (22) T hus Sukany ā explained how her 
husband had received the beautiful body of a 
young man. When the King heard this he was 
very surprised, and in great pleasure he em-
braced his beloved daughter.  (23)  
 Cyavana Muni, by his own prowess, enabled 
King Śaryāti to perform the soma -yajña. The 
muni offered a full pot of soma -rasa to the 
Aśvinī-kumāras, although they were unfit to 
drink it.  (24) King Indra, being perturbed and 
angry, wanted to kill Cyavana Muni, and there-
fore he impetuously took up his thunderbolt. 
But Cyavana Muni, by his powers, paralyzed 
Indra’s arm that held the thunderbolt.  (25) Alt-
hough the A śvinī-kumāras were only physi-
cians and were therefore excluded from drink-
ing soma -rasa in sacrifices, the demigods 
agreed to allow them henceforward to drin k it.  
(26)  

King Śaryāti begot three sons, named Ut-
tānabarhi, Ānarta and Bh ūriṣeṇa. From Ānarta 
came a son named Revata.  (27) O Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, subduer of enemies, this Revata con-
structed a kingdom known as Ku śasthal ī in the 
depths of the ocean. Ther e he lived and ruled 
such tracts of land as Ānarta, etc. He had one 
hundred very nice sons, of whom the eldest was 
Kakudm ī.  (28) Taking his own daughter, Re-
vatī, Kakudm ī went to Lord Brahm ā in Brah-
maloka, which is transcendental to the three 
modes of mate rial nature, and inquired about a 
husband for her.  (29) When Kakudm ī arrived 
there, Lord Brahm ā was engaged in hearing 
musical performances by the Gandharvas and 
had not a moment to talk with him. Therefore 
Kakudm ī waited, and at the end of the musical 
performances he offered his obeisances to Lord 
Brahm ā and thus submitted his long -standing 
desire.  (30) After hearing his words, Lord 
Brahm ā, who is most powerful, laughed loudly 
and said to Kakudm ī: O King, all those whom 
you may have decided within the co re of your 
heart to accept as your son -in-law have passed 
away in the course of time.  (31)  

Twenty -seven catur -yugas have already 
passed. Those upon whom you may have de-
cided are now gone, and so are their sons, 
grandsons and other descendants. You canno t 
even hear about their names.  (32) O King, 
leave here and offer your daughter to Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

530 
 Baladeva, who is  still present. He is most pow-
erful. Indeed, He is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, whose plenary portion is Lord Vi ṣṇu. 
Your daughter is fit to be given to Him in char-
ity.  (33) Lord Baladeva is the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. One who hears and cha nts 
about Him is purified. Because He is always the 
well-wisher of all living entities, He has de-
scended with all His paraphernalia to purify the 
entire world and lessen its burden.  (34) Having 
received this order from Lord Brahm ā, 
Kakudm ī offered obeisan ces unto him and re-
turned to his own residence. He then saw that 
his residence was vacant, having been aban-
doned by his brothers and other relatives, who 
were living in all directions because of fear of 
such higher living beings as the Yak ṣas.  (35) 
Therea fter, the King gave his most beautiful 
daughter in charity to the supremely powerful 
Baladeva and then retired from worldly life and 
went to Badarik āśrama to please Nara -
Nārāyaṇa (36)  

SB 9.4: Ambar īṣa Mah ārāja Offended by 
Durv āsā Muni  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: The son of 
Nabhaga named N ābhāga lived for a long time 
at the place of his spiritual master. Therefore, 
his brothers thought that he was not going to 
become a g ṛhastha and would not return. Con-
sequently, without providing a share for him, 
they divided  the property of their father among 
themselves. When N ābhāga returned from the 
place of his spiritual master, they gave him 
their father as his share.  (1) N ābhāga inquired, 
“My dear brothers, what have you given to me 
as my share of our father’s property? ” His elder 
brothers answered, “We have kept our father as 
your share.” But when N ābhāga went to his fa-
ther and said, “My dear father, my elder broth-
ers have given you as my share of property,” 
the father replied, “My dear son, do not rely 
upon their cheat ing words. I am not your prop-
erty.”  (2) N ābhāga’s father said: All the de-
scendants of A ṅgirā are now going to perform 
a great sacrifice, but although they are very in-telligent, on every sixth day they will be bewil-
dered in performing sacrifice and will ma ke 
mistakes in their daily duties.  (3) N ābhāga’s 
father continued: “Go to those great souls and 
describe two Vedic hymns pertaining to 
Vaiśvadeva. When the great sages have com-
pleted the sacrifice and are going to the heav-
enly planets, they will give you the remnants of 
the money they have received from the sacri-
fice. Therefore, go there immediately.” Thus 
Nābhāga acted exactly according to the advice 
of his father, and the great sages of the A ṅgirā 
dynasty gave him all their wealth and then went 
to the he avenly planets.  (4 -5)  

Thereafter, while N ābhāga was accepting 
the riches, a black -looking person from the 
north came to him and said, “All the wealth 
from this sacrificial arena belongs to me.”  (6)  

Nābhāga then said, “These riches belong to 
me. The g reat saintly persons have delivered 
them to me.” When N ābhāga said this, the 
black -looking person replied, “Let us go to 
your father and ask him to settle our disagree-
ment.” In accordance with this, N ābhāga in-
quired from his father.  (7) The father of 
Nābhāga said: Whatever the great sages sacri-
ficed in the arena of the Dak ṣa-yajña, they of-
fered to Lord Śiva as his share. Therefore, eve-
rything in the sacrificial arena certainly belongs 
to Lord Śiva.  (8) Thereupon, after offering 
obeisances to Lord Śiva, N ābhāga said: O wor-
shipable lord, everything in this arena of sacri-
fice is yours. This is the assertion of my father. 
Now, with great respect, I bow my head before 
you, begging your mercy.  (9) Lord Śiva said: 
Whatever your father has said is the truth, and 
you also are speaking the same truth. There-
fore, I, who know the Vedic mantras, shall ex-
plain transcendental knowledge to you.  (10) 
Lord Śiva said, “Now you may take all the 
wealth remaining from the sacrifice, for I give 
it to you.” After saying this, Lo rd Śiva, who is 
most adherent to the religious principles, disap-
peared from that place.  (11) If one hears and 
chants or remembers this narration in the morn-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

531 
 ing and evening with great attention, he cer-
tainly becomes learned, experienced in under-
standing th e Vedic hymns, and expert in self -
realization.  (12) From N ābhāga, Mah ārāja 
Ambar īṣa took birth. Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa was 
an exalted devotee, celebrated for his great 
merits. Although he was cursed by an infallible 
brāhmaṇa, the curse could not touch him.  (1 3)  

King Par īkṣit inquired: O great personality, 
Mahārāja Ambar īṣa was certainly most exalted 
and meritorious in character. I wish to hear 
about him. How surprising it is that the curse of 
a brāhmaṇa, which is insurmountable, could 
not act upon him.  (14)   

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Mah ārāja Am-
barīṣa, the most fortunate personality, achieved 
the rule of the entire world, consisting of seven 
islands, and achieved inexhaustible, unlimited 
opulence and prosperity on earth. Although 
such a position is rarely obta ined, Mah ārāja 
Ambar īṣa did not care for it at all, for he knew 
very well that all such opulence is material. 
Like that which is imagined in a dream, such 
opulence will ultimately be destroyed. The 
King knew that any nondevotee who attains 
such opulence me rges increasingly into mate-
rial nature’s mode of darkness.  (15 -16) 
Mahārāja Ambar īṣa was a great devotee of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, V āsudeva, 
and of the saintly persons who are the Lord’s 
devotees. Because of this devotion, he thought 
of the e ntire universe as being as insignificant 
as a piece of stone.  (17) Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa 
always engaged his mind in meditating upon 
the lotus feet of K ṛṣṇa, his words in describing 
the glories of the Lord, his hands in cleansing 
the Lord’s temple, and his ear s in hearing the 
words spoken by K ṛṣṇa or about K ṛṣṇa. He en-
gaged his eyes in seeing the Deity of K ṛṣṇa, 
Kṛṣṇa’s temples and K ṛṣṇa’s places like Ma-
thurā and V ṛndāvana, he engaged his sense of 
touch in touching the bodies of the Lord’s dev-
otees, he engaged his sense of smell in smelling 
the fragrance of tulas ī offered to the Lord, and 
he engaged his tongue in tasting the Lord’s 
prasāda. He engaged his legs in walking to the holy places and temples of the Lord, his head 
in bowing down before the Lord, and all  his de-
sires in serving the Lord, twenty -four hours a 
day. Indeed, Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa never desired 
anything for his own sense gratification. He en-
gaged all his senses in devotional service, in 
various engagements related to the Lord. This 
is the way to inc rease attachment for the Lord 
and be completely free from all material de-
sires.  (18 -20) In performing his prescribed du-
ties as king, Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa always offered 
the results of his royal activities to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, who is the en-
joyer of everything and is beyond the percep-
tion of material senses. He certainly took ad-
vice from br āhmaṇas who were faithful devo-
tees of the Lord, and thus he ruled the planet 
earth without difficulty.  (21) In desert coun-
tries where there flowed t he river Sarasvat ī, 
Mahārāja Ambar īṣa performed great sacrifices 
like the a śvamedha -yajña and thus satisfied the 
master of all yajñas, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. Such sacrifices were performed with 
great opulence and suitable paraphernalia and 
with contributions of dak ṣiṇā to the br āhmaṇas, 
who were supervised by great personalities like 
Vasiṣṭha, Asita and Gautama, representing the 
king, the performer of the sacrifices.  (22) In the 
sacrifice arranged by Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa, the 
members of the assem bly and the priests [espe-
cially hot ā, udg ātā, brahm ā and adhvaryu] were 
gorgeously dressed, and they all looked exactly 
like demigods. They eagerly saw to the proper 
performance of the yajña.  (23) The citizens of 
the state of Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa were accus-
tomed to chanting and hearing about the glori-
ous activities of the Personality of Godhead. 
Thus they never aspired to be elevated to the 
heavenly planets, which are extremely dear 
even to the demigods.  (24) Those who are sat-
urated with the transcendental h appiness of ren-
dering service to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead are uninterested even in the achieve-
ments of great mystics, for such achievements 
do not enhance the transcendental bliss felt by 
a devotee who always thinks of K ṛṣṇa within 
the core of hi s heart.  (25) The king of this 
planet, Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa, thus performed de-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

532 
 votional service to the Lord and in this en-
deavor practiced severe austerity. Always sat-
isfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead by 
his constitutional activities, he gradually ga ve 
up all material desires.  (26) Mah ārāja Am-
barīṣa gave up all attachment to household af-
fairs, wives, children, friends and relatives, to 
the best of powerful elephants, to beautiful 
chariots, carts, horses and inexhaustible jewels, 
and to ornaments, gar ments and an inexhausti-
ble treasury. He gave up attachment to all of 
them, regarding them as temporary and mate-
rial.  (27) Being very pleased by the unalloyed 
devotion of Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead gave the King His disc, 
which i s fearful to enemies and which always 
protects the devotee from enemies and adversi-
ties.  (28)  

To worship Lord K ṛṣṇa, Mah ārāja Am-
barīṣa, along with his queen, who was equally 
qualified, observed the vow of Ek ādaśī and 
Dvādaśī for one year.  (29) In the m onth of 
Kārtika, after observing that vow for one year, 
after observing a fast for three nights and after 
bathing in the Yamun ā, Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa 
worshiped the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Hari, in Madhuvana.  (30) Following the 
regulative principles o f mah ābhiṣeka, Mah ārāja 
Ambar īṣa performed the bathing ceremony for 
the Deity of Lord K ṛṣṇa with all paraphernalia, 
and then he dressed the Deity with fine cloth-
ing, ornaments, fragrant flower garlands and 
other paraphernalia for worship of the Lord. 
With attention and devotion, he worshiped 
Kṛṣṇa and all the greatly fortunate br āhmaṇas 
who were free from material desires.  (31 -32) 
Thereafter, Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa satisfied all the 
guests who arrived at his house, especially the 
brāhmaṇas. He gave in charity s ixty crores of 
cows whose horns were covered with gold plate 
and whose hooves were covered with silver 
plate. All the cows were well decorated with 
garments and had full milk bags. They were 
mild-natured, young and beautiful and were ac-
companied by their c alves. After giving these 
cows, the King first sumptuously fed all the 
brāhmaṇas, and when they were fully satisfied, he was about to observe the end of Ek ādaśī, 
with their permission, by breaking the fast. Ex-
actly at that time, however, Durv āsā Muni, the 
great and powerful mystic, appeared on the 
scene as an uninvited guest.  (33-35)  

After standing up to receive Durv āsā Muni, 
King Ambar īṣa offered him a seat and para-
phernalia of worship. Then, sitting at his feet, 
the King requested the great sage to eat.  (36) 
Durv āsā Muni gladly accepted the request of 
Mahārāja Ambar īṣa, bu t to perform the regula-
tive ritualistic ceremonies he went to the river 
Yamun ā. There he dipped into the water of the 
auspicious Yamun ā and meditated upon the im-
personal Brahman.  (37) In the meantime, only 
a muh ūrta of the Dv ādaśī day was left on which 
to break the fast. Consequently, it was impera-
tive that the fast be broken immediately. In this 
dangerous situation, the King consulted learned 
brāhmaṇas.  (38)  

The King said: “To transgress the laws of re-
spectful behavior toward the br āhmaṇas is cer-
tainly  a great offense. On the other hand, if one 
does not observe the breaking of the fast within 
the time of Dv ādaśī, there is a flaw in one’s ob-
servance of the vow. Therefore, O br āhmaṇas, 
if you think that it will be auspicious and not 
irreligious, I shall b reak the fast by drinking 
water.” In this way, after consulting with the 
brāhmaṇas, the King reached this decision, for 
according to brahminical opinion, drinking wa-
ter may be accepted as eating and also as not 
eating.  (39 -40) O best of the Kuru dynasty, af-
ter he drank some water, King Ambar īṣa, med-
itating upon the Supreme Personality of God-
head within his heart, waited for the return of 
the great mystic Durv āsā Muni.  (41) After ex-
ecuting the ritualistic ceremonies to be per-
formed at noon, Durv āsā returne d from the 
bank of the Yamun ā. The King received him 
well, offering all respects, but Durv āsā Muni, 
by his mystic power, could understand that 
King Ambar īṣa had drunk water without his 
permission.  (42) Still hungry, Durv āsā Muni, 
his body trembling, his f ace curved and his eye-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

533 
 brows crooked in a frown, angrily spoke as fol-
lows to King Ambar īṣa, who stood before him 
with folded hands.  (43) Alas, just see the be-
havior of this cruel man! He is not a devotee of 
Lord Vi ṣṇu. Being proud of his material opu-
lence and his position, he considers himself 
God. Just see how he has transgressed the laws 
of religion.  (44) Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa, you have 
invited me to eat as a guest, but instead of feed-
ing me, you yourself have eaten first. Because 
of your miSBehavior, I shal l show you some-
thing to punish you.  (45) As Durv āsā Muni 
said this, his face became red with anger. Up-
rooting a bunch of hair from his head, he cre-
ated a demon resembling the blazing fire of 
devastation to punish Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa.  (46) 
Taking a trident in his hand and making the sur-
face of the earth tremble with his footsteps, that 
blazing creature came before Mah ārāja Am-
barīṣa. But the King, upon seeing him, was not 
at all disturbed and did not move even slightly 
from his position.  (47) As fire in the forest im-
mediately burns to ashes an angry snake, so, by 
the previous order of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, His disc, the Sudar śana cakra, im-
mediately burnt to ashes the created demon to 
protect the Lord’s devotee.  (48) Upon seeing 
that his own att empt had failed and that the Su-
darśana cakra was moving toward him, 
Durv āsā Muni became very frightened and be-
gan to run in all directions to save his life.  (49) 
As the blazing flames of a forest fire pursue a 
snake, the disc of the Supreme Personality of  
Godhead began following Durv āsā Muni. 
Durv āsā Muni saw that the disc was almost 
touching his back, and thus he ran very swiftly, 
desiring to enter a cave of Sumeru Mountain.  
(50) Just to protect himself, Durv āsā Muni fled 
everywhere, in all directionsin the sky, on the 
surface of the earth, in caves, in the ocean, on 
different planets of the rulers of the three 
worlds, and even on the heavenly planetsbut 
wherever he went he immediately saw follow-
ing him the unbearable fire of the Sudar śana 
cakra.  (51) Wi th a fearful heart, Durv āsā Muni 
went here and there seeking shelter, but when 
he could find no shelter, he finally approached 
Lord Brahm ā and said, “O my lord, O Lord Brahm ā, kindly protect me from the blazing Su-
darśana cakra sent by the Supreme Personali ty 
of Godhead.”  (52)  

Lord Brahm ā said: At the end of the dvi -
parārdha, when the pastimes of the Lord come 
to an end, Lord Vi ṣṇu, by a flick of His eye-
brows, vanquishes the entire universe, includ-
ing our places of residence. Such personalities 
as me and Lord Śiva, as well as Dak ṣa, Bh ṛgu 
and similar great saints of which they are the 
head, and also the rulers of the living entities, 
the rulers of human society and the rulers of the 
demigodsall of us surrender to that Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Lord V iṣṇu, bowing 
our heads, to carry out His orders for the benefit 
of all living entities.  (53 -54)  

When Durv āsā, who was greatly afflicted by 
the blazing fire of the Sudar śana cakra, was 
thus refused by Lord Brahm ā, he tried to take 
shelter of Lord Śiva, w ho always resides on his 
planet, known as Kail āsa.  (55)  

Lord Śiva said: My dear son, I, Lord Brahm ā 
and the other demigods, who rotate within this 
universe under the misconception of our great-
ness, cannot exhibit any power to compete with 
the Supreme Pe rsonality of Godhead, for innu-
merable universes and their inhabitants come 
into existence and are annihilated by the simple 
direction of the Lord.  (56)  

Past, present and future are known to me 
[Lord Śiva], Sanat -kumāra, N ārada, the most 
revered Lord Bra hmā, Kapila [the son of 
Devah ūti], Ap āntaratama [Lord Vy āsadeva], 
Devala, Yamar āja, Āsuri, Mar īci and many 
saintly persons headed by him, as well as many 
others who have achieved perfection. Nonethe-
less, because we are covered by the illusory en-
ergy of the  Lord, we cannot understand how ex-
pansive that illusory energy is. You should 
simply approach that Supreme Personality of 
Godhead to get relief, for this Sudar śana cakra 
is intolerable even to us. Go to Lord Vi ṣṇu. He 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

534 
 will certainly be kind enough to besto w all 
good fortune upon you.  (57 -59) Thereafter, be-
ing disappointed even in taking shelter of Lord 
Śiva, Durv āsā Muni went to Vaiku ṇṭha-dhāma, 
where the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāyaṇa, resides with His consort, the god-
dess of fortune.  (60) Durv āsā Muni, the great 
mystic, scorched by the heat of the Sudar śana 
cakra, fell at the lotus feet of N ārāyaṇa. His 
body trembling, he spoke as follows: O infalli-
ble, unlimited Lord, protector of the entire uni-
verse, You are the only desirable objective for 
all devotees. I am a great offender, my Lord. 
Please give me protection.  (61) O my Lord, O 
supreme controller, without knowledge of 
Your unlimited prowess I have offended Your 
most dear devotee. Very kindly save me from 
the reaction of this offense. You ca n do every-
thing, for even if a person is fit for going to hell, 
You can deliver him simply by awakening 
within his heart the holy name of Your Lord-
ship.  (62)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said to 
the br āhmaṇa: I am completely under the con-
trol of My devotees. Indeed, I am not at all in-
dependent. Because My devotees are com-
pletely devoid of material desires, I sit only 
within the cores of their hearts. What to speak 
of My devotee, even those who are devot ees of 
My devotee are very dear to Me.  (63) O best of 
the br āhmaṇas, without saintly persons for 
whom I am the only destination, I do not desire 
to enjoy My transcendental bliss and My su-
preme opulences.  (64) Since pure devotees 
give up their homes, wive s, children, relatives, 
riches and even their lives simply to serve Me, 
without any desire for material improvement in 
this life or in the next, how can I give up such 
devotees at any time?  (65) As chaste women 
bring their gentle husbands under control by  
service, the pure devotees, who are equal to 
everyone and completely attached to Me in the 
core of the heart, bring Me under their full con-
trol.  (66) My devotees, who are always satis-
fied to be engaged in My loving service, are not 
interested even in the  four principles of libera-tion [s ālokya, s ārūpya, s āmīpya and s ārṣṭi], alt-
hough these are automatically achieved by their 
service. What then is to be said of such perish-
able happiness as elevation to the higher plane-
tary systems?  (67) The pure devotee is always 
within the core of My heart, and I am always in 
the heart of the pure devotee. My devotees do 
not know anything else but Me, and I do not 
know anyone else but them.  (68) O br āhmaṇa, 
let Me now advise you for your own protection. 
Please hear from Me . By offending Mah ārāja 
Ambar īṣa, you have acted with self -envy. 
Therefore you should go to him immediately, 
without a moment’s delay. One’s so -called 
prowess, when employed against the devotee, 
certainly harms he who employs it. Thus it is 
the subject, no t the object, who is harmed.  (69)  

For a br āhmaṇa, austerity and learning are 
certainly auspicious, but when acquired by a 
person who is not gentle, such austerity and 
learning are most dangerous.  (70) O best of the 
brāhmaṇas, you should therefore go im medi-
ately to King Ambar īṣa, the son of Mah ārāja 
Nābhāga. I wish you all good fortune. If you 
can satisfy Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa, then there will 
be peace for you.  (71)  

SB 9.5: Durv āsā Muni’s Life Spared  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: When thus advised 
by Lord Vi ṣṇu, Durv āsā Muni, who was very 
much harassed by the Sudar śana cakra, imme-
diately approached Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa. Being 
very much aggrieved, the muni fell down and 
clasped the King’s lotus feet.  (1) When 
Durv āsā touched his lotus feet, Mah ārāja Am-
barīṣa was ve ry much ashamed, and when he 
saw Durv āsā attempting to offer prayers, be-
cause of mercy he was aggrieved even more. 
Thus he immediately began offering prayers to 
the great weapon of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.  (2)  

Mahārāja Ambar īṣa said: O Sudar śana 
cakra, you are fire, you are the most powerful 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

535 
 sun, and you are the moon, the master of all lu-
minaries. You are water, earth and sky, you are 
the air, you are the five sense objects [sound, 
touch, form, taste and smell], and you are the 
senses also.  ( 3) O most favorite of Acyuta, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, you have 
thousands of spokes. O master of the material 
world, destroyer of all weapons, original vision 
of the Personality of Godhead, I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto you. Kindly give shel-
ter and be auspicious to this br āhmaṇa.  (4) O 
Sudar śana wheel, you are religion, you are 
truth, you are encouraging statements, you are 
sacrifice, and you are the enjoyer of the fruits 
of sacrifice. You are the maintainer of the entire 
universe, and y ou are the supreme transcenden-
tal prowess in the hands of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. You are the original vi-
sion of the Lord, and therefore you are known 
as Sudar śana. Everything has been created by 
your activities, and therefore you are all -per-
vading.  (5) O Sudar śana, you have a very aus-
picious hub, and therefore you are the upholder 
of all religion. You are just like an inauspicious 
comet for the irreligious demons. Indeed, you 
are the maintainer of the three worlds, you are 
full of transcendent al effulgence, you are as 
quick as the mind, and you are able to work 
wonders. I can simply utter the word “nama ḥ,” 
offering all obeisances unto you.  (6) O master 
of speech, by your effulgence, full of religious 
principles, the darkness of the world is di ssi-
pated, and the knowledge of learned persons or 
great souls is manifested. Indeed, no one can 
surpass your effulgence, for all things, mani-
fested and unmanifested, gross and subtle, su-
perior and inferior, are but various forms of you 
that are manifested by your effulgence.  (7) O 
indefatigable one, when you are sent by the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead to enter among 
the soldiers of the Daityas and the D ānavas, 
you stay on the battlefield and unendingly sep-
arate their arms, bellies, thighs, legs and heads.  
(8) O protector of the universe, you are engaged 
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as His 
all-powerful weapon in killing the envious en-
emies. For the benefit of our entire dynasty, 
kindly favor this poor br āhmaṇa. This will cer-
tainly be a favor for all of us.  (9) If our family has given charity to the proper persons, if we 
have performed ritualistic ceremonies and sac-
rifices, if we have properly ca rried out our oc-
cupational duties, and if we have been guided 
by learned br āhmaṇas, I wish, in exchange, that 
this br āhmaṇa be freed from the burning caused 
by the Sudar śana cakra.  (10) If the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is one without a 
second, w ho is the reservoir of all transcenden-
tal qualities, and who is the life and soul of all 
living entities, is pleased with us, we wish that 
this br āhmaṇa, Durv āsā Muni, be freed from 
the pain of being burned.  (11)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: When the 
King offered prayers to the Sudar śana cakra 
and Lord Vi ṣṇu, because of his prayers the Su-
darśana cakra became peaceful and stopped 
burning the br āhmaṇa known as Durv āsā Muni.  
(12) Durv āsā Muni, the greatly powerful mys-
tic, was indeed satisfied when freed fro m the 
fire of the Sudar śana cakra. Thus he praised the 
qualities of Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa and offered 
him the highest benedictions.  (13)  

Durv āsā Muni said: My dear King, today I 
have experienced the greatness of devotees of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhea d, for alt-
hough I have committed an offense, you have 
prayed for my good fortune.  (14) For those 
who have achieved the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, the master of the pure devotees, what 
is impossible to do, and what is impossible to 
give up?  (15) What  is impossible for the serv-
ants of the Lord? By the very hearing of His 
holy name one is purified.  (16) O King, over-
looking my offenses, you have saved my life. 
Thus I am very much obliged to you because 
you are so merciful.  (17)  

Expecting the return o f Durv āsā Muni, the 
King had not taken his food. Therefore, when 
the sage returned, the King fell at his lotus feet, 
pleasing him in all respects, and fed him sump-
tuously.  (18) Thus the King respectfully re-
ceived Durv āsā Muni, who after eating varie-
ties o f palatable food was so satisfied that with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

536 
 great affection he requested the King to eat 
also, saying, “Please take your meal.”  (19)  

Durv āsā Muni said: I am very pleased with 
you, my dear King. At first I thought of you as 
an ordinary human being and ac cepted your 
hospitality, but later I could understand, by my 
own intelligence, that you are the most exalted 
devotee of the Lord. Therefore, simply by see-
ing you, touching your feet and talking with 
you, I have been pleased and have become 
obliged to you.  (20) All the blessed women in 
the heavenly planets will continuously chant 
about your spotless character at every moment, 
and the people of this world will also chant 
your glories continuously.  (21)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosv āmī continued: Thus be-
ing satisfied in all respects, the great mystic 
yogī Durv āsā took permission and left, contin-
uously glorifying the King. Through the sky-
ways, he went to Brahmaloka, which is devoid 
of agnostics and dry philosophical sp eculators.  
(22) Durv āsā Muni had left the place of 
Mahārāja Ambar īṣa, and as long as he had not 
returnedfor one complete yearthe King had 
fasted, maintaining himself simply by drinking 
water.  (23)  

After one year, when Durv āsā Muni had re-
turned, King Am barīṣa sumptuously fed him all 
varieties of pure food, and then he himself also 
ate. When the King saw that the br āhmaṇa 
Durv āsā had been released from the great dan-
ger of being burned, he could understand that 
by the grace of the Lord he himself was also 
powerful, but he did not take any credit, for 
everything had been done by the Lord.  (24) In 
this way, because of devotional service, 
Mahārāja Ambar īṣa, who was endowed with 
varieties of transcendental qualities, was com-
pletely aware of Brahman, Param ātmā and the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus he 
executed devotional service perfectly. Because 
of his devotion, he thought even the topmost 
planet of this material world no better than the 
hellish planets.  (25) Śrīla Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: Therea fter, because of his advanced 
position in devotional life, Mah ārāja Ambar īṣa, 
who no longer desired to live with material 
things, retired from active family life. He di-
vided his property among his sons, who were 
equally as qualified, and he himself took th e or-
der of v ānaprastha and went to the forest to 
concentrate his mind fully upon Lord 
Vāsudeva.  (26)  

Anyone who chants this narration or even 
thinks of this narration about the activities of 
Mahārāja Ambar īṣa certainly becomes a pure 
devotee of the Lord .  (27) By the grace of the 
Lord, those who hear about the activities of 
Mahārāja Ambar īṣa, the great devotee, cer-
tainly become liberated or become devotees 
without delay.  (28)  

SB 9.6: The Downfall of Saubhari Muni  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, Ambar īṣa had three sons, named 
Virūpa, Ketum ān and Śambhu. From Vir ūpa 
came a son named P ṛṣadaśva, and from 
Pṛṣadaśva came a son named Rath ītara.  (1)  

Rath ītara had no sons, and therefore he re-
quested the great sage A ṅgirā to beget sons for 
him. B ecause of this request, A ṅgirā begot sons 
in the womb of Rath ītara’s wife. All these sons 
were born with brahminical prowess.  (2) Hav-
ing been born from the womb of Rath ītara’s 
wife, all these sons were known as the dynasty 
of Rath ītara, but because they w ere born from 
the semen of A ṅgirā, they were also known as 
the dynasty of A ṅgirā. Among all the progeny 
of Rath ītara, these sons were the most promi-
nent because, owing to their birth, they were 
considered br āhmaṇas.  (3)  

The son of Manu was Ik ṣvāku. When  Manu 
was sneezing, Ik ṣvāku was born from Manu’s 
nostrils. King Ik ṣvāku had one hundred sons, of 
whom Vikuk ṣi, Nimi and Da ṇḍakā were the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

537 
 most prominent.  (4) Of the one hundred sons, 
twenty -five became kings in the western side of 
Āryāvarta, a place betwee n the Him ālaya and 
Vindhya mountains. Another twenty -five sons 
became kings in the east of Āryāvarta, and the 
three principal sons became kings in the mid-
dle. The other sons became kings in various 
other places.  (5) During the months of January, 
February and March, oblations offered to the 
forefathers are called a ṣṭakā-śrāddha. The śrād-
dha ceremony is held during the dark fortnight 
of the month. When Mah ārāja Ikṣvāku was per-
forming his oblations in this ceremony, he or-
dered his son Vikuk ṣi to go immediatel y to the 
forest to bring some pure flesh.  (6) Thereafter, 
Ikṣvāku’s son Vikuk ṣi went to the forest and 
killed many animals suitable for being offered 
as oblations. But when fatigued and hungry he 
became forgetful and ate a rabbit he had killed.  
(7) Vikuk ṣi offered the remnants of the flesh to 
King Ik ṣvāku, who gave it to Vasi ṣṭha for puri-
fication. But Vasi ṣṭha could immediately un-
derstand that part of the flesh had already been 
taken by Vikuk ṣi, and therefore he said that it 
was unfit to be used in the śrāddha ceremony.  
(8) When King Ik ṣvāku, thus informed by Va-
siṣṭha, understood what his son Vikuk ṣi had 
done, he was extremely angry. Thus he ordered 
Vikuk ṣi to leave the country because Vikuk ṣi 
had violated the regulative principles.  (9) Hav-
ing been instr ucted by the great and learned 
brāhmaṇa Vasi ṣṭha, who discoursed about the 
Absolute Truth, Mah ārāja Ikṣvāku became re-
nounced. By following the principles for a 
yogī, he certainly achieved the supreme perfec-
tion after giving up his material body. (10) Af-
ter his father’s disappearance, Vikuk ṣi returned 
to the country and thus became the king, ruling 
the planet earth and performing various sacri-
fices to satisfy the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Vikuk ṣi later became celebrated as 
Śaśāda.  (11) The son of Śaśāda was Purañjaya, 
who is also known as Indrav āha and sometimes 
as Kakutstha. Please hear from me how he re-
ceived different names for different activities.  
(12)  
 Formerly, there was a devastating war be-
tween the demigods and the demons. The dem-
igods, havi ng been defeated, accepted Pura-
ñjaya as their assistant and then conquered the 
demons. Therefore this hero is known as Pura-
ñjaya, “he who conquered the residence of the 
demons.”  (13) Purañjaya agreed to kill all the 
demons, on the condition that Indra wou ld be 
his carrier. Because of pride, Indra could n ot 
accept this proposal, but later, by the order of 
the Supreme Lord, Vi ṣṇu, Indra did accept it 
and became a great bull carrier for Purañjaya.  
(14) Well protected by armor and desiring to 
fight, Purañjaya took up a transcendental bow 
and very sharp arrow s, and, while being highly 
praised by the demigods, he got up on the back 
of the bull [Indra] and sat on its hump. Thus he 
is known as Kakutstha. Being empowered by 
Lord Vi ṣṇu, who is the Supersoul and the Su-
preme Person, Purañjaya sat on the great bull 
and is therefore known as Indrav āha. Sur-
rounded by the demigods, he attacked the resi-
dence of the demons in the west.  (15 -16) There 
was a fierce battle between the demons and Pu-
rañjaya. Indeed, it was so fierce that when one 
hears about it one’s hairs stand  on end. All the 
demons bold enough to come before Purañjaya 
were immediately sent to the residence of 
Yamar āja by his arrows.  (17) To save them-
selves from the blazing arrows of Indrav āha, 
which resembled the flames of devastation at 
the end of the millen nium, the demons who re-
mained when the rest of their army was killed 
fled very quickly to their respective homes.  
(18) After conquering the enemy, the saintly 
king Purañjaya gave everything, including the 
enemy’s riches and wives, to Indra, who carries 
a thunderbolt. For this he is celebrated as Pura-
ñjaya. Thus Purañjaya is known by different 
names because of his different activities.  (19)  

The son of Purañjaya was known as Anen ā, 
Anen ā’s son was P ṛthu, and P ṛthu’s son was 
Viśvagandhi. Vi śvagandhi’s son was Candra, 
and Candra’s son was Yuvan āśva.  (20) The 
son of Yuvan āśva was Śrāvasta, who con-
structed a township known as Śrāvastī Purī. 
The son of Śrāvasta was B ṛhada śva, and his son 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

538 
 was Kuvalay āśva. In this way the dynasty in-
creased.  (21) To satisfy the sage Uta ṅka, the 
greatly powerful Kuvalay āśva killed a demon 
named Dhundhu. He did this with the assis-
tance of his twenty -one thousand sons.  (22) O 
Mahārāja Par īkṣit, for this re ason Kuvalay āśva 
is celebrated as Dhundhum āra [“the killer of 
Dhundhu”]. All but three of his sons, however, 
were burned to ashes by the fire emanating 
from Dhundhu’s mouth. The remaining sons 
were D ṛḍhāśva, Kapil āśva and Bhadr āśva. 
From D ṛḍhāśva came a so n named Harya śva, 
whose son is celebrated as Nikumbha.  (23 -24)  

The son of Nikumbha was Bahul āśva, the 
son of Bahul āśva was K ṛśāśva, the son of 
Kṛśāśva was Senajit, and the son of Senajit was 
Yuvan āśva. Yuvan āśva had no sons, and thus 
he retired from fam ily life and went to the for-
est.  (25) Although Yuvan āśva went into the 
forest with his one hundred wives, all of them 
were very morose. The sages in the forest, how-
ever, being very kind to the King, began very 
carefully and attentively performing an Indra -
yajña so that the King might have a son.  (26) 
Being thirsty one night, the King entered the 
arena of sacrifice, and when he saw all the 
brāhmaṇas lying down, he personally drank the 
sanctified water meant to be drunk by his wife.  
(27) When the br āhmaṇas got up from bed and 
saw the waterpot empty, they inquired who had 
done this work of drinking the water meant for 
begetting a child.  (28) When the br āhmaṇas 
came to understand that the King, inspired by 
the supreme controller, had drunk the water, 
they al l exclaimed “Alas! The power of provi-
dence is real power. No one can counteract the 
power of the Supreme.” In this way they of-
fered their respectful obeisances unto the Lord.  
(29) Thereafter, in due course of time, a son 
with all the good symptoms of a po werful king 
came forth from the lower right side of King 
Yuvan āśva’s abdomen.  (30) The baby cried 
so much for breast milk that all the br āhmaṇas 
were very unhappy. “Who will take care of this 
baby?” they said. Then Indra, who was wor-
shiped in that yajña, came and solaced the baby. “Do not cry,” Indra said. Then Indr a put his in-
dex finger in the baby’s mouth and said, “You 
may drink me.”  (31) Because Yuvan āśva, the 
father of the baby, was blessed by the 
brāhmaṇas, he did not fall a victim to death. Af-
ter this incident, he performed severe austeri-
ties and achieved per fection in that very spot.  
(32) M āndhātā, the son of Yuvan āśva, was the 
cause of fear for R āvaṇa and other thieves and 
rogues who caused anxiety. O King Par īkṣit, 
because they feared him, the son of Yuvan āśva 
was known as Trasaddasyu. This name was 
given by King Indra. By the mercy of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the son of 
Yuvan āśva was so powerful that when he be-
came emperor he ruled the entire world, con-
sisting of seven islands, without any second 
ruler.  (33 -34) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhea d is not different from the auspicious 
aspects of great sacrifices, such as the ingredi-
ents of the sacrifice, the chanting of Vedic 
hymns, the regulative principles, the performer, 
the priests, the result of the sacrifice, the arena 
of sacrifice, and the t ime of sacrifice. Knowing 
the principles of self -realization, M āndhātā 
worshiped that transcendentally situated Su-
preme Soul, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Lord Vi ṣṇu, who comprises all the demi-
gods. He also gave immense charity to the 
brāhmaṇas, and thus he performed yajña to 
worship the Lord.  (35 -36) All plac es, from 
where the sun rises on the horizon, shining bril-
liantly, to where the sun sets, are known as the 
possession of the celebrated M āndhātā, the son 
of Yuvan āśva.  (37)  

Māndhātā begot three sons in the womb of 
Bindumat ī, the daughter of Śaśabindu. Th ese 
sons were Purukutsa, Ambar īṣa, and 
Mucukunda, a great mystic yog ī. These three 
brothers had fifty sisters, who all accepted the 
great sage Saubhari as theirhusband.  (38) 
Saubhari Ṛṣi was engaged in austerity, deep in 
the water of the river Yamun ā, whe n he saw a 
pair of fish engaged in sexual affairs. Thus he 
perceived the pleasure of sex life, and induced 
by this desire he went to King M āndhātā and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

539 
 begged for one of the King’s daughters. In re-
sponse to this request, the King said, “O 
brāhmaṇa, any of m y daughters may accept any 
husband according to her personal selection.”  
(39-40) Saubhari Muni thought: I am now fee-
ble because of old age. My hair has become 
grey, my skin is slack, and my head always 
trembles. Besides, I am a yog ī. Therefore 
women do no t like me. Since the King has thus 
rejected me, I shall reform my body in such a 
way as to be desirable even to celestial women, 
what to speak of the daughters of worldly 
kings.  (41 -42)  

Thereafter, when Saubhari Muni became 
quite a young and beautiful p erson, the messen-
ger of the palace took him inside the residential 
quarters of the princesses, which were ex-
tremely opulent. All fifty princesses then ac-
cepted him as their husband, although he was 
only one man.  (43) Thereafter, the princesses, 
being attr acted by Saubhari Muni, gave up their 
sisterly relationship and quarreled among 
themselves, each one of them contending, 
“This man is just suitable for me, and not for 
you.” In this way there ensued a great disagree-
ment.  (44) Because Saubhari Muni was exp ert 
in chanting mantras perfectly, his severe auster-
ities resulted in an opulent home, with gar-
ments, ornaments, properly dressed and deco-
rated maidservants and manservants, and vari-
eties of parks with clear -water lakes and gar-
dens. In the gardens, fragran t with varieties of 
flowers, birds chirped and bees hummed, sur-
rounded by professional singers. Saubhari 
Muni’s home was amply provided with valua-
ble beds, seats, ornaments, and arrangements 
for bathing, and there were varieties of sandal-
wood creams, flowe r garlands, and palatable 
dishes. Thus surrounded by opulent parapher-
nalia, the muni engaged in family affairs with 
his numerous wives.  (45 -46) M āndhātā, the 
King of the entire world, consisting of seven is-
lands, was struck with wonder when he saw the 
household opulence of Saubhari Muni. Thus he 
gave up his false prestige in his position as em-
peror of the world.  (47) In this way, Saubhari 
Muni enj oyed sense gratification in the material world, but he was not at all satisfied, just as a 
fire never ceases blazing if constantly supplied 
with drops of fat.  (48)  

Thereafter, one day while Saubhari Muni, 
who was expert in chanting mantras, was sitting 
in a secluded place, he thought to himself about 
the cause of his falldown, which was simply 
that he had associated himself with the sexual 
affairs of the fish.  (49) Alas! While practicing 
austerity, even within the depths of the water, 
and while observin g all the rules and regula-
tions practiced by saintly persons, I lost the re-
sults of my long austerities simply by associa-
tion with the sexual affairs of fish. Everyone 
should observe this falldown and learn from it.  
(50) A person desiring liberation from material 
bondage must give up the association of per-
sons interested in sex life and should not em-
ploy his senses externally [in seeing, hearing, 
talking, walking and so on]. One should always 
stay in a secluded place, completely fixing his 
mind at the lotu s feet of the unlimited Person-
ality of Godhead, and if one wants any associ-
ation at all, he should associate with persons 
similarly engaged.  (51) In the beginning I was 
alone and engaged in performing the austerities 
of mystic yoga, but later, because of the associ-
ation of fish engaged in sex, I desired to marry. 
Then I became the husband of fifty wives, and 
in each of them I begot one hundred sons, and 
thus my family increased to five thousand 
members. By the influence of the modes of ma-
terial nature, I b ecame fallen and thought that I 
would be happy in material life. Thus there is 
no end to my material desires for enjoyment, in 
this life and the next.  (52) In this way he passed 
his life in household affairs for some time, but 
then he became detached from  material enjoy-
ment. To renounce material association, he ac-
cepted the v ānaprastha order and went to the 
forest. His devoted wives followed him, for 
they had no shelter other than their husband.  
(53) When Saubhari Muni, who was quite con-
versant with the self, went to the forest, he per-
formed severe penances. In this way, in t he fire 
at the time of death, he ultimately engaged him-
self in the service of the Supreme Personality 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

540 
 of Godhead.  (54) O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, by ob-
serving their husband progressing in spiritual 
existence, Saubhari Muni’s wives were also 
able to enter the sp iritual world by his spiritual 
power, just as the flames of a fire cease when 
the fire is extinguished. (55)  

SB 9.7: The Descendants of King M āndhātā 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: The most promi-
nent among the sons of M āndhātā was he who 
is celebrated as Ambar īṣa. Ambar īṣa was ac-
cepted as son by his grandfather Yuvan āśva. 
Ambar īṣa’s son was Yauvan āśva, and 
Yauvan āśva’s son was H ārīta. In M āndhātā’s 
dynasty, Ambar īṣa, H ārīta and Yauvan āśva 
were very prominent.  (1) The serpent brothers 
of Narmad ā gave Narmad ā to Purukutsa. Being 
sent by V āsuki, she took Purukutsa to the lower 
region of the universe.  (2) There in Ras ātala, 
the lower region of the universe, Purukutsa, be-
ing empowered by Lord Vi ṣṇu, was able to kill 
all the Gandharvas who deserved to be killed. 
Puru kutsa received the benediction from the 
serpents that anyone who remembers this his-
tory of his being brought by Narmad ā to the 
lower region of the universe will be assured of 
safety from the attack of snakes.  (3) The son of 
Purukutsa was Trasaddasyu, who was the fa-
ther of Anara ṇya. Anara ṇya’s son was Har-
yaśva, the father of Pr āruṇa. Pr āruṇa was the 
father of Tribandhana.  (4) The son of 
Tribandhana was Satyavrata, who is celebrated 
by the name Tri śaṅku. Because he kidnapped 
the daughter of a br āhmaṇa when she was being 
married, his father cursed him to become a 
caṇḍāla, lower than a śūdra. Thereafter, by the 
influence of Vi śvāmitra, he went to the higher 
planetary system, the heavenly planets, in his 
material body, but because of the prowess of 
the demigods  he fell back downward. Nonethe-
less, by the power of Vi śvāmitra, he did not fall 
all the way down; even today he can still be 
seen hanging in the sky, head downward.  (5 -6)  
 The son of Tri śaṅku was Hari ścandra. Be-
cause of Hari ścandra there was a quarrel b e-
tween Vi śvāmitra and Vasi ṣṭha, who for many 
years fought one another, having been trans-
formed into birds.  (7) Hari ścandra had no son 
and was therefore extremely morose. Once, 
therefore, following the advice of N ārada, he 
took shelter of Varu ṇa and said t o him, “My 
lord, I have no son. Would you kindly give me 
one?”  (8) O King Par īkṣit, Hari ścandra begged 
Varu ṇa, “My lord, if a son is born to me, with 
that son I shall perform a sacrifice for your sat-
isfaction.” When Hari ścandra said this, Varu ṇa 
replied, “Let it be so.” Because of Varu ṇa’s 
benediction, Hari ścandra begot a son named 
Rohita.  (9) Thereafter, when the child was 
born, Varu ṇa approached Hari ścandra and said, 
“Now you have a son. With this son you can 
offer me a sacrifice.” In answer to this, 
Hariścandra said, “After ten days have passed 
since an animal’s birth, the animal becomes fit 
to be sacrificed.”  (10) After ten days, Varu ṇa 
came again and said to Hari ścandra, “Now you 
can perform the sacrifice.” Hari ścandra replied, 
“When an animal grows teeth, then it becomes 
pure enough to be sacrificed.”  (11) When the 
teeth grew, Varu ṇa came and said to Hari ścan-
dra, “Now the animal has grown teeth, and you 
can perform the sacrifice.” Hari ścandra replied, 
“When all its teeth have fallen out, then it wil l 
be fit for sacrifice.”  (12) When the teeth had 
fallen out, Varu ṇa returned and said to 
Hariścandra, “Now the animal’s teeth have 
fallen out, and you can perform the sacrifice.” 
But Hari ścandra replied, “When the animal’s 
teeth grow in again, then he wil l be pure enough 
to be sacrificed.”  (13) When the teeth grew in 
again, Varu ṇa came and said to Hari ścandra, 
“Now you can perform the sacrifice.” But 
Hariścandra then said, “O King, when the sac-
rificial animal becomes a k ṣatriya and is able to 
shield himse lf to fight with the enemy, then he 
will be purified.”  (14) Hari ścandra was cer-
tainly very much attached to his son. Because 
of this affection, he asked the demigod Varu ṇa 
to wait. Thus Varu ṇa waited and waited for the 
time to come.  (15) Rohita could und erstand 
that his father intended to offer him as the ani-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

541 
 mal for sacrifice. Therefore, just to save him-
self from death, he equipped himself with bow 
and arrows and went to the forest.  (16) When 
Rohita heard that his father had been attacked 
by dropsy due t o Varu ṇa and that his abdomen 
had grown very large, he wanted to return to the 
capital, but King Indra forbade him to do so.  
(17) King Indra advised Rohita to travel to dif-
ferent pilgrimage sites and holy places, for such 
activities are pious indeed. Foll owing this in-
struction, Rohita went to the forest for one year.  
(18) In this way, at the end of the second, third, 
fourth and fifth years, when Rohita wanted to 
return to his capital, the King of heaven, Indra, 
approached him as an old br āhmaṇa and for-
bade him to return, repeating the same words as 
in the previous year.  (19) Thereafter, in the 
sixth year, after wandering in the forest, Rohita 
returned to the capital of his father. He pur-
chased from Aj īgarta his second son, named 
Śunaḥśepha. Then he offere d Śunaḥśepha to his 
father, Hari ścandra, to be used as the sacrificial 
animal and offered Hari ścandra his respectful 
obeisances.  (20) Thereafter, the famous King 
Hariścandra, one of the exalted persons in his-
tory, performed grand sacrifices by sacrificing  
a man and pleased all the demigods. In this way 
his dropsy created by Varu ṇa was cured.  (21) 
In that great human sacrifice, Vi śvāmitra was 
the chief priest to offer oblations, the perfectly 
self-realized Jamadagni had the responsibility 
for chanting the mantras from the Yajur Veda, 
Vasiṣṭha was the chief brahminical priest, and 
the sage Ay āsya was the reciter of the hymns of 
the S āma Veda. (22) King Indra, being very 
pleased with Hari ścandra, offered him a gift of 
a golden chariot. Śunaḥśepha’s glories wi ll be 
presented along with the description of the son 
of Vi śvāmitra.  (23)  

The great sage Vi śvāmitra saw that 
Mahārāja Hari ścandra, along with his wife, was 
truthful, forbearing and concerned with the es-
sence. Thus he gave them imperishable 
knowledge for  fulfillment of the human mis-
sion.  (24) Mah ārāja Hari ścandra first purified 
his mind, which was full of material enjoyment, 
by amalgamating it with the earth. Then he amalgamated the earth with water, the water 
with fire, the fire with the air, and the ai r with 
the sky. Thereafter, he amalgamated the sky 
with the total material energy, and the total ma-
terial energy with spiritual knowledge. This 
spiritual knowledge is realization of one’s self 
as part of the Supreme Lord. When the self -re-
alized spiritual s oul is engaged in service to the 
Lord, he is eternally imperceptible and incon-
ceivable. Thus established in spiritual 
knowledge, he is completely freed from mate-
rial bondage.  (25 -26)  

SB 9.8: The Sons of Sagara Meet Lord Ka-
piladeva  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: The son of 
Rohita was Harita, and Harita’s son was 
Campa, who constructed the town of 
Camp āpurī. The son of Campa was Sudeva, 
and his son was Vijaya.  (1) The son of Vijaya 
was Bharuka, Bharuka’s son was V ṛka, and 
Vṛka’s son was  Bāhuka. The enemies of King 
Bāhuka took away all his possessions, and 
therefore the King entered the order of 
vānaprastha and went to the forest with his 
wife.  (2) B āhuka died when he was old, and 
one of his wives wanted to die with him, fol-
lowing the sa tī rite. At that time, however, 
Aurva Muni, knowing her to be pregnant, for-
bade her to die.  (3) Knowing that she was preg-
nant, the co -wives of the wife of B āhuka con-
spired to give her poison with her food, but it 
did not act. Instead, the son was born alo ng 
with the poison. Therefore he became famous 
as Sagara [“one who is born with poison”]. 
Sagara later became the emperor. The place 
known as Ga ṅgāsāgara was excavated by his 
sons.  (4)  

Sagara Mah ārāja, following the order of his 
spiritual master, Aurva,  did not kill the uncivi-
lized men like the T ālajaṅghas, Yavanas, 
Śakas, Haihayas and Barbaras. Instead, some of 
them he made dress awkwardly, some of them 
he shaved clean but allowed to wear mustaches, 
some of them he left wearing loose hair, some 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

542 
 he half shaved, some he left without underwear, 
and some without external garments. Thus 
these different clans were made to dress differ-
ently, but King Sagara did not kill them.  (5 -6) 
Following the instructions of the great sage 
Aurva, Sagara Mah ārāja performed a śvamedha 
sacrifices and thus satisfied the Supreme Lord, 
who is the supreme controller, the Supersoul of 
all learned scholars, and the knower of all Ve-
dic knowledge, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. But Indra, the King of heaven, stole 
the horse meant t o be offered at the sacrifice.  
(7) [King Sagara had two wives, Sumati and 
Keśinī.] The sons of Sumati, who were very 
proud of their prowess and influence, following 
the order of their father, searched for the lost 
horse. While doing so, they dug into the earth 
very extensively.  (8) Thereafter, in the north-
eastern direction, they saw the horse near the 
āśrama of Kapila Muni. “Here is the man who 
has stolen the horse,” they said. “He is staying 
there with closed eyes. Certainly he is very sin-
ful. Kill him! Kill him!” Shouting like this, the 
sons of Sagara, sixty thousand all together, 
raised their weapons. When they approached 
the sage, the sage opened His eyes.  (9 -10) By 
the influence of Indra, the King of heaven, the 
sons of Sagara had lost their intellig ence and 
disrespected a great personality. Consequently, 
fire emanated from their own bodies, and they 
were immediately burned to ashes.  (11) It is 
sometimes argued that the sons of King Sagara 
were burned to ashes by the fire emanating 
from the eyes of K apila Muni. This statement, 
however, is not approved by great learned per-
sons, for Kapila Muni’s body is completely in 
the mode of goodness and therefore cannot 
manifest the mode of ignorance in the form of 
anger, just as the pure sky cannot be polluted 
by the dust of the earth.  (12) Kapila Muni 
enunciated in this material world the S āṅkhya 
philosophy, which is a strong boat with which 
to cross over the ocean of nescience. Indeed, a 
person eager to cross the ocean of the material 
world may take shelter of this philosophy. In 
such a greatly learned person, situated on the 
elevated platf orm of transcendence, how can 
there be any distinction between enemy and 
friend?  (13) Among the sons of Sagara Mahārāja was one named Asamañjasa, who 
was born from the King’s second wife, Ke śinī. 
The son of Asamañjasa was known as 
Aṁśumān, and he was alwa ys engaged in 
working for the good of Sagara Mah ārāja, his 
grandfather.  (14)  

Formerly, in his previous birth, Asamañjasa 
had been a great mystic yog ī, but by bad asso-
ciation he had fallen from his exalted position. 
Now, in this life, he was born in a ro yal family 
and was a j āti-smara; that is, he had the special 
advantage of being able to remember his past 
birth. Nonetheless, he wanted to display him-
self as a miscreant, and therefore he would do 
things that were abominable in the eyes of the 
public and u nfavorable to his relatives. He 
would disturb the boys sporting in the river 
Saray ū by throwing them into the depths of the 
water.  (15 -16) Because Asamañjasa engaged 
in such abominable activities, his father gave 
up affection for him and had him exiled. T hen 
Asamañjasa exhibited his mystic power by re-
viving the boys and showing them to the King 
and their parents. After this, Asamañjasa left 
Ayodhy ā.  (17) O King Par īkṣit, when all the 
inhabitants of Ayodhy ā saw that their boys had 
come back to life, they w ere astounded, and 
King Sagara greatly lamented the absence of 
his son.  (18) Thereafter, A ṁśumān, the grand-
son of Mah ārāja Sagara, was ordered by the 
King to search for the horse. Following the 
same path traversed by his uncles, A ṁśumān 
gradually reached the stack of ashes and found 
the horse nearby.  (19) The great A ṁśumān saw 
the sage named Kapila, the saint who is an in-
carnation of Vi ṣṇu, sitting there by the horse. 
Aṁśumān offered Him respectful obeisances, 
folded his hands and offered Him prayers with  
great attention.  (20)  

Aṁśumān said: My Lord, even Lord 
Brahm ā is to this very day unable to understand 
Your position, which is far beyond himself, ei-
ther by meditation or by mental speculation. So 
what to speak of others like us, who have been 
created by Brahm ā in various forms as demi-
gods, animals, human beings, birds and beasts? 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

543 
 We are completely in ignorance. Therefore, 
how can we know You, who are the Transcend-
ence?  (21)  

My Lord, You are fully situated in every-
one’s heart, but the living entities , covered by 
the material body, cannot see You, for they are 
influenced by the external energy, conducted 
by the three modes of material nature. Their in-
telligence being covered by sattva -guṇa, rajo -
guṇa and tamo -guṇa, they can see only the ac-
tions and rea ctions of these three modes of ma-
terial nature. Because of the actions and reac-
tions of the mode of ignorance, whether the liv-
ing entities are awake or sleeping, they can see 
only the workings of material nature; they can-
not see Your Lordship.  (22) O my L ord, sages 
freed from the influence of the three modes of 
material naturesages such as the four Kum āras 
[Sanat, Sanaka, Sanandana and San ātana]are 
able to think of You, who are concentrated 
knowledge. But how can an ignorant person 
like me think of You?  (23) O completely 
peaceful Lord, although material nature, frui-
tive activities and their consequent material 
names and forms are Your creation, You are 
unaffected by them. Therefore, Your transcen-
dental name is different from material names, 
and Your form is different from material forms. 
You assume a form resembling a material body 
just to give us instr uctions like those of Bhaga-
vad-gītā, but actually You are the supreme orig-
inal person. I therefore offer my respectful 
obeisances unto You.  (24) O my Lord, those 
whose hearts are bewildered by the influence of 
lust, greed, envy and illusion are interested only 
in false hearth and home i n this world created 
by Your m āyā. Attached to home, wife and 
children, they wander in this material world 
perpetually.  (25) O Supersoul of all living en-
tities, O Personality of Godhead, simply by see-
ing You I have now been freed from all lusty 
desires, w hich are the root cause of insurmount-
able illusion and bondage in the material world.  
(26) O King Par īkṣit, when A ṁśumān had glo-
rified the Lord in this way, the great sage Ka-
pila, the powerful incarnation of Vi ṣṇu, being 
very merciful to him, explained to  him the path of knowledge.  (27)  

The Personality of Godhead said: My dear 
Aṁśumān, here is the animal sought by your 
grandfather for sacrifice. Please take it. As for 
your forefathers, who have been burnt to ashes, 
they can be delivered only by Ganges w ater, 
and not by any other means.  (28)  

Thereafter, A ṁśumān circumambulated Ka-
pila Muni and offered Him respectful obei-
sances, bowing his head. After fully satisfying 
Him in this way, A ṁśumān brought back the 
horse meant for sacrifice, and with this hors e 
Mahārāja Sagara performed the remaining ritu-
alistic ceremonies.  (29)  

After delivering charge of his kingdom to 
Aṁśumān and thus being freed from all mate-
rial anxiety and bondage, Sagara Mah ārāja, fol-
lowing the means instructed by Aurva Muni, 
achieved the supreme destination.  (30)  

SB 9.9: The Dynasty of A ṁśumān 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: King 
Aṁśumān, like his grandfather, performed aus-
terities for a very long time. Nonetheless, he 
could not bring the Ganges to this material 
world, and thereafter, in due course of time, he 
died.  (1) Like A ṁśumān himself, Dil īpa, his 
son, was unable to bring the Ganges to this ma-
terial world, and he also became a victim of 
death in due course of time. Then Dil īpa’s son, 
Bhag īratha, performed very severe austerities 
to bring the Ganges to this material world.  (2) 
Thereafter, mother Ganges appeared before 
King Bhag īratha and said, “I am very much sat-
isfied with your austerities and am now pre-
pared to give you benedictions as you desire.” 
Being thus addressed by Ga ṅgādevī, mother 
Ganges, the King bowed his head before her 
and explained his desire.  (3)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

544 
 Mother Ganges replied: When I fall from the 
sky to the surface of the planet earth, the water 
will certainly be very forceful. Who will sustain 
that force? If I am not sustained, I shall pierce 
the surface of the earth and go down to 
Rasātala, the P ātāla area of the universe.  (4) O 
King, I do not wish to go down to the planet 
earth, for there the people in general will bathe 
in my water to cleanse themselves of the reac-
tions of their sinful deeds. When all these sinful 
reactions accumulate in me, how shall I become 
free from them? You must consider this very 
carefully.  (5)  

Bhag īratha said: Those who are saintly be-
cause of devotional service and are therefore in 
the re nounced order, free from material desires, 
and who are pure devotees, expert in following 
the regulative principles mentioned in the Ve-
das, are always glorious and pure in behavior 
and are able to deliver all fallen souls. When 
such pure devotees bathe in your water, the sin-
ful reactions accumulated from other people 
will certainly be counteracted, for such devo-
tees always keep in the core of their hearts the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can van-
quish all sinful reactions.  (6) Like a cloth wo-
ven of t hreads extending for its length and 
breadth, this entire universe, in all its latitude 
and longitude, is situated under different poten-
cies of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Lord Śiva is the incarnation of the Lord, and 
thus he represents the Supersou l in the embod-
ied soul. He can sustain your forceful waves on 
his head.  (7) After saying this, Bhag īratha sat-
isfied Lord Śiva by performing austerities. O 
King Par īkṣit, Lord Śiva was very quickly sat-
isfied with Bhag īratha.  (8) When King Bha-
gīratha appro ached Lord Śiva and requested 
him to sustain the forceful waves of the Gan-
ges, Lord Śiva accepted the proposal by saying, 
“Let it be so.” Then, with great attention, he 
sustained the Ganges on his head, for the water 
of the Ganges is purifying, having eman ated 
from the toes of Lord Vi ṣṇu.  (9) The great and 
saintly king Bhag īratha brought the Ganges, 
which can deliver all the fallen souls, to that place on earth where the bodies of his forefa-
thers lay burnt to ashes.  (10) Bhag īratha 
mounted a swift chariot  and drove before 
mother Ganges, who followed him, purifying 
many countries, until they reached the ashes of 
Bhag īratha’s forefathers, the sons of Sagara, 
who were thus sprinkled with water from the 
Ganges.  (11) Because the sons of Sagara 
Mahārāja had off ended a great personality, the 
heat of their bodies had increased, and they 
were burnt to ashes. But simply by being sprin-
kled with water from the Ganges, all of them 
became eligible to go to the heavenly planets. 
What then is to be said of those who use t he 
water of mother Ganges to worship her?  (12) 
Simply by having water from the Ganges come 
in contact with the ashes of their burnt bodies, 
the sons of Sagara Mah ārāja were elevated to 
the heavenly planets. Therefore, what is to be 
said of a devotee who worships mother Ganges 
faithfully with a determined vow? One can only 
imagine the benefit that accrues to such a dev-
otee.  (13) Because mother Ganges emanates 
from the lotus toe of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Anantadeva, she is able to liberate 
one from material bondage. Therefore what-
ever is described herewith about her is not at all 
wonderful.  (14) Great sages, completely freed 
from material lusty desires,  devote their minds 
fully to the service of the Lord. Such persons 
are liberated from material bondage without 
difficulty, and they become transcendentally 
situated, acquiring the spiritual quality of the 
Lord. This is the glory of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead.  (15)  

Bhag īratha had a son named Śruta, whose 
son was N ābha. This son was different from the 
Nābha previously described. N ābha had a son 
named Sindhudv īpa, from Sindhudv īpa came 
Ayut āyu, and from Ayut āyu came Ṛtūparṇa, 
who became a friend of Nalar āja. Ṛtūparṇa 
taught Nalar āja the art of gambling, and Na-
larāja gave Ṛtūparṇa lessons in controlling and 
maintaining horses. The son of Ṛtūparṇa was 
Sarvak āma.  (16 -17) Sarvak āma had a son 
named Sud āsa, whose son, known as Saud āsa, 
was the husband of Damayant ī. Saud āsa is 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

545 
 sometimes known as Mitrasaha or Kal-
māṣapāda. Because of his own misdeed, Mi-
trasaha was sonless and was cursed by Vasi ṣṭha 
to become a man -eater [R ākṣasa].  (18)  

King Par īkṣit said: O Śukadeva Gosv āmī, 
why did Vasi ṣṭha, the spiritual  master of 
Saud āsa, curse that great soul? I wish to know 
of this. If it is not a confidential matter, please 
describe it to me.  (19)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Once Saud āsa 
went to live in the forest, where he killed a man -
eater [R ākṣasa] but forgave and r eleased the 
man-eater’s brother. That brother, however, de-
cided to take revenge. Thinking to harm the 
King, he became the cook at the King’s house. 
One day, the King’s spiritual master, Vasi ṣṭha 
Muni, was invited for dinner, and the R ākṣasa 
cook served him  human flesh.  (20 -21) While 
examining the food given to him, Vasi ṣṭha 
Muni, by his mystic power, could understand 
that it was unfit to eat, being the flesh of a hu-
man being. He was very angry at this and im-
mediately cursed Saud āsa to become a man -
eater.  (22) When Vasi ṣṭha understood that the 
human flesh had been served by the R ākṣasa, 
not by the King, he undertook twelve years of 
austerity to cleanse himself for having cursed 
the faultless King. Meanwhile, King Saud āsa 
took water and chanted the śapa-mant ra, pre-
paring to curse Vasi ṣṭha, but his wife, Mada-
yantī, forbade him to do so. Then the King saw 
that the ten directions, the sky and the surface 
of the globe were full of living entities every-
where.  (23 -24) Saud āsa thus acquired the pro-
pensity of a man -eater and received on his leg 
a black spot, for which he was known as Kal-
māṣapāda. Once King Kalm āṣapāda saw a 
brāhmaṇa couple engaged in sexual intercourse 
in the forest.  (25) Being influenced by the pro-
pensity of a R ākṣasa and being very hungry, 
King Sa udāsa seized the br āhmaṇa. Then the 
poor woman, the br āhmaṇa’s wife, said to the 
King: O hero, you are not actually a man -eater; 
rather, you are among the descendants of 
Mahārāja Ik ṣvāku. Indeed, you are a great 
fighter, the husband of Madayant ī. You shoul d not act irreligiously in this way. I desire to have 
a son. Please, therefore, return my husband, 
who has not yet impregnated me.  (26 -27) O 
King, O hero, this human body is meant for uni-
versal benefits. If you kill this body untimely, 
you will kill all t he benefits of human life.  (28) 
Here is a learned, highly qualified br āhmaṇa, 
engaged in performing austerity and eagerly 
desiring to worship the Supreme Lord, the Su-
persoul who lives within the core of the heart in 
all living entities.  (29) My lord, you are com-
pletely aware of the religious principles. As a 
son never deser ves to be killed by his father, 
here is a br āhmaṇa who should be protected by 
the king, and never killed. How does he deserve 
to be killed by a r ājarṣi like you?  (30) You are 
well known and worshiped in learned circles. 
How dare you kill this br āhmaṇa, wh o is a 
saintly, sinless person, well versed in Vedic 
knowledge? Killing him would be like destroy-
ing the embryo within the womb or killing a 
cow.  (31) Without my husband, I cannot live 
for a moment. If you want to eat my husband, 
it would be better to eat  me first, for without my 
husband I am as good as a dead body.  (32) Be-
ing condemned by the curse of Vasi ṣṭha, King 
Saud āsa devoured the br āhmaṇa, exactly as a 
tiger eats its prey. Even though the br āhmaṇa’s 
wife spoke so pitiably, Saud āsa was unmoved 
by her lamentation.  (33) When the chaste wife 
of the br āhmaṇa saw that her husband, who was 
about to discharge semen, had been eaten by 
the man -eater, she was overwhelmed with grief 
and lamentation. Thus she angrily cursed the 
King.  (34) O foolish, sinful pe rson, because 
you have eaten my husband when I was sex-
ually inclined and desiring to have the seed of 
a child, I shall also see you die when you at-
tempt to discharge semen in your wife. In other 
words, whenever you attempt to sexually unite 
with your wife,  you shall die.  (35) Thus the 
wife of the br āhmaṇa cursed King Saud āsa, 
known as Mitrasaha. Then, being inclined to go 
with her husband, she set fire to her husband’s 
bones, fell into the fire herself, and went with 
him to the same destination.  (36)  

After twelve years, when King Saud āsa was 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

546 
 relea sed from the curse by Vasi ṣṭha, he wanted 
to have sexual intercourse with his wife. But 
the Queen reminded him about the curse by the 
brāhmaṇī, and thus he was checked from sexual 
intercourse.  (37) After being thus instructed, 
the King gave up the future happiness of sexual 
intercourse and by destiny remained sonless. 
Later, with the King’s permission, the great 
saint Vasi ṣṭha begot a child in the womb of 
Madayant ī.  (38) Madayant ī bore the child 
within the womb for seven years and did not 
give birth. Ther efore Vasi ṣṭha struck her abdo-
men with a stone, and then the child was born. 
Consequently, the child was known as A śmaka 
[“the child born of a stone”].  (39) From 
Aśmaka, B ālika took birth. Because B ālika was 
surrounded by women and was therefore saved 
from the anger of Para śurāma, he was known 
as N ārīkavaca [“one who is protected by 
women”]. When Para śurāma vanquished all the 
kṣatriyas, B ālika became the progenitor of 
more k ṣatriyas. Therefore he was known as 
Mūlaka, the root of the k ṣatriya dynasty.  (40)  
From B ālika came a son named Da śaratha, 
from Da śaratha came a son named Ai ḍaviḍi, 
and from Ai ḍaviḍi came King Vi śvasaha. The 
son of King Vi śvasaha was the famous 
Mahārāja Kha ṭvāṅga.  (41) King Kha ṭvāṅga 
was unconquerable in any fight. Requested by 
the dem igods to join them in fighting the de-
mons, he won victory, and the demigods, being 
very pleased, wanted to give him a benediction. 
The King inquired from them about the dura-
tion of his life and was informed that he had 
only one moment more. Thus he immedia tely 
left his palace and went to his own residence, 
where he engaged his mind fully on the lotus 
feet of the Lord.  (42) Mah ārāja Kha ṭvāṅga 
thought: Not even my life is dearer to me than 
the brahminical culture and the br āhmaṇas, 
who are worshiped by my family. What then is 
to be said of my kingdom, land, wife, children 
and opulence? Nothing is dearer to me than the 
brāhmaṇas.  (43) I was never attracted, even in 
my childhood, by insignificant things or irreli-
gious principles. I did not find anything more 
substantial than the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.  (44) The demigods, the directors of 
the three worlds, wanted to give me  whatever benediction I desired. I did not want their ben-
edictions, however, because I am interested in 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who cre-
ated everything in this material world. I am 
more interested in the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead than in al l material benedictions.  (45) 
Even though the demigods have the advantages 
of being situated in the higher planetary system, 
their minds, senses and intelligence are agitated 
by material conditions. Therefore, even such el-
evated persons fail to realize th e Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is eternally situated 
in the core of the heart. What then is to be said 
of others, such as human beings, who have 
fewer advantages?  (46) Therefore I should 
now give up my attachment for things created 
by the external energy of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. I should engage in thought of 
the Lord and should thus surrender unto Him. 
This material creation, having been created by 
the external energy of the Lord, is like an im-
aginary town visualized on a hill or in a forest. 
Every conditioned soul has a natural attraction 
and attachment for material things, but one 
must simply give up this attachment and sur-
render unto the Supreme Personality of God-
head.  (47) Thus Mah ārāja Kha ṭvāṅga, by his 
advanced intelligence in rendering service to 
the Lord, gave up false identification with the 
body full of ignorance. In his original position 
of eternal servitorship, he engaged himself in 
rendering service to the Lord.  (48) The S u-
preme Personality of Godhead, V āsudeva, 
Kṛṣṇa, is extremely difficult to understand for 
unintelligent men who accept Him as imper-
sonal or void, which He is not. The Lord is 
therefore understood and sung about by pure 
devotees.  (49)  

SB 9.10: The Pastime s of the Supreme Lord, 
Rāmacandra  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: The son of 
Mahārāja Kha ṭvāṅga was D īrghab āhu, and his 
son was the celebrated Mah ārāja Raghu. From 
Mahārāja Raghu came Aja, and from Aja was 
born the great personality Mah ārāja Da śaratha.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

547 
 (1) Being prayed for by the demigods, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute 
Truth Himself, directly appeared with His ex-
pansion and expansions of the expansion. Their 
holy names were R āma, Lak ṣmaṇa, Bharata 
and Śatrughna. These celebrated incarnations 
thus appeared in four forms as the sons of 
Mahārāja Da śaratha.  (2)  

O King Par īkṣit, the transcendental activities 
of Lord R āmacandra have been described by 
great saintly persons who have seen the truth. 
Because you have heard again and again about 
Lord R āmacandra, the husband of mother S ītā, 
I shall describe these activities only in brief. 
Please listen.  (3)  

To keep the promise of His father intact, 
Lord R āmacandra immediately gave up the po-
sition of king and, accompanied by His wife, 
mother S ītā, wander ed from one forest to an-
other on His lotus feet, which were so delicate 
that they were unable to bear even the touch of 
Sītā’s palms. The Lord was also accompanied 
by Hanum ān [or by another monkey, Sugr īva], 
king of the monkeys, and by His own younger 
brother Lord Lak ṣmaṇa, both of whom gave 
Him relief from the fatigue of wandering in the 
forest. Having cut off the nose and ears of 
Śūrpaṇakhā, thus disfiguring her, the Lord was 
separated from mother S ītā. He therefore be-
came angry, moving His eyebrows and t hus 
frightening the ocean, who then allowed the 
Lord to construct a bridge to cross the ocean. 
Subsequently, the Lord entered the kingdom of 
Rāvaṇa to kill him, like a fire devouring a for-
est. May that Supreme Lord, R āmacandra, give 
us all protection.  (4)   

In the arena of the sacrifice performed by 
Viśvāmitra, Lord R āmacandra, the King of 
Ayodhy ā, killed many demons, R ākṣasas and 
uncivilized men who wandered at night in the 
mode of darkness. May Lord R āmacandra, who 
killed these demons in the presence of Lakṣmaṇa, be kind enough to give us protec-
tion.  (5) O King, the pastimes of Lord 
Rāmacandra were wonderful, like those of a 
baby elephant. In the assembly where mother 
Sītā was to choose her husband, in the midst of 
the heroes of this world, He broke the bow be-
longing to Lord Śiva. This bow was so heavy 
that it was carried by three hundred men, but 
Lord R āmacandra bent and strung it and broke 
it in the middle, just as a baby elephant breaks 
a stick of sugarcane. Thus the Lord achieved 
the hand of mother S ītā, who was equally as en-
dowed with transcendental qualities of form, 
beauty, behavior, age and nature. Indeed, she 
was the goddess of fortune who constantly rests 
on the chest of the Lord. While returning from 
Sītā’s home after gaining her at the assembly  
of competitors, Lord R āmacandra met 
Paraśurāma. Although Para śurāma was very 
proud, having rid the earth of the royal order 
twenty -one times, he was defeated by the Lord, 
who appeared to be a k ṣatriya of the royal or-
der.  (6 -7) Carrying out the order of H is father, 
who was bound by a promise to his wife, Lord 
Rāmacandra left behind His kingdom, opu-
lence, friends, well -wishers, residence and eve-
rything else, just as a liberated soul gives up his 
life, and went to the forest with S ītā.  (8) While 
wandering i n the forest, where He accepted a 
life of hardship, carrying His invincible bow 
and arrows in His hand, Lord R āmacandra de-
formed R āvaṇa’s sister, who was polluted with 
lusty desires, by cutting off her nose and ears. 
He also killed her fourteen thousand R ākṣasa 
friends, headed by Khara, Tri śira and D ūṣaṇa.  
(9) O King Par īkṣit, when R āvaṇa, who had ten 
heads on his shoulders, heard about the beauti-
ful and attractive features of S ītā, his mind was 
agitated by lusty desires, and he went to kidnap 
her. To dist ract Lord R āmacandra from His 
āśrama, R āvaṇa sent M ārīca in the form of a 
golden deer, and when Lord R āmacandra saw 
that wonderful deer, He left His residence and 
followed it and finally killed it with a sharp ar-
row, just as Lord Śiva killed Dak ṣa.  (10) W hen 
Rāmacandra entered the forest and Lak ṣmaṇa 
was also absent, the worst of the R ākṣasas, 
Rāvaṇa, kidnapped S ītādevī, the daughter of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

548 
 the King of Videha, just as a tiger seizes unpro-
tected sheep when the shepherd is absent. Then 
Lord R āmacandra wandered i n the forest with 
His brother Lak ṣmaṇa as if very much dis-
tressed due to separation from His wife. Thus 
He showed by His personal example the condi-
tion of a person attached to women.  (11) Lord 
Rāmacandra, whose lotus feet are worshiped by 
Lord Brahm ā and Lord Śiva, had assumed the 
form of a human being. Thus He performed the 
funeral ceremony of Ja ṭāyu, who was killed by 
Rāvaṇa. The Lord then killed the demon named 
Kabandha, and after making friends with the 
monkey chiefs, killing V āli and arranging for 
the deliverance of mother S ītā, He went to the 
beach of the ocean.  (12) After reaching the 
beach, Lord R āmacandra fasted for three days, 
awaiting the arrival of the ocean personified. 
When the ocean did not come, the Lord exhib-
ited His pastimes of anger, and  simply by His 
glancing over the ocean, all the living entities 
within it, including the crocodiles and sharks, 
were agitated by fear. Then the personified 
ocean fearfully approached Lord R āmacandra, 
taking all paraphernalia to worship Him. Fall-
ing at the Lord’s lotus feet, the personified 
ocean spoke as follows.  (13) O all -pervading 
Supreme Person, we are dull -minded and did 
not understand who You are, but now we un-
derstand that You are the Supreme Person, the 
master of the entire universe, the unchanging  
and original Personality of Godhead. The dem-
igods are infatuated with the mode of goodness, 
the Praj āpatis with the mode of passion, and the 
lord of ghosts with the mode of ignorance, but 
You are the master of all these qualities.  (14) 
My Lord, You may use my water as You like. 
Indeed, You may cross it and go to the abode 
of Rāvaṇa, who is the great sou rce of disturb-
ance and crying for the three worlds. He is the 
son of Vi śravā, but is condemned like urine. 
Please go kill him and thus regain Your wife, 
Sītādevī. O great hero, although my water pre-
sents no impediment to Your going to La ṅkā, 
please constru ct a bridge over it to spread Your 
transcendental fame. Upon seeing this wonder-
fully uncommon deed of Your Lordship, all the 
great heroes and kings in the future will glorify 
You.  (15)   
Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: After constructing 
a bridge over the ocean by  throwing into the 
water the peaks of mountains whose trees and 
other vegetation had been shaken by the hands 
of great monkeys, Lord R āmacandra went to 
Laṅkā to release S ītādevī from the clutches of 
Rāvaṇa. With the direction and help of 
Vibh īṣaṇa, Rāvaṇa’s brother, the Lord, along 
with the monkey soldiers, headed by Sugr īva, 
Nīla and Hanum ān, entered R āvaṇa’s kingdom, 
Laṅkā, which had previously been burnt by 
Hanum ān.  (16) After entering La ṅkā, the mon-
key soldiers, led by chiefs like Sugr īva, N īla 
and Han umān, occupied all the sporting 
houses, granaries, treasuries, palace doorways, 
city gates, assembly houses, palace frontages 
and even the resting houses of the pigeons. 
When the city’s crossroads, platforms, flags 
and golden waterpots on its domes were al l de-
stroyed, the entire city of La ṅkā appeared like 
a river disturbed by a herd of elephants.  (17) 
When R āvaṇa, the master of the R ākṣasas, saw 
the disturbances created by the monkey sol-
diers, he called for Nikumbha, Kumbha, 
Dhūmrākṣa, Durmukha, Sur āntaka , Nar āntaka 
and other R ākṣasas and also his son Indrajit. 
Thereafter he called for Prahasta, Atik āya, 
Vikampana and finally Kumbhakar ṇa. Then he 
induced all his followers to fight against the en-
emies.  (18) Lord R āmacandra, surrounded by 
Lakṣmaṇa and monke y soldiers like Sugr īva, 
Hanum ān, Gandham āda, N īla, A ṅgada, 
Jāmbav ān and Panasa, attacked the soldiers of 
the R ākṣasas, who were fully equipped with 
various invincible weapons like swords, lances, 
bows, pr āsas, ṛṣṭis, śakti arrows, kha ḍgas and 
tomaras.  (1 9) Aṅgada and the other command-
ers of the soldiers of R āmacandra faced the el-
ephants, infantry, horses and chariots of the en-
emy and hurled against them big trees, moun-
tain peaks, clubs and arrows. Thus the soldiers 
of Lord R āmacandra killed R āvaṇa’s soldi ers, 
who had lost all good fortune because R āvaṇa 
had been condemned by the anger of mother 
Sītā.  (20)  

Thereafter, when R āvaṇa, the king of the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

549 
 Rākṣasas, observed that his soldiers had been 
lost, he was extremely angry. Thus he mounted 
his airplane, whi ch was decorated with flowers, 
and proceeded toward Lord R āmacandra, who 
sat on the effulgent chariot brought by M ātali, 
the chariot driver of Indra. Then R āvaṇa struck 
Lord R āmacandra with sharp arrows.  (21) Lord 
Rāmacandra said to R āvaṇa: You are the mo st 
abominable of the man -eaters. Indeed, you are 
like their stool. You resemble a dog, for as a 
dog steals eatables from the kitchen in the ab-
sence of the householder, in My absence you 
kidnapped My wife, S ītādevī. Therefore as 
Yamar āja punishes sinful men , I shall also pun-
ish you. You are most abominable, sinful and 
shameless. Today, therefore, I, whose attempt 
never fails, shall punish you.  (22) After thus 
rebuking R āvaṇa, Lord R āmacandra fixed an 
arrow to His bow, aimed at R āvaṇa, and re-
leased the arrow , which pierced R āvaṇa’s heart 
like a thunderbolt. Upon seeing this, R āvaṇa’s 
followers raised a tumultuous sound, crying, 
“Alas! Alas! What has happened? What has 
happened?” as R āvaṇa, vomiting blood from 
his ten mouths, fell from his airplane, just as a 
pious man falls to earth from the heavenly plan-
ets when the results of his pious activities are 
exhausted.  (23)  

Thereafter, all the women whose husbands 
had fallen in the battle, headed by Mandodar ī, 
the wife of R āvaṇa, came out of La ṅkā. Contin-
uously c rying, they approached the dead bodies 
of Rāvaṇa and the other R ākṣasas.  (24) Strik-
ing their breasts in affliction because their hus-
bands had been killed by the arrows of 
Lakṣmaṇa, the women embraced their respec-
tive husbands and cried piteously in voices  ap-
pealing to everyone.  (25) O my lord, O master! 
You epitomized trouble for others, and there-
fore you were called R āvaṇa. But now that you 
have been defeated, we also are defeated, for 
without you the state of La ṅkā has been con-
quered by the enemy. To wh om will it go for 
shelter?  (26) O greatly fortunate one, you came 
under the influence of lusty desires, and there-
fore you could not understand the influence of 
mother S ītā. Now, because of her curse, you have been reduced to this state, having been 
killed  by Lord R āmacandra.  (27) O pleasure of 
the R ākṣasa dynasty, because of you the state 
of La ṅkā and also we ourselves now have no 
protector. By your deeds you have made your 
body fit to be eaten by vultures and your soul 
fit to go to hell.  (28)  

ŚrīŚukad eva Gosv āmī said: Vibh īṣaṇa, the 
pious brother of R āvaṇa and devotee of Lord 
Rāmacandra, received approval from Lord 
Rāmacandra, the King of Kosala. Then he per-
formed the prescribed funeral ceremonies for 
his family members to save them from the path 
to he ll.  (29) Thereafter, Lord R āmacandra 
found S ītādevī sitting in a small cottage be-
neath the tree named Si ṁśapā in a forest of 
Aśoka trees. She was lean and thin, being ag-
grieved because of separation from Him.  (30) 
Seeing His wife in that condition, Lord 
Rāmacandra was very compassionate. When 
Rāmacandra came before her, she was exceed-
ingly happy to see her beloved, and her lo-
tuslike mouth showed her joy.  (31) After giv-
ing Vibh īṣaṇa the power to rule the R ākṣasa 
population of La ṅkā for the duration of one  
kalpa, Lord R āmacandra, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead [Bhagav ān], placed S ītādevī 
on an airplane decorated with flowers and then 
got on the plane Himself. The period for His 
living in the forest having ended, the Lord re-
turned to Ayodhy ā, accompanied  by Hanum ān, 
Sugr īva and His brother Lak ṣmaṇa.  (32) When 
Lord R āmacandra returned to His capital, 
Ayodhy ā, He was greeted on the road by the 
princely order, who showered His body with 
beautiful, fragrant flowers, while great person-
alities like Lord Brahm ā and other demigods 
glorified the activities of the Lord in great jubi-
lation.  (33)  

Upon reaching Ayodhy ā, Lord R āmacandra 
heard that in His absence His brother Bharata 
was eating barley cooked in the urine of a cow, 
covering His body with the bark of tr ees, wear-
ing matted locks of hair, and lying on a mattress 
of ku śa. The most merciful Lord very much la-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

550 
 mented this.  (34) When Lord Bharata under-
stood that Lord R āmacandra was returning to 
the capital, Ayodhy ā, He immediately took 
upon His own head Lord R āmacandra’s 
wooden shoes and came out from His camp at 
Nandigr āma. Lord Bharata was accompanied 
by ministers, priests and other respectable citi-
zens, by professional musicians vibrating 
pleasing musical sounds, and by learned 
brāhmaṇas loudly chanting Vedic  hymns. Fol-
lowing in the procession were chariots drawn 
by beautiful horses with harnesses of golden 
rope. These chariots were decorated by flags 
with golden embroidery and by other flags of 
various sizes and patterns. There were soldiers 
bedecked with gol den armor, servants bearing 
betel nut, and many well -known and beautiful 
prostitutes. Many servants followed on foot, 
bearing an umbrella, whisks, different grades of 
precious jewels, and other paraphernalia befit-
ting a royal reception. Accompanied in this  
way, Lord Bharata, His heart softened in ec-
stasy and His eyes full of tears, approached 
Lord R āmacandra and fell at His lotus feet with 
great ecstatic love.  (35 -38) After offering the 
wooden shoes before Lord R āmacandra, Lord 
Bharata stood with folded ha nds, His eyes full 
of tears, and Lord R āmacandra bathed Bharata 
with tears while embracing Him with both arms 
for a long time. Accompanied by mother S ītā 
and Lak ṣmaṇa, Lord R āmacandra then offered 
His respectful obeisances unto the learned 
brāhmaṇas and th e elderly persons in the fam-
ily, and all the citizens of Ayodhy ā offered their 
respectful obeisances unto the Lord.  (39 -40) 
The citizens of Ayodhy ā, upon seeing their 
King return after a long absence, offered Him 
flower garlands, waved their upper cloths,  and 
danced in great jubilation.  (41) O King, Lord 
Bharata carried Lord R āmacandra’s wooden 
shoes, Sugr īva and Vibh īṣaṇa carried a whisk 
and an excellent fan, Hanum ān carried a white 
umbrella, Śatrughna carried a bow and two 
quivers, and S ītādevī carried a waterpot filled 
with water from holy places. A ṅgada carried a 
sword, and J āmbav ān, King of the Ṛkṣas, car-
ried a golden shield.  (42 -43) O King Par īkṣit, 
as the Lord sat on His airplane of flowers, with 
women offering Him prayers and reciters chanting abo ut His characteristics, He appeared 
like the moon with the stars and planets.  (44) 
Thereafter, having been welcomed by His 
brother Bharata, Lord R āmacandra entered the 
city of Ayodhy ā in the midst of a festival. When 
He entered the palace, He offered obei sances to 
all the mothers, including Kaikey ī and the other 
wives of Mah ārāja Da śaratha, and especially 
His own mother, Kau śalyā. He also offered 
obeisances to the spiritual preceptors, such as 
Vasiṣṭha. Friends of His own age and younger 
friends worshiped Him, and He returned their 
respectful obeisances, as did Lak ṣmaṇa and 
mother S ītā. In this way they all entered the pal-
ace.  (45 -46)  

Upon seeing their sons, the mothers of 
Rāma, Lak ṣmaṇa, Bharata and Śatrughna im-
mediately arose, like unconscious bodies r e-
turning to consciousness. The mothers placed 
their sons on their laps and bathed Them with 
tears, thus relieving themselves of the grief of 
long separation.  (47) The family priest or spir-
itual master, Vasi ṣṭha, had Lord R āmacandra 
cleanly shaved, freeing  Him from His matted 
locks of hair. Then, with the cooperation of the 
elderly members of the family, he performed 
the bathing ceremony [abhi ṣeka] for Lord 
Rāmacandra with the water of the four seas and 
with other substances, just as it was performed 
for Ki ng Indra.  (48) Lord R āmacandra, fully 
bathed and His head clean -shaven, dressed 
Himself very nicely and was decorated with a 
garland and ornaments. Thus He shone 
brightly, surrounded by His brothers and wife, 
who were similarly dressed and ornamented.  
(49) Being pleased by the full surrender and 
submission of Lord Bharata, Lord R āmacandra 
then accepted the throne of the state. He cared 
for the citizens exactly like a father, and the cit-
izens, being fully engaged in their occupational 
duties of var ṇa and āśrama, accepted Him as 
their father.  (50) Lord R āmacandra became 
King during Tret ā-yuga, but because of His 
good government, the age was like Satya -yuga. 
Everyone was religious and completely happy.  
(51) O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, best of the Bharata 
dynasty, during the reign of Lord R āmacandra 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

551 
 the forests, the rivers, the hills and mountains, 
the states, the seven islands and the seven seas 
were all favorable in supplying the necessities 
of life for all living beings.  (52) When Lord 
Rāmacandra, the Supreme Pe rsonality of God-
head, was the King of this world, all bodily and 
mental suffering, disease, old age, bereave-
ment, lamentation, distress, fear and fatigue 
were completely absent. There was even no 
death for those who did not want it.  (53) Lord 
Rāmacandra t ook a vow to accept only one wife 
and have no connection with any other women. 
He was a saintly king, and everything in His 
character was good, untinged by qualities like 
anger. He taught good behavior for everyone, 
especially for householders, in terms of  
varṇāśrama -dharma. Thus He taught the gen-
eral public by His personal activities.  (54) 
Mother S ītā was very submissive, faithful, shy 
and chaste, always understanding the attitude 
of her husband. Thus by her character and her 
love and service she complete ly attracted the 
mind of the Lord.  (55)  

SB 9.11: Lord R āmacandra Rules the World  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Thereafter, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Lord R āmacan-
dra, accepted an ācārya and performed sacri-
fices [yajñas] with opulent paraphernalia. Th us 
He Himself worshiped Himself, for He is the 
Supreme Lord of all demigods.  (1) Lord 
Rāmacandra gave the entire east to the hot ā 
priest, the entire south to the brahm ā priest, the 
west to the adhvaryu priest, and the north to the 
udgātā priest, the recit er of the S āma Veda. In 
this way, He donated His kingdom.  (2) There-
after, thinking that because the br āhmaṇas have 
no material desires they should possess the en-
tire world, Lord R āmacandra delivered the land 
between the east, west, north and south to the 
ācārya.  (3) After thus giving everything in 
charity to the br āhmaṇas, Lord R āmacandra re-
tained only His personal garments and orna-
ments, and similarly the Queen, mother S ītā, 
was left with only her nose ring, and nothing 
else.  (4)   
All the br āhmaṇas who  were engaged in the 
various activities of the sacrifice were very 
pleased with Lord R āmacandra, who was 
greatly affectionate and favorable to the 
brāhmaṇas. Thus with melted hearts they re-
turned all the property received from Him and 
spoke as follows.  (5 ) O Lord, You are the mas-
ter of the entire universe. What have You not 
given to us? You have entered the core of our 
hearts and dissipated the darkness of our igno-
rance by Your effulgence. This is the supreme 
gift. We do not need a material donation.  (6) O 
Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who have accepted the br āhmaṇas as 
Your worshipable deity. Your knowledge and 
memory are never disturbed by anxiety. You 
are the chief of all famous persons within this 
world, and Your lotus feet are wors hiped by 
sages who are beyond the jurisdiction of pun-
ishment. O Lord R āmacandra, let us offer our 
respectful obeisances unto You.  (7)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: Once while 
Lord R āmacandra was walking at night incog-
nito, hiding Himself by a disguise to find out 
the people’s opinion of Himself, He heard a 
man speaking unfavorably about His wife, 
Sītādevī.  (8) [Speaking to his unchaste wife, 
the man said] You go to another man’s house, 
and therefore you are unchaste and polluted. I 
shall not maintain you any more. A henpecked 
husband like Lord R āma may accept a wife like 
Sītā, who went to another man’s house, but I 
am not henpecked like Him, and therefore I 
shall not accept you again.  (9) Śukadeva 
Gosv āmī said: Men with a poor fund of 
knowledge and a hein ous character speak non-
sensically. Fearing such rascals, Lord 
Rāmacandra abandoned His wife, S ītādevī, alt-
hough she was pregnant. Thus S ītādevī went to 
the āśrama of V ālmīki Muni.  (10) When the 
time came, the pregnant mother S ītādevī gave 
birth to twin so ns, later celebrated as Lava and 
Kuśa. The ritualistic ceremonies for their birth 
were performed by V ālmīki Muni.  (11) O 
Mahārāja Par īkṣit, Lord Lak ṣmaṇa had two 
sons, named A ṅgada and Citraketu, and Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

552 
 Bharata also had two sons, named Tak ṣa and 
Puṣkala.  (12) Śatrughna had two sons, named 
Subāhu and Śrutasena. When Lord Bharata 
went to conquer all directions, He had to kill 
many millions of Gandharvas, who are gener-
ally pretenders. Taking all their wealth, He of-
fered it to Lord R āmacandra. Śatrughna als o 
killed a R ākṣasa named Lava ṇa, who was the 
son of Madhu R ākṣasa. Thus He established in 
the great forest known as Madhuvana the town 
known as Mathur ā.  (13 -14) Being forsaken by 
her husband, S ītādevī entrusted her two sons to 
the care of V ālmīki Muni. Th en, meditating 
upon the lotus feet of Lord R āmacandra, she 
entered into the earth.  (15) After hearing the 
news of mother S ītā’s entering the earth, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead was certainly 
aggrieved. Although He is the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhe ad, upon remembering the ex-
alted qualities of mother S ītā, He could not 
check His grief in transcendental love.  (16) 
The attraction between man and woman, or 
male and female, always exists everywhere, 
making everyone always fearful. Such feelings 
are pres ent even among the controllers like 
Brahm ā and Lord Śiva and is the cause of fear 
for them, what to speak of others who are at-
tached to household life in this material world.  
(17)  

After mother S ītā entered the earth, Lord 
Rāmacandra observed complete ce libacy and 
performed an uninterrupted Agnihotra -yajña 
for thirteen thousand years.  (18) After com-
pleting the sacrifice, Lord R āmacandra, whose 
lotus feet were sometimes pierced by thorns 
when He lived in Da ṇḍakāraṇya, placed those 
lotus feet in the hearts  of those who always 
think of Him. Then He entered His own abode, 
the Vaiku ṇṭha planet beyond the brahmajyoti.  
(19)  

Lord R āmacandra’s reputation for having 
killed R āvaṇa with showers of arrows at the re-
quest of the demigods and for having built a 
bridge  over the ocean does not constitute the 
factual glory of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Lord R āmacandra, whose spiritual 
body is always engaged in various pastimes. 
Lord R āmacandra has no equal or superior, and 
therefore He had no need to take help fro m the 
monkeys to gain victory over R āvaṇa.  (20)  

Lord R āmacandra’s spotless name and 
fame, which vanquish all sinful reactions, are 
celebrated in all directions, like the ornamental 
cloth of the victorious elephant that conquers 
all directions. Great sai ntly persons like 
Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣi still glorify His characteristics 
in the assemblies of great emperors like 
Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira. Similarly, all the saintly 
kings and all the demigods, including Lord Śiva 
and Lord Brahm ā, worship the Lord by bowing 
down wi th their helmets. Let me offer my obei-
sances unto His lotus feet.  (21) Lord R āmacan-
dra returned to His abode, to which bhakti -
yogīs are promoted. This is the place to which 
all the inhabitants of Ayodhy ā went after they 
served the Lord in His manifest pas times by of-
fering Him obeisances, touching His lotus feet, 
fully observing Him as a fatherlike King, sitting 
or lying down with Him like equals, or even 
just accompanying Him.  (22) O King Par īkṣit, 
anyone who aurally receives the narrations con-
cerning the  characteristics of Lord R āmacan-
dra’s pastimes will ultimately be freed from the 
disease of envy and thus be liberated from the 
bondage of fruitive activities.  (23)  

Mahārāja Par īkṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosv āmī: How did the Lord conduct Himself, 
and how did He behave in relationship with His 
brothers, who were expansions of His own self? 
And how did His brothers and the inhabitants 
of Ayodhy ā treat Him?  (24)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī replied: After accepting 
the throne of the government by the fervent re-
quest of His younger brother Bharata, Lord 
Rāmacandra ordered His younger brothers to 
go out and conquer the entire world, while He 
personally remained in the capital to give audi-
ence to all the citizens and residents of the pal-
ace and supervise the governmen tal affairs with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

553 
 His other assistants.  (25) During the reign of 
Lord R āmacandra, the streets of the capital, 
Ayodhy ā, were sprinkled with perfumed water 
and drops of perfumed liquor, thrown about by 
elephants from their trunks. When the citizens 
saw the L ord personally supervising the affairs 
of the city in such opulence, they appreciated 
this opulence very much.  (26) The palaces, the 
palace gates, the assembly houses, the plat-
forms for meeting places, the temples and all 
such places were decorated with g olden water-
pots and bedecked with various types of flags.  
(27) Wherever Lord R āmacandra visited, aus-
picious welcome gates were constructed, with 
banana trees and betel -nut trees, full of flowers 
and fruits. The gates were decorated with vari-
ous flags made of colorful cloth and with tap-
estries, mirrors and garlands.  (28) Wherever 
Lord R āmacandra visited, the people ap-
proached Him with paraphernalia of worship 
and begged the Lord’s blessings. “O Lord,” 
they said, “as You rescued the earth from the 
bottom of the sea in Your incarnation as a boar, 
may You now maintain it. Thus we beg Yo ur 
blessings.”  (29) Thereafter, not having seen the 
Lord for a long time, the citizens, both men and 
women, being very eager to see Him, left their 
homes and got up on the roofs of the palaces. 
Being incompletely satiated with seeing the 
face of the lotus -eyed Lord R āmacandra, they 
showered flowers upon Him.  (30)  

Thereafter, Lord R āmacandra entered the 
palace of His forefathers. Within the palace 
were various treasures and valuable wardrobes. 
The sitting places on the two sides of the en-
trance door were made of cor al, the yards were 
surrounded by pillars of vaid ūrya-maṇi, the 
floor was made of highly polished marakata -
maṇi, and the foundation was made of marble. 
The entire palace was decorated with flags and 
garlands and bedecked with valuable stones, 
shining with a  celestial effulgence. The palace 
was fully decorated with pearls and surrounded 
by lamps and incense. The men and women 
within the palace all resembled demigods and 
were decorated with various ornaments, which 
seemed beautiful because of being placed on their bodies.  (31 -34) Lord R āmacandra, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, chief of the 
best learned scholars, resided in that palace 
with His pleasure potency, mother S ītā, and en-
joyed complete peace.  (35) Without trans-
gressing the religious principles, Lord 
Rāmacandra, whose lotus  feet are worshiped by 
devotees in meditation, enjoyed with all the 
paraphernalia of transcendental pleasure for as 
long as needed.  (36)  

SB 9.12: The Dynasty of Ku śa, the Son of 
Lord R āmacandra  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: The son of 
Rāmacandra was Ku śa, the  son of Ku śa was 
Atithi, the son of Atithi was Ni ṣadha, and the 
son of Ni ṣadha was Nabha. The son of Nabha 
was Pu ṇḍarīka, and from Pu ṇḍarīka came a son 
named K ṣemadhanv ā.  (1) The son of K ṣema-
dhanv ā was Dev ānīka, Dev ānīka’s son was 
Anīha, An īha’s son was P āriyātra, and P āri-
yātra’s son was Balasthala. The son of 
Balasthala was Vajran ābha, who was said to 
have been born from the effulgence of the sun -
god.  (2)  

The son of Vajran ābha was Saga ṇa, and his 
son was Vidh ṛti. The son of Vidh ṛti was 
Hiraṇyanābha, wh o became a disciple of Jai-
mini and became a great ācārya of mystic yoga. 
It is from Hira ṇyanābha that the great saint 
Yājñavalkya learned the highly elevated sys-
tem of mystic yoga known as ādhyātma-yoga, 
which can loosen the knots of material attach-
ment in  the heart.  (3 -4)  

The son of Hira ṇyanābha was Pu ṣpa, and the 
son of Pu ṣpa was Dhruvasandhi. The son of 
Dhruvasandhi was Sudar śana, whose son was 
Agnivar ṇa. The son of Agnivar ṇa was named 
Śīghra, and his son was Maru.  (5) Having 
achieved perfection in t he power of mystic 
yoga, Maru still lives in a place known as 
Kalāpa-grāma. At the end of Kali -yuga, he will 
revive the lost S ūrya dynasty by begetting a 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

554 
 son.  (6)  

From Maru was born a son named 
Prasu śruta, from Prasu śruta came Sandhi, from 
Sandhi came A marṣaṇa, and from Amar ṣaṇa a 
son named Mahasv ān. From Mahasv ān, 
Viśvabāhu took his birth.  (7) From Vi śvabāhu 
came a son named Prasenajit, from Prasenajit 
came Tak ṣaka, and from Tak ṣaka came B ṛhad-
bala, who was killed in a fight by your father.  
(8)  

All t hese kings in the dynasty of Ik ṣvāku 
have passed away. Now please listen as I de-
scribe the kings who will be born in the future. 
From B ṛhadbala will come B ṛhadra ṇa.  (9) The 
son of B ṛhadra ṇa will be Ūrukriya, who will 
have a son named Vatsav ṛddha. Vatsav ṛddha 
will have a son named Prativyoma, and Pra-
tivyoma will have a son named Bh ānu, from 
whom Div āka, a great commander of soldiers, 
will take birth.  (10) Thereafter, from Div āka 
will come a son named Sahadeva, and from Sa-
hadeva a great hero named B ṛhada śva. From 
Bṛhada śva will come Bh ānumān, and from 
Bhānumān will come Prat īkāśva. The son of 
Pratīkāśva will be Suprat īka.  (11) Thereafter, 
from Suprat īka will come Marudeva; from 
Marudeva, Sunak ṣatra; from Sunak ṣatra, 
Puṣkara; and from Pu ṣkara, Antarik ṣa. The  son 
of Antarik ṣa will be Sutap ā, and his son will be 
Amitrajit.  (12) From Amitrajit will come a son 
named B ṛhadrāja, from B ṛhadrāja will come 
Barhi, and from Barhi will come K ṛtañjaya. 
The son of K ṛtañjaya will be known as 
Raṇañjaya, and from him will co me a son 
named Sañjaya.  (13) From Sañjaya will come 
Śākya, from Śākya will come Śuddhoda, and 
from Śuddhoda will come L āṅgala. From 
Lāṅgala will come Prasenajit, and from 
Prasenajit, K ṣudraka.  (14) From K ṣudraka will 
come Ra ṇaka, from Ra ṇaka will come Su ratha, 
and from Suratha will come Sumitra, ending 
the dynasty. This is a description of the dynasty 
of Bṛhadbala.  (15) The last king in the dynasty 
of Ik ṣvāku will be Sumitra; after Sumitra there 
will be no more sons in the dynasty of the sun -
god, and thu s the dynasty will end.  (16)   
SB 9.13: The Dynasty of Mah ārāja Nimi  

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: After begin-
ning sacrifices, Mah ārāja Nimi, the son of 
Ikṣvāku, requested the great sage Vasi ṣṭha to 
take the post of chief priest. At that time, Va-
siṣṭha re plied, “My dear Mah ārāja Nimi, I have 
already accepted the same post in a sacrifice be-
gun by Lord Indra.”  (1) “I shall return here af-
ter finishing the yajña for Indra. Kindly wait for 
me until then.” Mah ārāja Nimi remained silent, 
and Vasi ṣṭha began to pe rform the sacrifice for 
Lord Indra.  (2) Mah ārāja Nimi, being a self -
realized soul, considered that this life is flick-
ering. Therefore, instead of waiting long for 
Vasiṣṭha, he began performing the sacrifice 
with other priests.  (3) After completing the 
sacrificial performance for King Indra, the spir-
itual master Vasi ṣṭha returned and found that 
his disciple Mah ārāja Nimi had disobeyed his 
instructions. Thus Vasi ṣṭha cursed him, saying, 
“May the material body of Nimi, who considers 
himself learned, immediat ely fall.”  (4) For un-
necessarily cursing him when he had commit-
ted no offense, Mah ārāja Nimi countercursed 
his spiritual master. “For the sake of getting 
contributions from the King of heaven,” he 
said, “you have lost your religious intelligence. 
Therefor e I pronounce this curse: your body 
also will fall.”  (5) After saying this, Mah ārāja 
Nimi, who was expert in the science of spiritual 
knowledge, gave up his body. Vasi ṣṭha, the 
great -grandfather, gave up his body also, but 
through the semen discharged by Mitra and 
Varu ṇa when they saw Urva śī, he was born 
again.  (6) During the performance of the yajña, 
the body relinquished by Mah ārāja Nimi was 
preserved in fragrant substances, and at the end 
of the Satra -yāga the great saints and 
brāhmaṇas made the follow ing request to all 
the demigods assembled there.  (7) “If you are 
satisfied with this sacrifice and if you are actu-
ally able to do so, kindly bring Mah ārāja Nimi 
back to life in this body.” The demigods said 
yes to this request by the sages, but Mah ārāja 
Nimi said, “Please do not imprison me again in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

555 
 a material body.”  (8) Mah ārāja Nimi contin-
ued: M āyāvādīs generally want freedom from 
accepting a material body because they fear 
having to give it up again. But devotees whose 
intelligence is always filled wit h the service of 
the Lord are unafraid. Indeed, they take ad-
vantage of the body to render transcendental 
loving service.  (9) I do not wish to accept a 
material body, for such a body is the source of 
all distress, lamentation and fear, everywhere in 
the un iverse, just as it is for a fish in the water, 
which lives always in anxiety because of fear 
of death.  (10)  

The demigods said: Let Mah ārāja Nimi live 
without a material body. Let him live in a spir-
itual body as a personal associate of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, and, according 
to his desire, let him be manifest or unmanifest 
to common materially embodied people.  (11) 
Thereafter,  to save the people from the danger 
of an unregulated government, the sages 
churned Mah ārāja Nimi’s material body, from 
which, as a result, a son was born.  (12) Be-
cause he was born in an unusual way, the son 
was called Janaka, and because he was born 
from  the dead body of his father, he was known 
as Vaideha. Because he was born from the 
churning of his father’s material body, he was 
known as Mithila, and because he constructed 
a city as King Mithila, the city was called Mith-
ilā.  (13)  

O King Par īkṣit, from Mithila came a son 
named Ud āvasu; from Ud āvasu, Nandi-
vardhana; from Nandivardhana, Suketu; and 
from Suketu, Devar āta.  (14) From Devar āta 
came a son named B ṛhadratha and from 
Bṛhadratha a son named Mah āvīrya, who be-
came the father of Sudh ṛti. The son of  Sudh ṛti 
was known as Dh ṛṣṭaketu, and from Dh ṛṣṭaketu 
came Harya śva. From Harya śva came a son 
named Maru.  (15) The son of Maru was 
Pratīpaka, and the son of Prat īpaka was K ṛtara-
tha. From K ṛtaratha came Devam īḍha; from 
Devam īḍha, Vi śruta; and from Vi śruta, 
Mahādhṛti.  (16) From Mah ādhṛti was born a 
son named K ṛtirāta, from K ṛtirāta was born Mahāromā, from Mah āromā came a son named 
Svarṇarom ā, and from Svar ṇarom ā came 
Hrasvarom ā.  (17) From Hrasvarom ā came a 
son named Śīradhvaja [also called Janaka]. 
When Śīradhvaja was plowing a field, from the 
front of his plow [ śīra] appeared a daughter 
named S ītādevī, who later became the wife of 
Lord R āmacandra. Thus he was known as Śīra-
dhvaja.  (18) The son of Śīradhvaja was 
Kuśadhvaja, and the son of Ku śadhvaja was 
King Dharmadhvaja, who had two sons, 
namely K ṛtadhvaja and Mitadhvaja.  (19)  

O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, the son of K ṛtadhvaja 
was Ke śidhvaja, and the son of Mitadhvaja was 
Khāṇḍikya. The son of K ṛtadhvaja was expert 
in spiritual knowledge, and the son of Mitadh-
vaja was expert in Vedic ritualistic ceremonies. 
Khāṇḍikya fled in fear of Ke śidhvaja. The son 
of Ke śidhvaja was Bh ānumān, and the son of 
Bhānumān was Śatadyumna.  (20 -21) The son 
of Śatadyumna was named Śuci. From Śuci, 
Sanadv āja was born, and from Sanadv āja came 
a son named Ūrjaketu. The son of Ūrjaketu was 
Aja, and the son of Aja was Purujit.  (22) The 
son of Purujit was Ari ṣṭanemi, and his son was 
Śrutāyu. Śrutāyu begot a son named 
Supārśvaka, and Sup ārśvaka begot Citraratha. 
The son of Citraratha was K ṣemādhi, who be-
came the king of Mithil ā.  (23) The son of 
Kṣemādhi was Samaratha, and his son was Sat-
yaratha. The son of Satyaratha was Upaguru, 
and the son of Upaguru was Upagupta, a partial 
expansion of the fire -god.  (24) The son of 
Upagupta was Vasvanant a, the son of 
Vasvananta was Yuyudha, the son of Yuyudha 
was Subh āṣaṇa, and the son of Subh āṣaṇa was 
Śruta. The son of Śruta was Jaya, from whom 
there came Vijaya. The son of Vijaya was Ṛta.  
(25) The son of Ṛta was Śunaka, the son of Śu-
naka was V ītahavya,  the son of V ītahavya was 
Dhṛti, and the son of Dh ṛti was Bahul āśva. The 
son of Bahul āśva was K ṛti, and his son was 
Mahāvaśī.  (26)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: My dear King 
Parīkṣit, all the kings of the dynasty of Mithila 
were completely in knowledge of thei r spiritual 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

556 
 identity. Therefore, even though staying at 
home, they were liberated from the duality of 
material existence.  (27)  

SB 9.14: King Pur ūravā Enchanted by Ur-
vaśī 

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosv āmī said to Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit: O King, thus far you have heard the 
description of the dynasty of the sun -god. Now 
hear the most glorious and purifying descrip-
tion of the dynasty of the moon -god. This de-
scription mentions kings like Aila [Pur ūravā] 
of whom it is glorious to hear.  (1)  

Lord Vi ṣṇu [Garbhodaka śāyī Viṣṇu] is also 
known as Sahasra -śīrṣā Puru ṣa. From the lake 
of His navel sprang a lotus, on which Lord 
Brahm ā was generated. Atri, the son of Lord 
Brahm ā, was as qualified as his father.  (2) 
From Atri’s tears of jubilation was born a son 
named Soma, the moon, who was full of sooth-
ing rays. Lord Brahm ā appointed him the direc-
tor of the br āhmaṇas, drugs and luminaries.  (3) 
After conquering the three worlds [the upper, 
middle and lower planetary systems], Soma, 
the moon -god, performed a great sacrifice 
known as t he R ājasūya-yajña. Because he was 
very much puffed up, he forcibly kidnapped 
Bṛhaspati’s wife, whose name was T ārā.  (4) 
Although requested again and again by 
Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, 
Soma did not return T ārā. This was due to his 
false pride. Consequently, a fight ensued be-
tween the demigods and the demons.  (5) Be-
cause of enmity between B ṛhaspati and Śukra, 
Śukra took the side of the moon -god and was 
joined by the demons. But Lord Śiva, because 
of affection for the son of his spiritu al master, 
joined the side of B ṛhaspati and was accompa-
nied by all the ghosts and hobgoblins.  (6) King 
Indra, accompanied by all kinds of demigods, 
joined the side of B ṛhaspati. Thus there was a 
great fight, destroying both demons and demi-
gods, only for t he sake of T ārā, Bṛhaspati’s 
wife.  (7) When Lord Brahm ā was fully in-
formed by A ṅgirā about the entire incident, he severely chastised the moon -god, Soma. Thus 
Lord Brahm ā delivered T ārā to her husband, 
who could then understand that she was preg-
nant.  (8)   

Bṛhaspati said: You foolish woman, your 
womb, which was meant for me to impregnate, 
has been impregnated by someone other than 
me. Immediately deliver your child! Immedi-
ately deliver it! Be assured that after the child 
is delivered, I shall not burn you  to ashes. I 
know that although you are unchaste, you 
wanted a son. Therefore I shall not punish you.  
(9) Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: By 
Bṛhaspati’s order, T ārā, who was very much 
ashamed, immediately gave birth to the child, 
who was very beautiful, with a golden bodily 
hue. Both B ṛhaspati and the moon -god, Soma, 
desired the beautiful child.  (10) Fighting again 
broke out between B ṛhaspati and the moon -
god, both of whom claimed, “This is my child, 
not yours!” All the saints and demigods present 
asked T ārā whose child the newborn baby ac-
tually was, but because she was ashamed she 
could not immediately answer.  (11) The child 
then became very angry and demanded that his 
mother immediately tell the truth. “You un-
chaste woman,” he said, “what is the use of 
your unnecessary shame? Why do you not ad-
mit your fault? Immediately tell me about your 
faulty behavior.”  (12) Lord Brahm ā then 
brought T ārā to a secluded place, and after pac-
ifying her he asked to whom the child actually 
belonged. She replied very slowly, “T his is the 
son of Soma, the moon -god.” Then the moon -
god immediately took charge of the child.  (13) 
O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, when Lord Brahm ā saw 
that the child was deeply intelligent, he gave 
the child the name Budha. The moon -god, the 
ruler of the stars, en joyed great jubilation be-
cause of this son.  (14)  

Thereafter, from Budha, through the womb 
of Ilā, a son was born named Pur ūravā, who 
was described in the beginning of the Ninth 
Canto. When his beauty, personal qualities, 
magnanimity, behavior, wealth an d power were 
described by N ārada in the court of Lord Indra, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

557 
 the celestial woman Urva śī was attracted to 
him. Pierced by the arrow of Cupid, she thus 
approached him.  (15 -16) Having been cursed 
by Mitra and Varu ṇa, the celestial woman Ur-
vaśī had acquired t he habits of a human being. 
Therefore, upon seeing Pur ūravā, the best of 
males, whose beauty resembled that of Cupid, 
she controlled herself and then approached 
him. When King Pur ūravā saw Urva śī, his eyes 
became jubilant in the ecstasy of joy, and the 
hairs on his body stood on end. With mild, 
pleasing words, he spoke to her as follows.  
(17-18)  

King Pur ūravā said: O most beautiful 
woman, you are welcome. Please sit here and 
tell me what I can do for you. You may enjoy 
with me as long as you desire. Let us pass our 
life happily in a sexual relationship.  (19)  

Urva śī replied: O most handsome man, who 
is the woman whose mind and sight would not 
be attracted by you? If a woman takes shelter 
of your chest, she cannot refuse to enjoy with 
you in a sexual rel ationship.  (20) My dear King 
Purūravā, please give protection to these two 
lambs, who have fallen down with me. Alt-
hough I belong to the heavenly planets and you 
belong to earth, I shall certainly enjoy sexual 
union with you. I have no objection to accept-
ing you as my husband, for you are superior in 
every respect.  (21)  

Urva śī said: “My dear hero, only prepara-
tions made in ghee [clarified butter] will be my 
eatables, and I shall not want to see you naked 
at any time, except at the time of sexual inter-
course.” The great -minded King Pur ūravāac-
cepted these proposals.  (22)  

Purūravā replied: O beautiful one, your 
beauty is wonderful and your gestures are also 
wonderful. Indeed, you are attractive to all hu-
man society. Therefore, since you have come 
of your  own accord from the heavenly planets, who on earth would not agree to serve a demi-
goddess such as you.  (23)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: The best of 
human beings, Pur ūravā, began freely enjoying 
the company of Urva śī, who engaged in sexual 
activities wi th him in many celestial places, 
such as Caitraratha and Nandana -kānana, 
where the demigods enjoy.  (24) Urva śī’s 
body was as fragrant as the saffron of a lotus. 
Being enlivened by the fragrance of her face 
and body, Pur ūravā enjoyed her company for 
many d ays with great jubilation.  (25) Not see-
ing Urva śī in his assembly, the King of heaven, 
Lord Indra, said, “Without Urva śī my assembly 
is no longer beautiful.” Considering this, he re-
quested the Gandharvas to bring her back to his 
heavenly planet.  (26) Thu s the Gandharvas 
came to earth, and at midnight, when every-
thing was dark, they appeared in the house of 
Purūravā and stole the two lambs entrusted to 
the King by his wife, Urva śī.  (27) Urva śī 
treated the two lambs like her own sons. There-
fore, when they were being taken by the 
Gandharvas and began crying, Urva śī heard 
them and rebuked her husband. “Now I am be-
ing killed,” she said, “under the protection of an 
unworthy husband, who is a coward and a eu-
nuch although he thinks himself a great hero.”  
(28) “B ecause I depended on him, the plunder-
ers have deprived me of my two sons the lambs, 
and therefore I am now lost. My husband lies 
down at night in fear, exactly like a woman, alt-
hough he appears to be a man during the day.”  
(29) Pur ūravā, stricken by the s harp words of 
Urva śī like an elephant struck by its driver’s 
pointed rod, became very angry. Not even 
dressing himself properly, he took a sword in 
hand and went out naked into the night to fol-
low the Gandharvas who had stolen the lambs.  
(30) After giving  up the two lambs, the 
Gandharvas shone brightly like lightning, thus 
illuminating the house of Pur ūravā. Urva śī then 
saw her husband returning with the lambs in 
hand, but he was naked, and therefore she left.  
(31)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

558 
 No longer seeing Urva śī on his bed, 
Purūravā was most aggrieved. Because of his 
great attraction for her, he was very much dis-
turbed. Thus, lamenting, he began traveling 
about the earth like a madman.  (32) Once dur-
ing his travels all over the world, Pur ūravā saw 
Urva śī, accompanied by five co mpanions, on 
the bank of the Sarasvat ī at Kuruk ṣetra. With 
jubilation in his face, he then spoke to her in 
sweet words as follows.  (33) O my dear wife, 
O most cruel one, kindly stay, kindly stay. I 
know that I have never made you happy until 
now, but you should not give me up for that rea-
son. This is not proper for you. Even if you 
have decided to give up my company, let us 
nonetheless talk for some time.  (34) O god-
dess, now that you have refused me, my beau-
tiful body will fall down here, and because it i s 
unsuitable for your pleasure, it will be eaten by 
foxes and vultures.  (35)  

Urva śī said: My dear King, you are a man, a 
hero. Don’t be impatient and give up your life. 
Be sober and don’t allow the senses to over-
come you like foxes. Don’t let the foxes eat 
you. In other words, you should not be con-
trolled by your senses. Rather, you should 
know that the heart of a woman is like that of a 
fox. There is no use making friendship with 
women.  (36) Women as a class are merciless 
and cunning. They cannot toler ate even a slight 
offense. For their own pleasure they can do an-
ything irreligious, and therefore they do not 
fear killing even a faithful husband or brother.  
(37) Women are very easily seduced by men. 
Therefore, polluted women give up the friend-
ship of a  man who is their well -wisher and es-
tablish false friendship among fools. Indeed, 
they seek newer and newer friends, one after 
another.  (38) O my dear King, you will be able 
to enjoy with me as my husband at the end of 
every year, for one night only. In t his way you 
will have other children, one after another.  (39)  

Understanding that Urva śī was pregnant, 
Purūravā returned to his palace. At the end of 
the year, there at Kuruk ṣetra, he again obtained 
the association of Urva śī, who was then the mother of a  heroic son.  (40) Having regained 
Urva śī at the end of the year, King Pur ūravā 
was most jubilant, and he enjoyed her company 
in sex for one night. But then he was very sorry 
at the thought of separation from her, so Urva śī 
spoke to him as follows.  (41)  

Urva śī said: “My dear King, seek shelter of 
the Gandharvas, for they will be able to deliver 
me to you again.” In accordance with these 
words, the King satisfied the Gandharvas by 
prayers, and the Gandharvas, being pleased 
with him, gave him an Agnisth ālī girl who 
looked exactly like Urva śī. Thinking that the 
girl was Urva śī, the King began walking with 
her in the forest, but later he could understand 
that she was not Urva śī but Agnisth ālī.  (42)  

King Pur ūravā then left Agnisth ālī in the 
forest and retur ned home, where he meditated 
all night upon Urva śī. In the course of his med-
itation, the Tret ā millennium began, and there-
fore the principles of the three Vedas, including 
the process of performing yajña to fulfill frui-
tive activities, appeared within his heart.  (43) 
When the process of fruitive yajña became 
manifest within his heart, King Pur ūravā went 
to the same spot where he had left Agnisth ālī. 
There he saw that from the womb of a śamī tree, 
an aśvattha tree had grown. He then took a 
piece of wood fro m that tree and made it into 
two ara ṇis. Desiring to go to the planet where 
Urva śī resided, he chanted mantras, meditating 
upon the lower ara ṇi as Urva śī, the upper one 
as himself, and the piece of wood between them 
as his son. In this way he began to igni te a fire.  
(44-45) From Pur ūravā’s rubbing of the 
araṇis came a fire. By such a fire one can 
achieve all success in material enjoyment and 
be purified in seminal birth, initiation and in the 
performance of sacrifice, which are invoked 
with the combined le tters a -u-m. Thus the fire 
was considered the son of King Pur ūravā.  (46) 
By means of that fire, Pur ūravā, who desired to 
go to the planet where Urva śī resided, per-
formed a sacrifice, by which he satisfied the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

559 
 Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the en-
joyer of the results of sacrifice. Thus he wor-
shiped the Lord, who is beyond the perception 
of the senses and is the reservoir of all the dem-
igods.  (47)  

In the Satya -yuga, the first millennium, all 
the Vedic mantras were included in one man-
trapra ṇava, the  root of all Vedic mantras. In 
other words, the Atharva Veda alone was the 
source of all Vedic knowledge. The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead N ārāyaṇa was the only 
worshipable Deity; there was no recommenda-
tion for worship of the demigods. Fire was one 
only, and the only order of life in human society 
was known as ha ṁsa.  (48) O Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, at the beginning of Tret ā-yuga, King 
Purūravā inaugurated a karma -kāṇḍa sacrifice. 
Thus Pur ūravā, who considered the yajñic fire 
his son, was able to go to Gandhar valoka as he 
desired.  (49)  

SB 9.15: Para śurāma, the Lord’s Warrior In-
carnation  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī continued: O King 
Parīkṣit, from the womb of Urva śī, six sons 
were generated by Pur ūravā. Their names were 
Āyu, Śrutāyu, Saty āyu, Raya, Vijaya and Jaya.  
(1)  

The son of Śrutāyu was Vasum ān; the son of 
Satyāyu, Śrutañjaya; the son of Raya, Eka; the 
son of Jaya, Amita; and the son of Vijaya, 
Bhīma. The son of Bh īma was K āñcana; the 
son of K āñcana was Hotraka; and the son of 
Hotraka was Jahnu, who drank all th e water of 
the Ganges in one sip.  (2 -3) The son of Jahnu 
was Puru, the son of Puru was Bal āka, the son 
of Bal āka was Ajaka, and the son of Ajaka was 
Kuśa. Ku śa had four sons, named Ku śāmbu, 
Tanaya, Vasu and Ku śanābha. The son of 
Kuśāmbu was G ādhi.  (4)  
 King G ādhi had a daughter named Satya-
vatī, whom a br āhmaṇa sage named Ṛcīka re-
quested from the King to be his wife. King 
Gādhi, however, regarded Ṛcīka as an unfit 
husband for his daughter, and therefore he told 
the br āhmaṇa, “My dear sir, I belong to the 
dynasty of Ku śa. Because we are aristocratic 
kṣatriyas, you have to give some dowry for my 
daughter. Therefore, bring at least one thousand 
horses, each as brilliant as moonshine and each 
having one black ear, whether right or left.”  (5 -
6) When King G ādhi made this demand, the 
great sage Ṛcīka could understand the King’s 
mind. Therefore he went to the demigod Var-
uṇa and brought from him the one thousand 
horses that G ādhi had demanded. After deliver-
ing these horses, the sage married the King’s 
beautiful dau ghter.  (7) Thereafter, Ṛcīka 
Muni’s wife and mother -in-law, each desiring 
a son, requested the Muni to prepare an obla-
tion. Thus Ṛcīka Muni prepared one oblation 
for his wife with a br āhmaṇa mantra and an-
other for his mother -in-law with a k ṣatriya 
mantra.  Then he went out to bathe.  (8) Mean-
while, because Satyavat ī’s mother thought 
that the oblation prepared for her daughter, 
Ṛcīka’s wife, must be better, she asked her 
daughter for that oblation. Satyavat ī therefore 
gave her own oblation to her mother and ate her 
mother’s oblation herself.  (9) When the great 
sage Ṛcīka returned home after bathing and un-
derstood what had happened in his absence, he 
said to his wife, Satyavat ī, “You have done a 
great wrong. Your son will be a fierce k ṣatriya, 
able to punish everyone, and your brother will 
be a learned scholar in spiritual science.”  (10) 
Satyavat ī, however, pacified Ṛcīka Muni with 
peaceful words and requested that her son not 
be like a fierce k ṣatriya. Ṛcīka Muni replied, 
“Then your grandson will be of a k ṣatriya 
spirit.” Thus Jamadagni was born as the son of 
Satyavat ī.  (11) Satyavat ī later became the sa-
cred river Kau śikī to purify the entire world, 
and her son, Jamadagni, married Re ṇukā, the 
daughter of Re ṇu. By the semen of Jamadagni, 
many sons, headed by Vasum ān, were born 
from the womb of Re ṇukā. The youngest of 
them was named R āma, or Para śurāma.  (12 -
13) Learned scholars accept this Para śurāma as 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

560 
 the celebrated incarnation of V āsudeva who an-
nihilated the dynasty of K ārtavīrya. 
Paraśurāma killed all the kṣatriyas on earth 
twenty -one times.  (14) When the royal dyn-
asty, being excessively proud because of the 
material modes of passion and ignorance, be-
came irreligious and ceased to care for the laws 
enacted by the br āhmaṇas, Para śurāma killed 
them. Although  their offense was not very se-
vere, he killed them to lessen the burden of the 
world.  (15)  

King Par īkṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosv āmī: What was the offense that the k ṣatri-
yas who could not control their senses commit-
ted before Lord Para śurāma, the inc arnation of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for which 
the Lord annihilated the k ṣatriya dynasty again 
and again?  (16)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: The best of the 
kṣatriyas, K ārtavīryārjuna, the King of the 
Haihayas, received one thousand arms by wor-
shipi ng Datt ātreya, the plenary expansion of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāyaṇa. He also became undefeatable by en-
emies and received unobstructed sensory 
power, beauty, influence, strength, fame and 
the mystic power by which to achieve all the 
perfect ions of yoga, such as a ṇimā and lagh-
imā. Thus having become fully opulent, he 
roamed all over the universe without opposi-
tion, just like the wind.  (17 -19) Once while en-
joying in the water of the river Narmad ā, the 
puffed -up K ārtavīryārjuna, surrounded by 
beautiful women and garlanded with a garland 
of victory, stopped the flow of the water with 
his arms.  (20) Because K ārtavīryārjuna made 
the water flow in the opposite direction, the 
camp of R āvaṇa, which was set up on the bank 
of the Narmad ā near the city  of M āhiṣmatī, was 
inundated. This was unbearable to the ten -
headed R āvaṇa, who considered himself a great 
hero and could not tolerate K ārtavīryārjuna’s 
power.  (21) When R āvaṇa attempted to insult 
Kārtavīryārjuna in the presence of the women 
and thus offe nded him, K ārtavīryārjuna easily 
arrested R āvaṇa and put him in custody in the city of M āhiṣmatī, just as one captures a mon-
key, and then released him neglectfully.  (22)  

Once while K ārtavīryārjuna was wandering 
unengaged in a solitary forest and hunting , he 
approached the residence of Jamadagni.  (23) 
The sage Jamadagni, who was engaged in great 
austerities in the forest, received the King very 
well, along with the King’s soldiers, ministers 
and carriers. He supplied all the necessities to 
worship these guests, for he possessed a 
kāmadhenu cow that was able to supply every-
thing.  (24) K ārtavīryārjuna thought that 
Jamadagni was more powerful and wealthy 
than himself because of possessing a jewel in 
the form of the k āmadhenu. Therefore he and 
his own men, t he Haihayas, were not very much 
appreciative of Jamadagni’s reception. On the 
contrary, they wanted to possess that 
kāmadhenu, which was useful for the execution 
of the agnihotra sacrifice.  (25) Being puffed up 
by material power, K ārtavīryārjuna encourage d 
his men to steal Jamadagni’s k āmadhenu. Thus 
the men forcibly took away the crying 
kāmadhenu, along with her calf, to M āhiṣmatī, 
Kārtavīryārjuna’s capital.  (26) Thereafter, 
Kārtavīryārjuna having left with the 
kāmadhenu, Para śurāma returned to the 
āśrama. When Para śurāma, the youngest son of 
Jamadagni, heard about K ārtavīryārjuna’s ne-
farious deed, he became as angry as a trampled 
snake.  (27) Taking up his fierce chopper, his 
shield, his bow and a quiver of arrows, Lord 
Paraśurāma, exceedingly angry, cha sed 
Kārtavīryārjuna just as a lion chases an ele-
phant.  (28)  

As King K ārtavīryārjuna entered his capital, 
Māhiṣmatī Purī, he saw Lord Para śurāma, the 
best of the Bh ṛgu dynasty, coming after him, 
holding a chopper, shield, bow and arrows. 
Lord Para śurāma was covered with a black 
deerskin, and his matted locks of hair appeared 
like the sunshine.  (29) Upon seeing 
Paraśurāma, K ārtavīryārjuna immediately 
feared him and sent many elephants, chariots, 
horses and infantry soldiers equipped with 
clubs, swords, ar rows, ṛṣṭis, śataghnis, śaktis, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

561 
 and many similar weapons to fight against him. 
Kārtavīryārjuna sent seventeen full ak ṣauhiṇīs 
of soldiers to check Para śurāma. But Lord 
Paraśurāma alone killed all of them.  (30) Lord 
Paraśurāma, being expert in killing the military 
strength of the enemy, worked with the speed 
of the mind and the wind, slicing his enemies 
with his chopper [para śu]. Wherever he went, 
the enemies fell, their legs, arms and shoulders 
being severed, their chariot drivers killed, and 
their carrier s, the elephants and horses, all an-
nihilated.  (31)  

By manipulating his axe and arrows, Lord 
Paraśurāma cut to pieces the shields, flags, 
bows and bodies of K ārtavīryārjuna’s soldiers, 
who fell on the battlefield, muddying the 
ground with their blood. Se eing these reverses, 
Kārtavīryārjuna, infuriated, rushed to the bat-
tlefield.  (32) Then K ārtavīryārjuna, with his 
one thousand arms, simultaneously fixed ar-
rows on five hundred bows to kill Lord 
Paraśurāma. But Lord Para śurāma, the best of 
fighters, releas ed enough arrows with only one 
bow to cut to pieces immediately all the arrows 
and bows in the hands of K ārtavīryārjuna.  (33) 
When his arrows were cut to pieces, 
Kārtavīryārjuna uprooted many trees and hills 
with his own hands and again rushed strongly 
toward Lord Para śurāma to kill him. But 
Paraśurāma then used his axe with great force 
to cut off K ārtavīryārjuna’s arms, just as one 
might lop off the hoods of a serpent.  (34) 
Thereafter, Para śurāma cut off like a mountain 
peak the head of K ārtavīryārjuna, who had al-
ready lost his arms. When K ārtavīryārjuna’s 
ten thousand sons saw their father killed, they 
all fled in fear. Then Para śurāma, having killed 
the enemy, released the k āmadhenu, which had 
undergone great suffering, and brought it back 
with its calf  to his residence, where he gave it 
to his father, Jamadagni.  (35 -36)  

Paraśurāma described to his father and 
brothers his activities in killing K ārtavīryār-
juna. Upon hearing of these deeds, Jamadagni 
spoke to his son as follows.  (37) O great hero, my d ear son Para śurāma, you have unneces-
sarily killed the king, who is supposed to be the 
embodiment of all the demigods. Thus you 
have committed a sin.  (38) My dear son, we 
are all br āhmaṇas and have become worshipa-
ble for the people in general because of ou r 
quality of forgiveness. It is because of this qual-
ity that Lord Brahm ā, the supreme spiritual 
master of this universe, has achieved his post.  
(39) The duty of a br āhmaṇa is to culture the 
quality of forgiveness, which is illuminating 
like the sun. The S upreme Personality of God-
head, Hari, is pleased with those who are for-
giving.  (40)  

My dear son, killing a king who is an em-
peror is more severely sinful than killing a 
brāhmaṇa. But now, if you become K ṛṣṇa con-
scious and worship the holy places, you can  
atone for this great sin.  (41)  

SB 9.16: Lord Para śurāma Destroys the 
World’s Ruling Class  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: My dear Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, son of the Kuru dynasty, when Lord 
Paraśurāma was given this order by his father, 
he immediately agreed, saying , “Let it be so.” 
For one complete year he traveled to holy 
places. Then he returned to his father’s resi-
dence.  (1) Once when Re ṇukā, the wife of 
Jamadagni, went to the bank of the Ganges to 
get water, she saw the King of the Gandharvas, 
decorated with a garland of lotuses and sporting 
in the Ganges with celestial women [Apsar ās].  
(2) She had gone to bring water from the Gan-
ges, but when she saw Citraratha, the King of 
the Gandharvas, sporting with the celestial 
girls, she was somewhat inclined toward him  
and failed to remember that the time for the fire 
sacrifice was passing.  (3) Later, understanding 
that the time for offering the sacrifice had 
passed, Re ṇukā feared a curse from her hus-
band. Therefore when she returned she simply 
put the waterpot before him and stood there 
with folded hands.  (4) The great sage Jamada-
gni understood the adultery in the mind of his 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

562 
 wife. Therefore he was very angry and told his 
sons, “My dear sons, kill this sinful woman!” 
But the sons did not carry out his order.  (5) 
Jama dagni then ordered his youngest son, 
Paraśurāma, to kill his brothers, who had diso-
beyed this order, and his mother, who had men-
tally committed adultery. Lord Para śurāma, 
knowing the power of his father, who was prac-
ticed in meditation and austerity, kille d his 
mother and brothers immediately.  (6) Jamada-
gni, the son of Satyavat ī, was very much 
pleased with Para śurāma and asked him to take 
any benediction he liked. Lord Para śurāma re-
plied, “Let my mother and brothers live again 
and not remember having been killed by me. 
This is the benediction I ask.”  (7) Thereafter, 
by the benediction of Jamadagni, Lord 
Paraśurāma’s mother and brothers immediately 
came alive and were very happy, as if awak-
ened from sound sleep. Lord Para śurāma had 
killed his relatives in a ccordance with his fa-
ther’s order because he was fully aware of his 
father’s power, austerity and learning.  (8)  

My dear King Par īkṣit, the sons of 
Kārtavīryārjuna, who were defeated by the su-
perior strength of Para śurāma, never achieved 
happiness, for t hey always remembered the 
killing of their father.  (9) Once when 
Paraśurāma left the āśrama for the forest with 
Vasum ān and his other brothers, the sons of 
Kārtavīryārjuna took the opportunity to ap-
proach Jamadagni’s residence to seek venge-
ance for their grudge.  (10) The sons of 
Kārtavīryārjuna were determined to commit 
sinful deeds. Therefore when they saw Jamada-
gni sitting by the side of the fire to perform 
yajña and meditating upon the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is praised by the best 
of selec ted prayers, they took the opportunity to 
kill him.  (11) With pitiable prayers, Re ṇukā, 
the mother of Para śurāma and wife of Jamada-
gni, begged for the life of her husband. But the 
sons of K ārtavīryārjuna, being devoid of the 
qualities of k ṣatriyas, were s o cruel that despite 
her prayers they forcibly cut off his head and 
took it away.  (12) Lamenting in grief for the 
death of her husband, the most chaste Re ṇukā struck her own body with her hands and cried 
very loudly, “O R āma, my dear son R āma!”  
(13) Alth ough the sons of Jamadagni, including 
Lord Para śurāma, were a long distance from 
home, as soon as they heard Re ṇukā loudly 
calling “O R āma, O my son,” they hastily re-
turned to the āśrama, where they saw their fa-
ther already killed.  (14) Virtually bewilder ed 
by grief, anger, indignation, affliction and 
lamentation, the sons of Jamadagni cried, “O 
father, most religious, saintly person, you have 
left us and gone to the heavenly planets!”  (15) 
Thus lamenting, Lord Para śurāma entrusted his 
father’s dead body to his brothers and person-
ally took up his axe, having decided to put an 
end to all the k ṣatriyas on the surface of the 
world.  (16)  

O King, Lord Para śurāma then went to 
Māhiṣmatī, which was already doomed by the 
sinful killing of a br āhmaṇa. In the mids t of that 
city he made a mountain of heads, severed from 
the bodies of the sons of K ārtavīryārjuna.  (17) 
With the blood of the bodies of these sons, Lord 
Paraśurāma created a ghastly river, which 
brought great fear to the kings who had no re-
spect for brah minical culture. Because the k ṣat-
riyas, the men of power in government, were 
performing sinful activities, Lord Para śurāma, 
on the plea of retaliating for the murder of his 
father, rid all the k ṣatriyas from the face of the 
earth twenty -one times. Indeed, in the place 
known as Samanta -pañcaka he created nine 
lakes filled with their blood.  (18 -19) Thereaf-
ter, Para śurāma joined his father’s head to the 
dead body and placed the whole body and head 
upon ku śa grass. By offering sacrifices, he be-
gan to worship L ord V āsudeva, who is the all -
pervading Supersoul of all the demigods and of 
every living entity.  (20) After completing the 
sacrifice, Lord Para śurāma gave the eastern di-
rection to the hot ā as a gift, the south to the 
brahm ā, the west to the adhvaryu, the north to 
the udg ātā, and the four cornersnortheast, 
southeast, northwest and southwestto the other 
priests. He gave the middle to Ka śyapa and the 
place known as Āryāvarta to the upadra ṣṭā. 
Whatever remained he distributed among the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

563 
 sadasyas, the associate priests.  (21 -22) There-
after, having completed the ritualistic sacrifi-
cial ceremonies, Lord Para śurāma took the bath 
known as the avabh ṛtha-snāna. Standing on the 
bank of the great river Sarasvat ī, cleared of all 
sins, Lord Para śurāma appeared like the sun  in 
a clear, cloudless sky.  (23) Thus Jamadagni, 
being worshiped by Lord Para śurāma, was 
brought back to life with full remembrance, and 
he became one of the seven sages in the group 
of seven stars.  (24) My dear King Par īkṣit, in 
the next manvantara the lotus -eyed Personality 
of Godhead Lord Para śurāma, the son of 
Jamadagni, will be a great propounder of Vedic 
knowledge. In other words, he will be one of 
the seven sages.  (25) Lord Para śurāma still 
lives as an intelligent br āhmaṇa in the moun-
tainous count ry known as Mahendra. Com-
pletely satisfied, having given up all the weap-
ons of a k ṣatriya, he is always worshiped, 
adored and offered prayers for his exalted char-
acter and activities by such celestial beings as 
the Siddhas, C āraṇas and Gandharvas.  (26) In  
this way the supreme soul, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, the Lord and the supreme 
controller, descended as an incarnation in the 
Bhṛgu dynasty and released the universe from 
the burden of undesirable kings by killing them 
many times.  (27)  

Viśvāmitra, the son of Mah ārāja Gādhi, was 
as powerful as the flames of fire. From the po-
sition of a k ṣatriya, he achieved the position of 
a powerful br āhmaṇa by undergoing penances 
and austerities.  (28) O King Par īkṣit, 
Viśvāmitra had 101 sons, of whom the midd le 
one was known as Madhucchand ā. In relation 
to him, all the other sons were celebrated as the 
Madhucchand ās.  (29) Vi śvāmitra accepted the 
son of Aj īgarta known as Śunaḥśepha, who was 
born in the Bh ṛgu dynasty and was also known 
as Devar āta, as one of hi s own sons. Vi śvāmitra 
ordered his other sons to accept Śunaḥśepha as 
their eldest brother.  (30) Śunaḥśepha’s father 
sold Śunaḥśepha to be sacrificed as a man -ani-
mal in the yajña of King Hari ścandra. When 
Śunaḥśepha was brought into the sacrificial 
arena,  he prayed to the demigods for release and was released by their mercy.  (31) Alt-
hough Śunaḥśepha was born in the Bh ārgava 
dynasty, he was greatly advanced in spiritual 
life, and therefore the demigods involved in the 
sacrifice protected him. Consequently he was 
also celebrated as the descendant of G ādhi 
named Devar āta.  (32) When requested by their 
father to accept Śunaḥśepha as the eldest son, 
the elder fifty of the Madhucchand ās, the sons 
of Vi śvāmitra, did not agree. Therefore 
Viśvāmitra, being angry, c ursed them. “May all 
of you bad sons become mlecchas,” he said, 
“being opposed to the principles of Vedic cul-
ture.”  (33) When the elder Madhucchand ās 
were cursed, the younger fifty, along with 
Madhucchand ā himself, approached their fa-
ther and agreed to ac cept his proposal. “Dear 
father,” they said, “we shall abide by whatever 
arrangement you like.”  (34) Thus the younger 
Madhucchand ās accepted Śunaḥśepha as their 
eldest brother and told him, “We shall follow 
your orders.” Vi śvāmitra then said to his obe-
dient sons, “Because you have accepted 
Śunaḥśepha as your eldest brother, I am very 
satisfied. By accepting my order, you have 
made me a father of worthy sons, and therefore 
I bless all of you to become the fathers of sons 
also.”  (35) Vi śvāmitra said, “O Ku śikas [de-
scendants of Kau śika], this Devar āta is my son 
and is one of you. Please obey his orders.” O 
King Par īkṣit, Vi śvāmitra had many other sons, 
such as A ṣṭaka, H ārīta, Jaya and Kratum ān.  
(36) Vi śvāmitra cursed some of his sons and 
blessed the others, and he also adopted a son. 
Thus there were varieties in the Kau śika dyn-
asty, but among all the sons, Devar āta was con-
sidered the eldest.  (37)  

SB 9.17: The Dynasties of the Sons of 
Purūravā 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: From Pur ūravā 
came a son named Āyu, whos e very powerful 
sons were Nahu ṣa, Kṣatrav ṛddha, Raj ī, Rābha 
and Anen ā. O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, now hear 
about the dynasty of K ṣatrav ṛddha. K ṣatrav ṛd-
dha’s son was Suhotra, who had three sons, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

564 
 named K āśya, Ku śa and G ṛtsamada. From G ṛt-
samada came Śunaka, and fro m him came Śau-
naka, the great saint, the best of those conver-
sant with the Ṛg Veda.  (1 -3)  

The son of K āśya was K āśi, and his son was 
Rāṣṭra, the father of D īrghatama. D īrghatama 
had a son named Dhanvantari, who was the in-
augurator of the medical science  and an incar-
nation of Lord V āsudeva, the enjoyer of the re-
sults of sacrifices. One who remembers the 
name of Dhanvantari can be released from all 
disease.  (4) The son of Dhanvantari was Ke-
tumān, and his son was Bh īmaratha. The son of 
Bhīmaratha was Divod āsa, and the son of 
Divod āsa was Dyum ān, also known as Pratar-
dana.  (5)  

Dyum ān was also known as Śatrujit, Vatsa, 
Ṛtadhvaja and Kuvalay āśva. From him were 
born Alarka and other sons.  (6) Alarka, the son 
of Dyum ān, reigned over the earth for sixty -six 
thousand years, my dear King Par īkṣit. No one 
other than him has reigned over the earth for so 
long as a young man.  (7) From Alarka came a 
son named Santati, and his son was Sun ītha. 
The son of Sun ītha was Niketana, the son of Ni-
ketana was Dharmaketu, and t he son of Dhar-
maketu was Satyaketu.  (8)  

O King Par īkṣit, from Satyaketu came a son 
named Dh ṛṣṭaketu, and from Dh ṛṣṭaketu came 
Sukum āra, the emperor of the entire world. 
From Sukum āra came a son named V ītihotra; 
from V ītihotra, Bharga; and from Bharga, 
Bhārgabh ūmi.  (9)  

O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, all of these kings were 
descendants of K āśi, and they could also be 
called descendants of K ṣatrav ṛddha. The son of 
Rābha was Rabhasa, from Rabhasa came Gam-
bhīra, and from Gambh īra came a son named 
Akriya.  (10) The s on of Akriya was known as 
Brahmavit, O King. Now hear about the de-
scendants of Anen ā. From Anen ā came a son 
named Śuddha, and his son was Śuci. The son of Śuci was Dharmas ārathi, also called Citrak ṛt.  
(11) From Citrak ṛt was born a son named Śān-
taraja, a s elf-realized soul who performed all 
kinds of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies and there-
fore did not beget any progeny. The sons of 
Rajī were five hundred, all very powerful.  (12)  

On the request of the demigods, Raj ī killed 
the demons and thus returned the k ingdom of 
heaven to Lord Indra. But Indra, fearing such 
demons as Prahl āda, returned the kingdom of 
heaven to Raj ī and surrendered himself at Raj ī
’s lotus feet.  (13) Upon Raj ī’s death, Indra 
begged Raj ī’s sons for the return of the heav-
enly planet. They d id not return it, however, alt-
hough they agreed to return Indra’s shares in 
ritualistic ceremonies.  (14) Thereafter, 
Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, 
offered oblations in the fire so that the sons of 
Rajī would fall from moral principles. When 
they fell, Lord Indra killed them easily because 
of their degradation. Not a single one of them 
remained alive.  (15) From Ku śa, the grandson 
of K ṣatrav ṛddha, was born a son named Prati. 
The son of Prati was Sañjaya, and the son of 
Sañjaya was Jaya. F rom Jaya, K ṛta was born, 
and from K ṛta, King Haryabala.  (16) From 
Haryabala came a son named Sahadeva, and 
from Sahadeva came H īna. The son of H īna 
was Jayasena, and the son of Jayasena was 
Saṅkṛti. The son of Sa ṅkṛti was the powerful 
and expert fighter n amed Jaya. These kings 
were the members of the K ṣatrav ṛddha dynasty. 
Now let me describe to you the dynasty of Na-
huṣa.  (17)  

SB 9.18: King Yay āti Regains His Youth  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King Par īkṣit, as 
the embodied soul has six senses, King Nahu ṣa 
had six sons, named Yati, Yay āti, Sa ṁyāti, 
Āyati, Viyati and K ṛti.  (1) When one enters the 
post of king or head of the government, one 
cannot understand the meaning of self -realiza-
tion. Knowing this, Yati, the eldest son of Na-
huṣa, did not accept the powe r to rule, although 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

565 
 it was offered by his father.  (2) Because Na-
huṣa, the father of Yay āti, molested Indra’s 
wife, Śacī, who then complained to Agastya 
and other br āhmaṇas, these saintly br āhmaṇas 
cursed Nahu ṣa to fall from the heavenly planets 
and be deg raded to the status of a python. Con-
sequently, Yay āti became the king.  (3) King 
Yayāti had four younger brothers, whom he al-
lowed to rule the four directions. Yay āti him-
self married Devay ānī, the daughter of 
Śukrācārya, and Śarmiṣṭhā, the daughter of 
Vṛṣaparvā, and ruled the entire earth.  (4)  

Mahārāja Par īkṣit said: Śukrācārya was a 
very powerful br āhmaṇa, and Mah ārāja Yay āti 
was a k ṣatriya. Therefore I am curious to know 
how there occurred this pratiloma marriage be-
tween a k ṣatriya and a br āhmaṇa.  (5)   

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: One day V ṛṣaparv ā
’s daughter Śarmiṣṭhā, who was innocent but 
angry by nature, was walking with Devay ānī, 
the daughter of Śukrācārya, and with thousands 
of friends, in the palace garden. The garden was 
full of lotuses and trees of flowers and fruits 
and was inhabited by sweetly singing birds and 
bumblebees.  (6 -7) When the young, lotus -eyed 
girls came to the bank of a reservoir of water, 
they wanted to enjoy by bathing. Thus they left 
their clothing on the bank and began sporting, 
throwing water on one another.  (8)  

While sporting in the water, the girls sud-
denly saw Lord Śiva passing by, seated on the 
back of his bull with his wife, P ārvatī. Ashamed 
because they were naked, the girls quickly got 
out of the water and covered themse lves with 
their garments.  (9) Śarmiṣṭhā unknowingly put 
Devay ānī’s dress on her own body, thus an-
gering Devay ānī, who then spoke as follows.  
(10) Oh, just see the activities of this servant -
maid Śarmiṣṭhā! Disregarding all etiquette, she 
has put on my dr ess, just like a dog snatching 
clarified butter meant for use in a sacrifice.  
(11) We are among the qualified br āhmaṇas, 
who are accepted as the face of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The br āhmaṇas have 
created the entire universe by their austerity,  
and they always keep the Absolute Truth within 
the core of their hearts. They have directed the 
path of good fortune, the path of Vedic civili-
zation, and because they are the only worship-
able objects within this world, they are offered 
prayers and worship ed even by the great demi-
gods, the directors of the various planets, and 
even by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the Supersoul, the supreme purifier, the hus-
band of the goddess of fortune. And we are 
even more respectable because we are in the 
dynasty of Bh ṛgu. Yet although this woman’s 
father, being among the demons, is our disciple, 
she has put on my dress, exactly like a śūdra 
taking charge of Vedic knowledge.  (12 -14) 
Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: When thus rebuked in 
cruel words, Śarmiṣṭhā was very angry.  Breath-
ing heavily like a serpent and biting her lower 
lip with her teeth, she spoke to the daughter of 
Śukrācārya as follows.  (15) You beggar, since 
you don’t understand your position, why 
should you unnecessarily talk so much? Don’t 
all of you wait at o ur house, depending on us 
for your livelihood like crows?  (16) Using such 
unkind words, Śarmiṣṭhā rebuked Devay ānī, 
the daughter of Śukrācārya. In anger, she took 
away Devay ānī’s garments and threw 
Devay ānī into a well.  (17)  

After throwing Devay ānī into the well, 
Śarmiṣṭhā went home. Meanwhile, King 
Yayāti, while engaged in a hunting excursion, 
went to the well to drink water and by chance 
saw Devay ānī.  (18) Seeing Devay ānī naked in 
the well, King Yay āti immediately gave her his 
upper cloth. Being very  kind to her, he caught 
her hand with his own and lifted her out.  (19) 
With words saturated with love and affection, 
Devay ānī said to King Yay āti: O great hero, O 
King, conqueror of the cities of your enemies, 
by accepting my hand you have accepted me as 
your married wife. Let me not be touched by 
others, for our relationship as husband and wife 
has been made possible by providence, not by 
any human being.  (20 -21) Because of falling 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

566 
 in the well, I met you. Indeed, this has been ar-
ranged by providence. Aft er I cursed Kaca, the 
son of the learned scholar B ṛhaspati, he cursed 
me by saying that I would not have a br āhmaṇa 
for a husband. Therefore, O mighty -armed one, 
there is no possibility of my becoming the wife 
of a br āhmaṇa.  (22) Śukadeva Gosv āmī con-
tinue d: Because such a marriage is not sanc-
tioned by regular scriptures, King Yay āti did 
not like it, but because it was arranged by prov-
idence and because he was attracted by 
Devay ānī’s beauty, he accepted her request.  
(23)  

Thereafter, when the learned King  returned 
to his palace, Devay ānī returned home crying 
and told her father, Śukrācārya, about all that 
had happened because of Śarmiṣṭhā. She told 
how she had been thrown into the well but was 
saved by the King.  (24) As Śukrācārya listened 
to what had hap pened to Devay ānī, his mind 
was very much aggrieved. Condemning the 
profession of priesthood and praising the pro-
fession of uñcha -vṛtti [collecting grains from 
the fields], he left home with his daughter.  (25) 
King V ṛṣaparv ā understood that Śukrācārya 
was coming to chastise or curse him. Conse-
quently, before Śukrācārya came to his house, 
Vṛṣaparv ā went out and fell down in the street 
at the feet of his guru and satisfied him, check-
ing his wrath.  (26) The powerful Śukrācārya 
was angry for a few moments, bu t upon being 
satisfied he said to V ṛṣaparv ā: My dear King, 
kindly fulfill the desire of Devay ānī, for she is 
my daughter and in this world I cannot give her 
up or neglect her.  (27) After hearing 
Śukrācārya’s request, V ṛṣaparv ā agreed to ful-
fill Devay ānī’s desire, and he awaited her 
words. Devay ānī then expressed her desire as 
follows: “Whenever I marry by the order of my 
father, my friend Śarmiṣṭhā must go with me as 
my maidservant, along with her friends.”  (28)  

Vṛṣaparv ā wisely thought that Śukrācārya’s 
displeasure would bring danger and that his 
pleasure would bring material gain. Therefore 
he carried out Śukrācārya’s order and served him like a slave. He gave his daughter 
Śarmiṣṭhā to Devay ānī, and Śarmiṣṭhā served 
Devay ānī like a slave, along with th ousands of 
other women.  (29)  

When Śukrācārya gave Devay ānī in mar-
riage to Yay āti, he had Śarmiṣṭhā go with her, 
but he warned the King, “My dear King, never 
allow this girl Śarmiṣṭhā to lie with you in your 
bed.”  (30) O King Par īkṣit, upon seeing 
Devay ānī with a nice son, Śarmiṣṭhā once ap-
proached King Yay āti at the appropriate time 
for conception. In a secluded place, she re-
quested the King, the husband of her friend 
Devay ānī, to enable her to have a son also.  (31) 
When Princess Śarmiṣṭhā begged King Yayāti 
for a son, the King was certainly aware of the 
principles of religion, and therefore he agreed 
to fulfill her desire. Although he remembered 
the warning of Śukrācārya, he thought of this 
union as the desire of the Supreme, and thus he 
had sex with Śarmiṣṭhā.  (32) Devay ānī gave 
birth to Yadu and Turvasu, and Śarmiṣṭhā gave 
birth to Druhyu, Anu and P ūru.  (33) When the 
proud Devay ānī understood from outside 
sources that Śarmiṣṭhā was pregnant by her 
husband, she was frenzied with anger. Thus she 
depar ted for her father’s house.  (34) King 
Yayāti, who was very lusty, followed his wife, 
caught her and tried to appease her by speaking 
pleasing words and massaging her feet, but he 
could not satisfy her by any means.  (35) 
Śukrācārya was extremely angry. “Y ou un-
truthful fool, lusting after women! You have 
done a great wrong,” he said. “I therefore curse 
you to be attacked and disfigured by old age 
and invalidity.”  (36)  

King Yay āti said: “O learned, worshipable 
brāhmaṇa, I have not yet satisfied my lusty d e-
sires with your daughter.” Śukrācārya then re-
plied, “You may exchange your old age with 
someone who will agree to transfer his youth to 
you.”  (37) When Yay āti received this benedic-
tion from Śukrācārya, he requested his eldest 
son: My dear son Yadu, please  give me your 
youth in exchange for my old age and invalid-
ity.  (38) My dear son, I am not yet satisfied in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

567 
 my sexual desires. But if you are kind to me, 
you can take the old age given by your maternal 
grandfather, and I may take your youth so that 
I may e njoy life for a few years more.  (39)  

Yadu replied: My dear father, you have al-
ready achieved old age, although you also were 
a young man. But I do not welcome your old 
age and invalidity, for unless one enjoys mate-
rial happiness, one cannot attain renun ciation.  
(40) O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, Yay āti similarly re-
quested his sons Turvasu, Druhyu and Anu to 
exchange their youth for his old age, but be-
cause they were unaware of religious princi-
ples, they thought that their flickering youth 
was eternal, and theref ore they refused to carry 
out their father’s order.  (41) King Yay āti then 
requested P ūru, who was younger than these 
three brothers but more qualified, “My dear 
son, do not be disobedient like your elder broth-
ers, for that is not your duty.”  (42)  

Pūru replied: O Your Majesty, who in this 
world can repay his debt to his father? By the 
mercy of one’s father, one gets the human form 
of life, which can enable one to become an as-
sociate of the Supreme Lord.  (43) A son who 
acts by anticipating what his fathe r wants him 
to do is first class, one who acts upon receiving 
his father’s order is second class, and one who 
executes his father’s order irreverently is third 
class. But a son who refuses his father’s order 
is like his father’s stool.  (44)  

Śukadeva Gos vāmī said: In this way, O 
Mahārāja Par īkṣit, the son named P ūru was 
very pleased to accept the old age of his father, 
Yayāti, who took the youth of his son and en-
joyed this material world as he required.  (45) 
Thereafter, King Yay āti became the ruler of th e 
entire world, consisting of seven islands, and 
ruled the citizens exactly like a father. Because 
he had taken the youth of his son, his senses 
were unimpaired, and he enjoyed as much ma-
terial happiness as he desired.  (46) In secluded 
places, engaging he r mind, words, body and 
various paraphernalia, Devay ānī, the dear wife of Mah ārāja Yay āti, always brought her hus-
band the greatest possible transcendental bliss.  
(47) King Yay āti performed various sacrifices, 
in which he offered abundant gifts to the 
brāhmaṇas to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Hari, 
who is the reservoir of all the demigods and the 
object of all Vedic knowledge.  (48) The Su-
preme Lord, V āsudeva, who created the cosmic 
manifestation, exhibits Himself as all -pervad-
ing, like the sky that holds clou ds. And when 
the creation is annihilated, everything enters 
into the Supreme Lord, Vi ṣṇu, and varieties are 
no longer manifested.  (49) Without material 
desires, Mah ārāja Yay āti worshiped the Su-
preme Lord, who is situated in everyone’s heart 
as N ārāyaṇa and is invisible to material eyes, 
although existing everywhere.  (50) Although 
Mahārāja Yay āti was the king of the entire 
world and he engaged his mind and five senses 
in enjoying material possessions for one thou-
sand years, he was unable to be satisfied. ( 51)  

SB 9.19: King Yay āti Achieves Liberation  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, Yay āti was very much attached to 
woman. In due course of time, however, when 
disgusted with sexual enjoyment and its bad ef-
fects, he renounced this way of life and narrated 
the following story to his beloved wife.  (1) My 
dearly beloved wife, daughter of Śukrācārya, in 
this world there was someone exactly like me. 
Please listen as I narrate the history of his life. 
By hearing about the life of such a householder, 
those who have retired from householder life 
always lament.  (2) While wandering in the for-
est, eating to satisfy his senses, a he -goat by 
chance approached a well, in which he saw a 
she-goat standing helplessly, having fallen into 
it by the influence of the results of fruitive ac-
tivities.  (3) After planning how to get the she -
goat out of the well, the lusty he -goat dug up 
the earth on the well’s edge with the point of 
his horns in such a way that she was able to 
come out very easily.  (4) When the she -goat, 
who had very nice hips, got out of the well and 
saw the very handsome he -goat, she desired to 
accept him as her husband. When she did so, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

568 
 many other she -goats also desired him as their 
husband because he had a very beautiful bodily 
structure and a nice mus tache and beard and 
was expert in discharging semen and in the art 
of sexual intercourse. Therefore, just as a per-
son haunted by a ghost exhibits madness, the 
best of the he -goats, attracted by the many she -
goats, engaged in erotic activities and naturally  
forgot his real business of self -realization.  (5 -
6)  

When the she -goat who had fallen into the 
well saw her beloved goat engaged in sexual af-
fairs with another she -goat, she could not toler-
ate the goat’s activities.  (7) Aggrieved by her 
husband’s behav ior with another, the she -goat 
thought that the he -goat was not actually her 
friend but was hardhearted and was her friend 
only for the time being. Therefore, because her 
husband was lusty, she left him and returned to 
her former maintainer.  (8) Being ver y sorry, 
the he -goat, who was subservient to his wife, 
followed the she -goat on the road and tried his 
best to flatter her, but he could not pacify her.  
(9) The she -goat went to the residence of a 
brāhmaṇa who was the maintainer of another 
she-goat, and t hat br āhmaṇa angrily cut off the 
he-goat’s dangling testicles. But at the he -
goat’s request, the br āhmaṇa later rejoined 
them by the power of mystic yoga.  (10) My 
dear wife, when the he -goat had his testicles re-
stored, he enjoyed the she -goat he had gotte n 
from the well, but although he continued to en-
joy for many, many years, even now he has not 
been fully satisfied.  (11) O my dear wife with 
beautiful eyebrows, I am exactly like that he -
goat, for I am so poor in intelligence that I am 
captivated by your beauty and have forgotten 
the real task of self -realization.  (12)  

A person who is lusty cannot satisfy his 
mind even if he has enough of everything in 
this world, including rice, barley and other food 
grains, gold, animals and women. Nothing can 
satisfy  him.  (13) As supplying butter to a fire 
does not diminish the fire but instead increases 
it more and more, the endeavor to stop lusty de-sires by continual enjoyment can never be suc-
cessful. [In fact, one must voluntarily cease 
from material desires.]  (1 4) When a man is 
nonenvious and does not desire ill fortune for 
anyone, he is equipoised. For such a person, all 
directions appear happy.  (15) For those who 
are too attached to material enjoyment, sense 
gratification is very difficult to give up. Even 
when one is an invalid because of old age, one 
cannot give up such desires for sense gratifica-
tion. Therefore, one who actually desires hap-
piness must give up such unsatisfied desires, 
which are the cause of all tribulations.  (16) One 
should not allow onesel f to sit on the same seat 
even with one’s own mother, sister or daughter, 
for the senses are so strong that even though 
one is very advanced in knowledge, he may be 
attracted by sex.  (17) I have spent a full one 
thousand years enjoying sense gratification , yet 
my desire to enjoy such pleasure increases 
daily.  (18) Therefore, I shall now give up all 
these desires and meditate upon the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Free from the dualities 
of mental concoction and free from false pres-
tige, I shall wander i n the forest with the ani-
mals.  (19) One who knows that material hap-
piness, whether good or bad, in this life or in 
the next, on this planet or on the heavenly plan-
ets, is temporary and useless, and that an intel-
ligent person should not try to enjoy or eve n 
think of such things, is the knower of the self. 
Such a self -realized person knows quite well 
that material happiness is the very cause of con-
tinued material existence and forgetfulness of 
one’s own constitutional position.  (20)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said:  After speaking in 
this way to his wife, Devay ānī, King Yay āti, 
who was now free from all material desires, 
called his youngest son, P ūru, and returned 
Pūru’s youth in exchange for his own old age.  
(21) King Yay āti gave the southeast to his son 
Druhyu, th e south to his son Yadu, the west to 
his son Turvasu, and the north to his son Anu. 
In this way he divided the kingdom.  (22) 
Yayāti enthroned his youngest son, P ūru, as the 
emperor of the entire world and the proprietor 
of all its riches, and he placed al l the other sons, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

569 
 who were older than P ūru, under P ūru’s con-
trol.  (23) Having enjoyed sense gratification 
for many, many years, O King Par īkṣit, Yay āti 
was accustomed to it, but he gave it up entirely 
in a moment, just as a bird flies away from the 
nest a s soon as its wings have grown.  (24) Be-
cause King Yay āti completely surrendered unto 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Vāsudeva, he was freed from all contamination 
of the material modes of nature. Because of his 
self-realization, he was able to fix his  mind 
upon the Transcendence [Parabrahman, 
Vāsudeva], and thus he ultimately achieved the 
position of an associate of the Lord.  (25)  

When Devay ānī heard Mah ārāja Yay āti’s 
story of the he -goat and she -goat, she under-
stood that this story, which was prese nted as if 
a funny joke for entertainment between hus-
band and wife, was intended to awaken her to 
her constitutional position.  (26) Thereafter, 
Devay ānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya, under-
stood that the materialistic association of hus-
band, friends and rel atives is like the associa-
tion in a hotel full of tourists. The relationships 
of society, friendship and love are created by 
the m āyā of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, exactly as in a dream. By the grace of 
Kṛṣṇa, Devay ānī gave up her imaginary posi-
tion in the material world. Completely fixing 
her mind upon K ṛṣṇa, she achieved liberation 
from the gross and subtle bodies.  (27 -28) O 
Lord V āsudeva, O Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, You are the creator of the entire cos-
mic manifestation. You live as the S upersoul in 
everyone’s heart and are smaller than the small-
est, yet You are greater than the greatest and are 
all-pervading. You appear completely silent, 
having nothing to do, but this is due to Your all -
pervading nature and Your fullness in all opu-
lences . I therefore offer my respectful obei-
sances unto You.  (29)  

SB 9.20: The Dynasty of P ūru 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, descendant of Mah ārāja Bharata, I shall now describe the dynasty of P ūru, in 
which you were born, in which many saintly  
kings appeared, and from which many dynas-
ties of br āhmaṇas began.  (1) King Janamejaya 
was born of this dynasty of P ūru. Janamejaya’s 
son was Pracinv ān, and his son was Prav īra. 
Thereafter, Prav īra’s son was Manusyu, and 
from Manusyu came the son named C ārupada.  
(2) The son of C ārupada was Sudyu, and the 
son of Sudyu was Bahugava. Bahugava’s son 
was Sa ṁyāti. From Sa ṁyāti came a son named 
Ahaṁyāti, from whom Raudr āśva was born.  
(3)  

Raudr āśva had ten sons, named Ṛteyu, 
Kakṣeyu, Stha ṇḍileyu, K ṛteyuka, Jal eyu, San-
nateyu, Dharmeyu, Satyeyu, Vrateyu and 
Vaneyu. Of these ten sons, Vaneyu was the 
youngest. As the ten senses, which are products 
of the universal life, act under the control of 
life, these ten sons of Raudr āśva acted under 
Raudr āśva’s full control.  All of them were born 
of the Apsar ā named Gh ṛtācī.  (4-5)  

Ṛteyu had a son named Rantin āva, who had 
three sons, named Sumati, Dhruva and Aprati-
ratha. Apratiratha had only one son, whose 
name was Ka ṇva.  (6) The son of Ka ṇva was 
Medh ātithi, whose sons, al l brāhmaṇas, were 
headed by Praskanna. The son of Rantin āva 
named Sumati had a son named Rebhi. 
Mahārāja Du ṣmanta is well known as the son 
of Rebhi.  (7)  

Once when King Du ṣmanta went to the for-
est to hunt and was very much fatigued, he ap-
proached the res idence of Ka ṇva Muni. There 
he saw a most beautiful woman who looked ex-
actly like the goddess of fortune and who sat 
there illuminating the entire āśrama by her ef-
fulgence. The King was naturally attracted by 
her beauty, and therefore he approached her, 
accompanied by some of his soldiers, and 
spoke to her.  (8 -9) Seeing the beautiful 
woman, the King was very much enlivened, 
and the fatigue of his hunting excursion was re-
lieved. He was of course very much attracted 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

570 
 because of lusty desires, and thus he inqu ired 
from her as follows, in a joking mood.  (10) O 
beautiful lotus -eyed woman, who are you? 
Whose daughter are you? What purpose do you 
have in this solitary forest? Why are you stay-
ing here?  (11) O most beautiful one, it appears 
to my mind that you must  be the daughter of a 
kṣatriya. Because I belong to the P ūru dynasty, 
my mind never endeavors to enjoy anything ir-
religiously.  (12)  

Śakuntal ā said: I am the daughter of 
Viśvāmitra. My mother, Menak ā, left me in the 
forest. O hero, the most powerful sain t Kaṇva 
Muni knows all about this. Now let me know, 
how may I serve you?  (13) O King with eyes 
like the petals of a lotus, kindly come sit down 
and accept whatever reception we can offer. 
We have a supply of n īvārā rice that you may 
kindly take. And if yo u so desire, stay here 
without hesitation.  (14)  

King Du ṣmanta   
replied:  
 O Śakuntal ā, with beautiful eyebrows, you 
have taken your birth in the family of the great 
saint Vi śvāmitra, and your reception is quite 
worthy of your family. Aside from this, t he 
daughters of a king generally select their own 
husbands.  (15) When Śakuntal ā responded to 
Mahārāja Du ṣmanta’s proposal with silence, 
the agreement was complete. Then the King, 
who knew the laws of marriage, immediately 
married her by chanting the Vedic  praṇava 
[oṁkāra], in accordance with the marriage cer-
emony as performed among the Gandharvas.  
(16) King Du ṣmanta, who never discharged se-
men without a result, placed his semen at night 
in the womb of his Queen, Śakuntal ā, and in the 
morning he returned t o his palace. Thereafter, 
in due course of time, Śakuntal ā gave birth to a 
son.  (17)  

In the forest, Ka ṇva Muni performed all the 
ritualistic ceremonies concerning the newborn 
child. Later, the boy became so powerful that he would capture a lion and play  with it.  (18)  

Śakuntal ā, the best of beautiful women, 
along with her son, whose strength was insur-
mountable and who was a partial expansion of 
the Supreme Godhead, approached her hus-
band, Du ṣmanta.  (19) When the King refused 
to accept his wife and son , who were both irre-
proachable, an unembodied voice spoke from 
the sky as an omen and was heard by everyone 
present.  (20) The voice said: O Mah ārāja 
Duṣmanta, a son actually belongs to his father, 
whereas the mother is only a container, like the 
skin of a  bellows. According to Vedic injunc-
tions, the father is born as the son. Therefore, 
maintain your own son and do not insult 
Śakuntal ā.  (21) O King Du ṣmanta, he who dis-
charges semen is the actual father, and his son 
saves him from the custody of Yamar āja. You 
are the actual procreator of this child. Indeed, 
Śakuntal ā is speaking the truth.  (22)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: When Mah ārāja 
Duṣmanta passed away from this earth, his son 
became the emperor of the world, the proprie-
tor of the seven islands. He is ref erred to as a 
partial representation of the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead in this world.  (23) Mah ārāja 
Bharata, the son of Du ṣmanta, had the mark of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s disc on the palm of his right hand, 
and he had the mark of a lotus whorl on the 
soles of his  feet. By worshiping the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead with a grand ritualistic 
ceremony, he became the emperor and master 
of the entire world. Then, under the priesthood 
of M āmateya, Bh ṛgu Muni, he performed fifty -
five horse sacrifices on the bank of the  Ganges, 
beginning from its mouth and ending at its 
source, and seventy -eight horse sacrifices on 
the bank of the Yamun ā, beginning from the 
confluence at Pray āga and ending at the source. 
He established the sacrificial fire on an excel-
lent site, and he di stributed great wealth to the 
brāhmaṇas. Indeed, he distributed so many 
cows that each of thousands of br āhmaṇas had 
one badva [13,084] as his share.  (24 -26) Bha-
rata, the son of Mah ārāja Du ṣmanta, bound 
thirty -three hundred horses for those sacrifices, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

571 
 and thus he astonished all other kings. He sur-
passed even the opulence of the demigods, for 
he achieved the supreme spiritual master, Hari.  
(27) When Mah ārāja Bharata performed the 
sacrifice known as Ma ṣṇāra [or a sacrifice in 
the place known as Ma ṣṇāra], h e gave in char-
ity fourteen lakhs of excellent elephants with 
white tusks and black bodies, completely cov-
ered with golden ornaments.  (28) As one can-
not approach the heavenly planets simply by 
the strength of his arms (for who can touch the 
heavenly planet s with his hands?), one cannot 
imitate the wonderful activities of Mah ārāja 
Bharata. No one could perform such activities 
in the past, nor will anyone be able to do so in 
the future.  (29) When Mah ārāja Bharata was 
on tour, he defeated or killed all the Ki rātas, 
Hūṇas, Yavanas, Pau ṇḍras, Ka ṅkas, Kha śas, 
Śakas and the kings who were opposed to the 
Vedic principles of brahminical culture.  (30) 
Formerly, after conquering the demigods, all 
the demons had taken shelter in the lower plan-
etary system known as Ras ātala and had 
brought all the wives and daughters of the dem-
igods there also. Mah ārāja Bharata, however, 
rescued all those women, along with their asso-
ciates, from the clutches of the demons, and he 
returned them to the demigods.  (31) Mah ārāja 
Bharata pro vided all necessities for his sub-
jects, both on this earth and in the heavenly 
planets, for twenty -seven thousand years. He 
circulated his orders and distributed his soldiers 
in all directions.  (32) As the ruler of the entire 
universe, Emperor Bharata had  the opulences 
of a great kingdom and unconquerable soldiers. 
His sons and family had seemed to him to be 
his entire life. But finally he thought of all this 
as an impediment to spiritual advancement, and 
therefore he ceased from enjoying it.  (33)  

O Kin g Par īkṣit, Mah ārāja Bharata had three 
pleasing wives, who were daughters of the 
King of Vidarbha. When all three of them bore 
children who did not resemble the King, these 
wives thought that he would consider them un-
faithful queens and reject them, and th erefore 
they killed their own sons.  (34) The King, his attempt for progeny frustrated in this way, per-
formed a sacrifice named marut -stoma to get a 
son. The demigods known as the Maruts, being 
fully satisfied with him, then presented him a 
son named Bhara dvāja.  (35) When the demi-
god named B ṛhaspati was attracted by his 
brother’s wife, Mamat ā, who at that time was 
pregnant, he desired to have sexual relations 
with her. The son within her womb forbade 
this, but B ṛhaspati cursed him and forcibly dis-
charged s emen into the womb of Mamat ā.  (36) 
Mamat ā very much feared being forsaken by 
her husband for giving birth to an illegitimate 
son, and therefore she considered giving up the 
child. But then the demigods solved the prob-
lem by enunciating a name for the chil d.  (37) 
Bṛhaspati said to Mamat ā, “You foolish 
woman, although this child was born from the 
wife of one man through the semen discharged 
by another, you should maintain him.” Upon 
hearing this, Mamat ā replied, “O B ṛhaspati, 
you maintain him!” After speaki ng in this way, 
Bṛhaspati and Mamat ā both left. Thus the child 
was known as Bharadv āja.  (38) Although en-
couraged by the demigods to maintain the 
child, Mamat ā considered him useless because 
of his illicit birth, and therefore she left him. 
Consequently, t he demigods known as the 
Maruts maintained the child, and when 
Mahārāja Bharata was disappointed for want of 
a child, this child was given to him as his son.  
(39)  

SB 9.21: The Dynasty of Bharata  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Because Bha-
radvāja was delivered b y the Marut demigods, 
he was known as Vitatha. The son of Vitatha 
was Manyu, and from Manyu came five 
sonsB ṛhatkṣatra, Jaya, Mah āvīrya, Nara and 
Garga. Of these five, the one known as Nara 
had a son named Sa ṅkṛti.  (1) O Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, descendant of P āṇḍu, Sa ṅkṛti had two 
sons, named Guru and Rantideva. Rantideva is 
famous in both this world and the next, for he 
is glorified not only in human society but also 
in the society of the demigods.  (2) Rantideva 
never endeavored to earn anything. He would 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

572 
 enjoy whatever he got by the arrangement of 
providence, but when guests came he would 
give them everything. Thus he underwent con-
siderable suffering, along with the members of 
his family. Indeed, he and his family members 
shivered for want of food and water, y et 
Rantideva always remained sober. Once, after 
fasting for forty -eight days, in the morning 
Rantideva received some water and some food-
stuffs made with milk and ghee, but when he 
and his family were about to eat, a br āhmaṇa 
guest arrived.  (3 -5) Because R antideva per-
ceived the presence of the Supreme Godhead 
everywhere, and in every living entity, he re-
ceived the guest with faith and respect and gave 
him a share of the food. The br āhmaṇa guest ate 
his share and then went away.  (6)  

Thereafter, having div ided the remaining 
food with his relatives, Rantideva was just 
about to eat his own share when a śūdra guest 
arrived. Seeing the śūdra in relationship with 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, King 
Rantideva gave him also a share of the food.  
(7)  

When th e śūdra went away, another guest 
arrived, surrounded by dogs, and said, “O King, 
I and my company of dogs are very hungry. 
Please give us something to eat.”  (8) With 
great respect, King Rantideva offered the bal-
ance of the food to the dogs and the master of 
the dogs, who had come as guests. The King 
offered them all respects and obeisances.  (9) 
Thereafter, only the drinking water remained, 
and there was only enough to satisfy one per-
son, but when the King was just about to drink 
it, a ca ṇḍāla appeared and  said, “O King, alt-
hough I am lowborn, kindly give me some 
drinking water.”  (10) Aggrieved at hearing the 
pitiable words of the poor fatigued ca ṇḍāla, 
Mahārāja Rantideva spoke the following nec-
tarean words.  (11) I do not pray to the Supreme 
Personality o f Godhead for the eight perfec-
tions of mystic yoga, nor for salvation from re-
peated birth and death. I want only to stay 
among all the living entities and suffer all dis-
tresses on their behalf, so that they may be freed from suffering.  (12) By offering my  water to 
maintain the life of this poor ca ṇḍāla, who is 
struggling to live, I have been freed from all 
hunger, thirst, fatigue, trembling of the body, 
moroseness, distress, lamentation and illusion.  
(13) Having spoken thus, King Rantideva, alt-
hough on th e verge of death because of thirst, 
gave his own portion of water to the ca ṇḍāla 
without hesitation, for the King was naturally 
very kind and sober.  (14) Demigods like Lord 
Brahm ā and Lord Śiva, who can satisfy all ma-
terially ambitious men by giving them the re-
wards they desire, then manifested their own 
identities before King Rantideva, for it was 
they who had presented themselves as the 
brāhmaṇa, śūdra, ca ṇḍāla and so on.  (15) King 
Rantideva had no ambition to enjoy material 
benefits from the demigods. He offered them 
obeisances, but because he was factually at-
tached to Lord Vi ṣṇu, Vāsudeva, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, he fixed his mind at 
Lord Vi ṣṇu’s lotus feet.  (16) O Mah ārāja 
Parīkṣit, because King Rantideva was a pure 
devotee, always K ṛṣṇa conscious and free from 
all material desires, the Lord’s illusory energy, 
māyā, could not exhibit herself before him. On 
the contrary, for him m āyā entirely vanished, 
exactly like a dream.  (17) All those who fol-
lowed the principles of King Rantideva were 
totally favored by his mercy and became pure 
devotees, attached to the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, N ārāyaṇa. Thus they all became 
the best of yog īs.  (18)  

From Garga came a son named Śini, and his 
son was G ārgya. Although G ārgya was a k ṣat-
riya, there  came from him a generation of brah-
maṇas. From Mah āvīrya came a son named Du-
ritakṣaya, whose sons were Trayy āruṇi, Kavi 
and Pu ṣkarāruṇi. Although these sons of Duri-
takṣaya took birth in a dynasty of k ṣatriyas, 
they too attained the position of br āhmaṇas. 
Bṛhatkṣatra had a son named Hast ī, who estab-
lished the city of Hastin āpura [now New 
Delhi].  (19 -20) From King Hast ī came three 
sons, named Ajam īḍha, Dvim īḍha and 
Purum īḍha. The descendants of Ajam īḍha, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

573 
 headed by Priyamedha, all achieved the posi-
tion of br āhmaṇas.  (21) From Ajam īḍha came 
a son named B ṛhadiṣu, from B ṛhadiṣu came a 
son named B ṛhaddhanu, from B ṛhaddhanu a 
son named B ṛhatkāya, and from B ṛhatkāya a 
son named Jayadratha.  (22) The son of Jaya-
dratha was Vi śada, and his son was Syenajit. 
The sons o f Syenajit were Rucir āśva, D ṛḍha-
hanu, K āśya and Vatsa.  (23) The son of 
Rucir āśva was P āra, and the sons of P āra were 
Pṛthusena and N īpa. N īpa had one hundred 
sons.  (24) King N īpa begot a son named Brah-
madatta through the womb of his wife, K ṛtvī, 
who was the daughter of Śuka. And Brahmad-
atta, who was a great yog ī, begot a son named 
Viṣvaksena through the womb of his wife, Sar-
asvat ī.  (25) Following the instructions of the 
great sage Jaig īṣavya, Vi ṣvaksena compiled an 
elaborate description of the mystic yog a sys-
tem. From Vi ṣvaksena, Udaksena was born, 
and from Udaksena, Bhall āṭa. All these sons 
are known as descendants of B ṛhadiṣu.  (26)  

The son of Dvim īḍha was Yav īnara, whose 
son was K ṛtimān. The son of K ṛtimān was well 
known as Satyadh ṛti. From Satyadh ṛti came a 
son named D ṛḍhanemi, who became the father 
of Sup ārśva.  (27) From Sup ārśva came a son 
named Sumati, from Sumati came Sannatim ān, 
and from Sannatim ān came K ṛtī, who achieved 
mystic power from Brahm ā and taught six 
saṁhitās of the Pr ācyasāma verses  of the S āma 
Veda. The son of K ṛtī was N īpa; the son of 
Nīpa, Udgr āyudha; the son of Udgr āyudha, 
Kṣemya; the son of K ṣemya, Suv īra; and the 
son of Suv īra, Ripuñjaya.  (28 -29) From 
Ripuñjaya came a son named Bahuratha. 
Purum īḍha was sonless. Ajam īḍha had a son 
named N īla by his wife known as Nalin ī, and 
the son of N īla was Śānti.  (30) The son of Śānti 
was Su śānti, the son of Su śānti was Puruja, and 
the son of Puruja was Arka. From Arka came 
Bharmy āśva, and from Bharmy āśva came five 
sonsMudgala, Yav īnara, B ṛhadvi śva, K āmpilla 
and Sañjaya. Bharmy āśva prayed to his sons, 
“O my sons, please take charge of my five 
states, for you are quite competent to do so.” 
Thus his five sons were known as the Pañc ālas. From Mudgala came a dynasty of br āhmaṇas 
known as Maudgal ya.  (31 -33)  

Mudgala, the son of Bharmy āśva, had twin 
children, one male and the other female. The 
male child was named Divod āsa, and the fe-
male child was named Ahaly ā. From the womb 
of Ahaly ā by the semen of her husband, Gau-
tama, came a son named Śatānanda.  (34) The 
son of Śatānanda was Satyadh ṛti, who was ex-
pert in archery, and the son of Satyadh ṛti was 
Śaradv ān. When Śaradv ān met Urva śī, he dis-
charged semen, which fell on a clump of śara 
grass. From this semen were born two all -aus-
picious babies, one male and the other female.  
(35) While Mah ārāja Śāntanu was on a hunting 
excursion, he saw the male and female children 
lying in the forest, and out of compassion he 
took them home. Consequently, the male child 
was known as K ṛpa, and the female child was 
named K ṛpī. Kṛpī later became the wife of 
Droṇācārya.  (36)  

SB 9.22: The Descendants of Ajam īḍha 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: O King, the son of 
Divod āsa was Mitr āyu, and from Mitr āyu came 
four sons, named Cyavana, Sud āsa, Sahadeva 
and Somaka. Somaka was the f ather of Jantu.  
(1) Somaka had one hundred sons, of whom the 
youngest was P ṛṣata. From P ṛṣata was born 
King Drupada, who was opulent in all suprem-
acy.  (2) From Mah ārāja Drupada, Draupad ī 
was born. Mah ārāja Drupada also had many 
sons, headed by Dh ṛṣṭadyum na. From 
Dhṛṣṭadyumna came a son named Dh ṛṣṭaketu. 
All these personalities are known as descend-
ants of Bharmy āśva or as the dynasty of 
Pāñcāla.  (3) Another son of Ajam īḍha was 
known as Ṛkṣa. From Ṛkṣa came a son named 
Saṁvaraṇa, and from Sa ṁvaraṇa through  the 
womb of his wife, Tapat ī, the daughter of the 
sun-god, came Kuru, the King of Kuruk ṣetra. 
Kuru had four sonsPar īkṣi, Sudhanu, Jahnu and 
Niṣadha. From Sudhanu, Suhotra was born, and 
from Suhotra, Cyavana. From Cyavana, K ṛtī 
was born.  (4 -5)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

574 

The son o f Kṛtī was Uparicara Vasu, and 
among his sons, headed by B ṛhadratha, were 
Kuśāmba, Matsya, Pratyagra and Cedipa. All 
the sons of Uparicara Vasu became rulers of the 
Cedi state.  (6) From B ṛhadratha, Ku śāgra was 
born; from Ku śāgra, Ṛṣabha; and from Ṛṣabha, 
Satyahita. The son of Satyahita was Pu ṣpavān, 
and the son of Pu ṣpavān was Jahu.  (7)  

Through the womb of another wife, 
Bṛhadratha begot two halves of a son. When the 
mother saw those two halves she rejected them, 
but later a she -demon named Jar ā playfull y 
joined them and said, “Come to life, come to 
life!” Thus the son named Jar āsandha was born.  
(8) From Jar āsandha came a son named Sa-
hadeva; from Sahadeva, Som āpi; and from 
Somāpi, Śrutaśravā. The son of Kuru called 
Parīkṣi had no sons, but the son of Kur u called 
Jahnu had a son named Suratha.  (9) From Su-
ratha came a son named Vid ūratha, from whom 
Sārvabhauma was born. From S ārvabhauma 
came Jayasena; from Jayasena, R ādhika; and 
from R ādhika, Ayut āyu.  (10)  

From Ayut āyu came a son named Ak-
rodhana, and hi s son was Dev ātithi. The son of 
Devātithi was Ṛkṣa, the son of Ṛkṣa was Dil īpa, 
and the son of Dil īpa was Prat īpa.  (11) The 
sons of Prat īpa were Dev āpi, Śāntanu and 
Bāhlīka. Dev āpi left the kingdom of his father 
and went to the forest, and therefore Śāntanu 
became the king. Śāntanu, who in his previous 
birth was known as Mah ābhiṣa, had the ability 
to transform anyone from old age to youth 
simply by touching that person with his hands.  
(12-13) Because the King was able to make 
everyone happy for sense grat ification, primar-
ily by the touch of his hand, his name was 
Śāntanu. Once, when there was no rainfall in 
the kingdom for twelve years and the King con-
sulted his learned brahminical advisors, they 
said, “You are faulty for enjoying the property 
of your elde r brother. For the elevation of your 
kingdom and home, you should return the king-
dom to him.”  (14 -15) When the br āhmaṇas said this, Mah ārāja Śāntanu went to the forest 
and requested his elder brother Dev āpi to take 
charge of the kingdom, for it is the dut y of a 
king to maintain his subjects. Previously, how-
ever, Śāntanu’s minister A śvavāra had insti-
gated some br āhmaṇas to induce Dev āpi to 
transgress the injunctions of the Vedas and thus 
make himself unfit for the post of ruler. The 
brāhmaṇas deviated Dev āpi from the path of 
the Vedic principles, and therefore when asked 
by Śāntanu he did not agree to accept the post 
of ruler. On the contrary, he blasphemed the 
Vedic principles and therefore became fallen. 
Under the circumstances, Śāntanu again be-
came the ki ng, and Indra, being pleased, show-
ered rains. Dev āpi later took to the path of mys-
tic yoga to control his mind and senses and 
went to the village named Kal āpagrāma, where 
he is still living.  (16 -17) After the dynasty of 
the moon -god comes to an end in thi s Age of 
Kali, Dev āpi, in the beginning of the next 
Satya -yuga, will reestablish the Soma dynasty 
in this world. From B āhlīka [the brother of 
Śāntanu] came a son named Somadatta, who 
had three sons, named Bh ūri, Bh ūriśravā and 
Śala. From Śāntanu, through t he womb of his 
wife named Ga ṅgā, came Bh īṣma, the exalted, 
self-realized devotee and learned scholar.  (18 -
19) Bh īṣmadeva was the foremost of all warri-
ors. When he defeated Lord Para śurāma in a 
fight, Lord Para śurāma was very satisfied with 
him. By the sem en of Śāntanu in the womb of 
Satyavat ī, the daughter of a fisherman, Cit-
rāṅgada took birth.  (20) Citr āṅgada, of whom 
Vicitrav īrya was the younger brother, was 
killed by a Gandharva who was also named Cit-
rāṅgada. Satyavat ī, before her marriage to 
Śāntanu, gave birth to the master authority of 
the Vedas, Vy āsadeva, known as K ṛṣṇa 
Dvaip āyana, who was begotten by Par āśara 
Muni. From Vy āsadeva, I [ Śukadeva Gosv āmī] 
was born, and from him I studied this great 
work of literature, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The 
incarnatio n of Godhead Vedavy āsa, rejecting 
his disciples, headed by Paila, instructed 
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to me because I was free 
from all material desires. After Ambik ā and 
Amb ālikā, the two daughters of K āśīrāja, were 
taken away by force, Vicitrav īrya married 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

575 
 them , but because he was too attached to these 
two wives, he had a heart attack and died of tu-
berculosis.  (21 -24) B ādarāyaṇa, Śrī 
Vyāsadeva, following the order of his mother, 
Satyavat ī, begot three sons, two by the womb 
of Ambik ā and Amb ālikā, the two wives of his 
brother Vicitrav īrya, and the third by Vici-
travīrya’s maidservant. These sons were 
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Pāṇḍu and Vidura.  (25)  

Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s wife, G āndhārī, gave birth to 
one hundred sons and one daughter, O King. 
The oldest of the sons was Duryodhana, a nd the 
daughter’s name was Du ḥśalā.  (26) P āṇḍu was 
restrained from sexual life because of having 
been cursed by a sage, and therefore his three 
sons Yudhi ṣṭhira, Bh īma and Arjuna were be-
gotten through the womb of his wife, Kunt ī, by 
Dharmar āja, by the dem igod controlling the 
wind, and by the demigod controlling the rain. 
Pāṇḍu’s second wife, M ādrī, gave birth to 
Nakula and Sahadeva, who were begotten by 
the two A śvinī-kumāras. The five brothers, 
headed by Yudhi ṣṭhira, begot five sons through 
the womb of Dr aupad ī. These five sons were 
your uncles.  (27 -28)  

From Yudhi ṣṭhira came a son named Pra-
tivindhya, from Bh īma a son named Śrutasena, 
from Arjuna a son named Śrutak īrti, and from 
Nakula a son named Śatānīka.  (29) O King, the 
son of Sahadeva was Śrutakarm ā. Furthermore, 
Yudhi ṣṭhira and his brothers begot other sons 
in other wives. Yudhi ṣṭhira begot a son named 
Devaka through the womb of Paurav ī, and 
Bhīmasena begot a son named Gha ṭotkaca 
through his wife Hi ḍimbā and a son named Sar-
vagata through his wife K ālī. Similarly, Sa-
hadeva had a son named Suhotra through his 
wife named Vijay ā, who was the daughter of 
the king of the mountains.  (30 -31) Nakula be-
got a son named Naramitra through his wife 
named Kare ṇumat ī. Similarly, Arjuna begot a 
son named Ir āvān thr ough his wife known as 
Ulup ī, the daughter of the N āgas, and a son 
named Babhruv āhana by the womb of the prin-
cess of Ma ṇipura. Babhruv āhana became the 
adopted son of the king of Ma ṇipura.  (32) My dear King Par īkṣit, your father, Abhimanyu, 
was born from t he womb of Subhadr ā as the 
son of Arjuna. He was the conqueror of all ati-
rathas [those who could fight with one thou-
sand charioteers]. From him, by the womb of 
Uttar ā, the daughter of Vir āḍrāja, you were 
born.  (33) After the Kuru dynasty was annihi-
lated i n the Battle of Kuruk ṣetra, you also were 
about to be destroyed by the brahm āstra atomic 
weapon released by the son of Dro ṇācārya, but 
by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, you were saved from death.  
(34)  

My dear King, your four son sJanamejaya, 
Śrutasena, Bh īmasena and Ugrasenaare very 
powerful. Janamejaya is the eldest.  (35)  

Because of your death by the Tak ṣaka snake, 
your son Janamejaya will be very angry and 
will perform a sacrifice to kill all the snakes in 
the world.  (36) Af ter conquering throughout 
the world and after accepting Tura, the son of 
Kala ṣa, as his priest, Janamejaya will perform 
aśvamedha -yajñas, for which he will be known 
as Turaga -medha ṣāṭ.  (37)  

The son of Janamejaya known as Śatānīka 
will learn from Y ājñava lkya the three Vedas 
and the art of performing ritualistic ceremonies. 
He will also learn the military art from 
Kṛpācārya and the transcendental science from 
the sage Śaunaka.  (38) The son of Śatānīka will 
be Sahasr ānīka, and from him will come the 
son na med A śvamedhaja. From A śvamedhaja 
will come As īmakṛṣṇa, and his son will be 
Nemicakra.  (39) When the town of 
Hastin āpura [New Delhi] is inundated by the 
river, Nemicakra will live in the place known 
as Kau śāmbī. His son will be celebrated as 
Citraratha, a nd the son of Citraratha will be 
Śuciratha.  (40) From Śuciratha will come the 
son named V ṛṣṭimān, and his son, Su ṣeṇa, will 
be the emperor of the entire world. The son of 
Suṣeṇa will be Sun ītha, his son will be N ṛcakṣu, 
and from N ṛcakṣu will come a son na med Su-
khīnala.  (41) The son of Sukh īnala will be 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

576 
 Pariplava, and his son will be Sunaya. From 
Sunaya will come a son named Medh āvī; from 
Medh āvī, Nṛpañjaya; from N ṛpañjaya, D ūrva; 
and from D ūrva, Timi.  (42) From Timi will 
come B ṛhadratha; from B ṛhadratha,  Sudāsa; 
and from Sud āsa, Śatānīka. From Śatānīka will 
come Durdamana, and from him will come a 
son named Mah īnara.  (43) The son of 
Mahīnara will be Da ṇḍapāṇi, and his son will 
be Nimi, from whom King K ṣemaka will be 
born. I have now described to you the moon -
god’s dynasty, which is the source of 
brāhmaṇas and k ṣatriyas and is worshiped by 
demigods and great saints. In this Kali -yuga, 
Kṣemaka will be the last monarch. Now I shall 
describe to you the future of the M āgadha dyn-
asty. Please listen.  (44 -45)  

Sahadeva, the son of Jar āsandha, will have a 
son named M ārjāri. From M ārjāri will come 
Śrutaśravā; from Śrutaśravā, Yut āyu; and from 
Yutāyu, Niramitra. The son of Niramitra will 
be Sunak ṣatra, from Sunak ṣatra will come 
Bṛhatsena, and from B ṛhatsena, Karmaj it. The 
son of Karmajit will be Sutañjaya, the son of 
Sutañjaya will be Vipra, and his son will be 
Śuci. The son of Śuci will be K ṣema, the son of 
Kṣema will be Suvrata, and the son of Suvrata 
will be Dharmas ūtra. From Dharmas ūtra will 
come Sama; from Sama , Dyumatsena; from 
Dyumatsena, Sumati; and from Sumati, Subala.  
(46-48) From Subala will come Sun ītha; from 
Sunītha, Satyajit; from Satyajit, Vi śvajit; and 
from Vi śvajit, Ripuñjaya. All of these person-
alities will belong to the dynasty of B ṛhadratha, 
whic h will rule the world for one thousand 
years.  (49)  

SB 9.23: The Dynasties of the Sons of 
Yayāti 

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: Anu, the fourth son 
of Yay āti, had three sons, named Sabh ānara, 
Cakṣu and Pare ṣṇu. O King, from Sabh ānara 
came a son named K ālanara, and from K ālanara 
came a son named S ṛñjaya.  (1) From S ṛñjaya came a son named Janamejaya. From Ja-
namejaya came Mah āśāla; from Mah āśāla, 
Mahāmanā; and from Mah āmanā two sons, 
named U śīnara and Titik ṣu.  (2) The four sons 
of U śīnara were Śibi, Vara, K ṛmi an d Dak ṣa, 
and from Śibi again came four sons, named 
Vṛṣādarbha, Sudh īra, Madra and ātma-tattva -
vit Kekaya. The son of Titik ṣu was Ru ṣadratha. 
From Ru ṣadratha came Homa; from Homa, 
Sutap ā; and from Sutap ā, Bali.  (3 -4)  

By the semen of D īrghatam ā in the wif e of 
Bali, the emperor of the world, six sons took 
birth, namely A ṅga, Va ṅga, Kali ṅga, Suhma, 
Puṇḍra and O ḍra.  (5) These six sons, headed 
by A ṅga, later became kings of six states in the 
eastern side of India. These states were known 
according to the name s of their respective 
kings. From A ṅga came a son named 
Khalap āna, and from Khalap āna came Di-
viratha.  (6) From Diviratha came a son named 
Dharmaratha, and his son was Citraratha, who 
was celebrated as Romap āda. Romap āda, how-
ever, was without issue, and th erefore his friend 
Mahārāja Da śaratha gave him his own daugh-
ter, named Śāntā. Romap āda accepted her as 
his daughter, and thereafter she married 
Ṛṣyaśṛṅga. When the demigods from the heav-
enly planets failed to shower rain, Ṛṣyaśṛṅga 
was appointed the priest  for performing a sac-
rifice, after being brought from the forest by the 
allurement of prostitutes, who danced, staged 
theatrical performances accompanied by mu-
sic, and embraced and worshiped him. After 
Ṛṣyaśṛṅga came, the rain fell. Thereafter, 
Ṛṣyaśṛṅga performed a son -giving sacrifice on 
behalf of Mah ārāja Da śaratha, who had no is-
sue, and then Mah ārāja Da śaratha had sons. 
From Romap āda, by the mercy of Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, 
Catura ṅga was born, and from Catura ṅga came 
Pṛthulākṣa.  (7 -10)  

The sons of P ṛthulākṣa were  Bṛhadratha, 
Bṛhatkarm ā and B ṛhadbh ānu. From the eldest, 
Bṛhadratha, came a son named B ṛhanman ā, and 
from B ṛhanman ā came a son named Jaya-
dratha.  (11) The son of Jayadratha, by the 
womb of his wife Sambh ūti, was Vijaya, and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

577 
 from Vijaya, Dh ṛti was born. Fro m Dh ṛti came 
Dhṛtavrata; from Dh ṛtavrata, Satkarm ā; and 
from Satkarm ā, Adhiratha.  (12)  

While playing on the bank of the Ganges, 
Adhiratha found a baby wrapped up in a basket. 
The baby had been left by Kunt ī because he 
was born before she was married. Be cause Ad-
hiratha had no sons, he raised this baby as his 
own. [This son was later known as Kar ṇa.]  (13) 
O King, the only son of Kar ṇa was V ṛṣasena. 
Druhyu, the third son of Yay āti, had a son 
named Babhru, and the son of Babhru was 
known as Setu.  (14) The son of Setu was 
Ārabdha, Ārabdha’s son was G āndhāra, and 
Gāndhāra’s son was Dharma. Dharma ’s son 
was Dh ṛta, Dh ṛta’s son was Durmada, and Dur-
mada’s son was Pracet ā, who had one hundred 
sons.  (15) The Pracet ās [the sons of Pracet ā] 
occupied the northern sid e of India, which was 
devoid of Vedic civilization, and became kings 
there. Yay āti’s second son was Turvasu. The 
son of Turvasu was Vahni; the son of Vahni, 
Bharga; the son of Bharga, Bh ānumān. (16) 
The son of Bh ānumān was Tribh ānu, and his 
son was the mag nanimous Karandhama. 
Karandhama’s son was Maruta, who had no 
sons and who therefore adopted a son of the 
Pūru dynasty [Mah ārāja Du ṣmanta] as his own.  
(17) Mah ārāja Du ṣmanta, desiring to occupy 
the throne, returned to his original dynasty [the 
Pūru dynasty ], even though he had accepted 
Maruta as his father. O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, let 
me now describe the dynasty of Yadu, the eld-
est son of Mah ārāja Yay āti. This description is 
supremely pious, and it vanquishes the reac-
tions of sinful activities in human society . 
Simply by hearing this description, one is freed 
from all sinful reactions.  (18 -19)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa, the Supersoul in the hearts of all living 
entities, descended in His original form as a hu-
man being in the dynasty or family  of Yadu. 
Yadu had four sons, named Sahasrajit, Kro ṣṭā, 
Nala and Ripu. Of these four, the eldest, Sa-
hasrajit, had a son named Śatajit, who had three sons, named Mah āhaya, Re ṇuhaya and 
Haihaya.  (20 -21) The son of Haihaya was 
Dharma, and the son of Dharma w as Netra, the 
father of Kunti. From Kunti came a son named 
Sohañji, from Sohañji came Mahi ṣmān, and 
from Mahi ṣmān, Bhadrasenaka.  (22) The sons 
of Bhadrasena were known as Durmada and 
Dhanaka. Dhanaka was the father of K ṛtavīrya 
and also of K ṛtāgni, K ṛtavarmā and K ṛtaujā.  
(23) The son of K ṛtavīrya was Arjuna. He 
[Kārtavīryārjuna] became the emperor of the 
entire world, consisting of seven islands, and 
received mystic power from Datt ātreya, the in-
carnation of the Supreme Personality of God-
head. Thus he obta ined the mystic perfections 
known as a ṣṭa-siddhi.  (24) No other king in this 
world could equal K ārtavīryārjuna in sacri-
fices, charity, austerity, mystic power, educa-
tion, strength or mercy.  (25) For eighty -five 
thousand years, K ārtavīryārjuna continuousl y 
enjoyed material opulences with full bodily 
strength and unimpaired memory. In other 
words, he enjoyed inexhaustible material opu-
lences with his six senses.  (26) Of the one 
thousand sons of K ārtavīryārjuna, only five re-
mained alive after the fight with Paraśurāma. 
Their names were Jayadhvaja, Śūrasena, 
Vṛṣabha, Madhu and Ūrjita.  (27)  

Jayadhvaja had a son named T ālajaṅgha, 
who had one hundred sons. All the k ṣatriyas in 
that dynasty, known as T ālajaṅgha, were anni-
hilated by the great power received by 
Mahārāja Sagara from Aurva Ṛṣi.  (28) Of the 
sons of T ālajaṅgha, V ītihotra was the eldest. 
The son of V ītihotra named Madhu had a cele-
brated son named V ṛṣṇi. Madhu had one hun-
dred sons, of whom V ṛṣṇi was the eldest. The 
dynasties known as Y ādava, M ādhava an d 
Vṛṣṇi had their origin from Yadu, Madhu and 
Vṛṣṇi.  (29) O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, because 
Yadu, Madhu and V ṛṣṇi each inaugurated a 
dynasty, their dynasties are known as Y ādava, 
Mādhava and V ṛṣṇi. The son of Yadu named 
Kroṣṭā had a son named V ṛjinav ān. The so n of 
Vṛjinav ān was Sv āhita; the son of Sv āhita, 
Viṣadgu; the son of Vi ṣadgu, Citraratha; and 
the son of Citraratha, Śaśabindu. The greatly 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

578 
 fortunate Śaśabindu, who was a great mystic, 
possessed fourteen opulences and was the 
owner of fourteen great jewels.  Thus he became 
the emperor of the world.  (30 -31) The famous 
Śaśabindu had ten thousand wives, and by each 
he begot a lakh of sons. Therefore the number 
of his sons was ten thousand lakhs.  (32) 
Among these many sons, six were the foremost, 
such as P ṛthuśravā and P ṛthukīrti. The son of 
Pṛthuśravā was known as Dharma, and his son 
was known as U śanā. Uśanā was the performer 
of one hundred horse sacrifices.  (33) The son 
of Uśanā was Rucaka, who had five sonsPuru-
jit, Rukma, Rukme ṣu, Pṛthu and Jy āmagha. 
Please  hear of these sons from me.  (34) 
Jyāmagha had no sons, but because he was 
fearful of his wife, Śaibyā, he could not accept 
another wife. Jy āmagha once took from the 
house of some royal enemy a girl who was a 
prostitute, but upon seeing her Śaibyā was ver y 
angry and said to her husband, “My husband, 
you cheater, who is this girl sitting upon my 
seat on the chariot?” Jy āmagha then replied, 
“This girl will be your daughter -in-law.” Upon 
hearing these joking words, Śaibyā smilingly 
replied.  (35 -36)  

Śaibyā said, “I am sterile and have no co -
wife. How can this girl be my daughter -in-law? 
Please tell me.” Jy āmagha replied, “My dear 
Queen, I shall see that you indeed have a son 
and that this girl will be your daughter -in-law.”  
(37) Long, long ago, Jy āmagha had  satisfied 
the demigods and Pit ās by worshiping them. 
Now, by their mercy, Jy āmagha’s words came 
true. Although Śaibyā was barren, by the grace 
of the demigods she became pregnant and in 
due course of time gave birth to a child named 
Vidarbha. Before the c hild’s birth, the girl had 
been accepted as a daughter -in-law, and there-
fore Vidarbha actually married her when he 
grew up.  (38)  

SB 9.24: K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said: By the womb of the girl brought by his father, Vi darbha begot 
three sons, named Ku śa, Kratha and Ro-
mapāda. Romap āda was the favorite in the dyn-
asty of Vidarbha.  (1) The son of Romap āda 
was Babhru, from whom there came a son 
named K ṛti. The son of K ṛti was U śika, and the 
son of U śika was Cedi. From Cedi was born the 
king known as Caidya and others.  (2)  

The son of Kratha was Kunti; the son of 
Kunti, V ṛṣṇi; the son of V ṛṣṇi, Nirv ṛti; and the 
son of Nirv ṛti, Da śārha. From Da śārha came 
Vyoma; from Vyoma came J īmūta; from 
Jīmūta, Vik ṛti; from Vik ṛti, Bh īmaratha; from 
Bhīmaratha, Navaratha; and from Navaratha, 
Daśaratha.  (3 -4)  

From Da śaratha came a son named Śakuni 
and from Śakuni a son named Karambhi. The 
son of Karambhi was Devar āta, and his son was 
Devak ṣatra. The son of Devak ṣatra was Madhu, 
and his so n was Kuruva śa, from whom there 
came a son named Anu.  (5) The son of Anu 
was Puruhotra, the son of Puruhotra was Ayu, 
and the son of Ayu was S ātvata. O great Āryan 
King, S ātvata had seven sons, named Bha-
jamāna, Bhaji, Divya, V ṛṣṇi, Dev āvṛdha, 
Andhaka and Mahābhoja. From Bhajam āna by 
one wife came three sonsNimloci, Ki ṅkaṇa and 
Dhṛṣṭi. And from his other wife came three 
other sons Śatājit, Sahasr ājit and Ayut ājit.  (6 -8)  

The son of Dev āvṛdha was Babhru. Con-
cerning Dev āvṛdha and Babhru there are two 
famous songs of prayer, which were sung by 
our predecessors and which we have heard 
from a distance. Even now I hear the same 
prayers about their qualities [because that 
which was heard before is still sung continu-
ously].  (9)  

“It has been decided that among hu man be-
ings Babhru is the best and that Dev āvṛdha is 
equal to the demigods. Because of the associa-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

579 
 tion of Babhru and Dev āvṛdha, all of their de-
scendants, numbering 14,065, achieved libera-
tion.” In the dynasty of King Mah ābhoja, who 
was exceedingly religious , there appeared the 
Bhoja kings.  (10 -11)  

O King, Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, who can sup-
press your enemies, the sons of V ṛṣṇi were Su-
mitra and Yudh ājit. From Yudh ājit came Śini 
and Anamitra, and from Anamitra came a son 
named Nighna.  (12)  

The two sons of Nig hna were Satr ājita and 
Prasena. Another son of Anamitra was another 
Śini, and his son was Satyaka.  (13)  

The son of Satyaka was Yuyudh āna, whose 
son was Jaya. From Jaya came a son named 
Kuṇi and from Ku ṇi a son named Yugandhara. 
Another son of Anamitra w as Vṛṣṇi.  (14) From 
Vṛṣṇi came the sons named Śvaphalka and 
Citraratha. From Śvaphalka by his wife 
Gāndinī came Akr ūra. Akr ūra was the eldest, 
but there were twelve other sons, all of whom 
were most celebrated.  (15) The names of these 
twelve were Āsaṅga, Sārameya, M ṛdura, 
Mṛduvit, Giri, Dharmav ṛddha, Sukarm ā, 
Kṣetropek ṣa, Arimardana, Śatrughna, Gand-
hamāda and Pratib āhu. These brothers also had 
a sister named Suc ārā. From Akr ūra came two 
sons, named Devav ān and Upadeva. Citraratha 
had many sons, headed by Pṛthu and Vid ūratha, 
all of whom were known as belonging to the 
dynasty of V ṛṣṇi.  (16 -18)  

Kukura, Bhajam āna, Śuci and Kam-
balabarhi ṣa were the four sons of Andhaka. The 
son of Kukura was Vahni, and his son was Vi-
lomā.  (19) The son of Vilom ā was Ka-
potaro mā, and his son was Anu, whose friend 
was Tumburu. From Anu came Andhaka; from 
Andhaka, Dundubhi; and from Dundubhi, 
Avidyota. From Avidyota came a son named 
Punarvasu.  (20) Punarvasu had a son and a 
daughter, named Āhuka and Āhukī respec-
tively, and Āhuka  had two sons, named Devaka and Ugrasena. Devaka had four sons, named 
Devav ān, Upadeva, Sudeva and Devavardhana, 
and he also had seven daughters, named Śān-
tidev ā, Upadev ā, Śrīdevā, Devarak ṣitā, Sa-
hadev ā, Devak ī and Dh ṛtadev ā. Dhṛtadev ā was 
the eldest. Vasu deva, the father of K ṛṣṇa, mar-
ried all these sisters.  (21 -23)  

Kaṁsa, Sun āmā, Nyagrodha, Ka ṅka, Śaṅku, 
Suhū, Rāṣṭrapāla, Dh ṛṣṭi and Tu ṣṭimān were 
the sons of Ugrasena.  (24) Ka ṁsā, Kaṁsavat ī, 
Kaṅkā, Śūrabhū and R āṣṭrapālikā were the 
daughters of Ugrasena . They became the wives 
of Vasudeva’s younger brothers.  (25)  

The son of Citraratha was Vid ūratha, the son 
of Vid ūratha was Śūra, and his son was Bha-
jamāna. The son of Bhajam āna was Śini, the 
son of Śini was Bhoja, and the son of Bhoja was 
Hṛdika.  (26) The three sons of H ṛdika were De-
vamīḍha, Śatadhanu and K ṛtavarm ā. The son of 
Devam īḍha was Śūra, whose wife was named 
Māriṣā.  (27) Through M āriṣā, King Śūra begot 
Vasudeva, Devabh āga, Deva śravā, Ānaka, 
Sṛñjaya, Śyāmaka, Ka ṅka, Śamīka, Vatsaka 
and V ṛka. Th ese ten sons were spotlessly pious 
personalities. When Vasudeva was born, the 
demigods from the heavenly kingdom sounded 
kettledrums. Therefore Vasudeva, who pro-
vided the proper place for the appearance of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, was 
also known as Ānakadundubhi. The five 
daughters of King Śūra, named P ṛthā, Śru-
tadev ā, Śrutak īrti, Śrutaśravā and R ājādhidev ī, 
were Vasudeva’s sisters. Śūra gave P ṛthā to his 
friend Kunti, who had no issue, and therefore 
another name of P ṛthā was Kunt ī.  (28 -31)  

Once when Durv āsā was a guest at the house 
of P ṛthā’s father, Kunti, P ṛthā satisfied 
Durv āsā by rendering service. Therefore she re-
ceived a mystic power by which she could call 
any demigod. To examine the potency of this 
mystic power, the pious Kunt ī immediately 
called for the sun -god.  (32) As soon as Kunt ī 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

580 
 called for the demigod of the sun, he immedi-
ately appeared before her, and she was very 
much surprised. She told the sun -god, “I was 
simply examining the effectiveness of this 
mystic power. I am so rry I have called you un-
necessarily. Please return and excuse me.”  (33)  

The sun -god said: O beautiful P ṛthā, your 
meeting with the demigods cannot be fruitless. 
Therefore, let me place my seed in your womb 
so that you may bear a son. I shall arrange to 
keep your virginity intact, since you are still an 
unmarried girl.  (34) After saying this, the sun -
god discharged his semen into the womb of 
Pṛthā and then returned to the celestial king-
dom. Immediately thereafter, from Kunt ī a 
child was born, who was lik e a second sun -god.  
(35) Because Kunt ī feared people’s criticisms, 
with great difficulty she had to give up her af-
fection for her child. Unwillingly, she packed 
the child in a basket and let it float down the 
waters of the river. O Mah ārāja Par īkṣit, your  
great -grandfather the pious and chivalrous 
King P āṇḍu later married Kunt ī.  (36)  

Vṛddha śarmā, the King of Kar ūṣa, married 
Kunt ī’s sister Śrutadev ā, and from her womb 
Dantavakra was born. Having been cursed by 
the sages headed by Sanaka, Dantavakra had 
formerly been born as the son of Diti named 
Hiraṇyākṣa.  (37) King Dh ṛṣṭaketu, the King of 
Kekaya, married Śrutak īrti, another sister of 
Kunt ī’s. Śrutak īrti had five sons, headed by 
Santardana.  (38) Through the womb of 
Rājādhidev ī, another sister of Kunt ī’s, Jay-
asena begot two sons, named Vinda and 
Anuvinda. Similarly, the king of the Cedi state 
married Śrutaśravā. This king’s name was 
Damagho ṣa.  (39) The son of Śrutaśravā was 
Śiśupāla, whose birth has already been de-
scribed [in the Seventh Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam]. Vasudeva’s brother named 
Devabh āga had two sons born of his wife, 
Kaṁsā. These two sons were Citraketu and 
Bṛhadbala.  (40) Vasudeva’s brother named 
Deva śravā married Ka ṁsavat ī, by whom he be-
got two sons, named Suv īra and I ṣumān. Kaṅka, by hi s wife Ka ṅkā, begot three sons, 
named Baka, Satyajit and Purujit.  (41) King 
Sṛñjaya, by his wife, R āṣṭrapālikā, begot sons 
headed by V ṛṣa and Durmar ṣaṇa. King 
Śyāmaka, by his wife, Śūrabhūmi, begot two 
sons, named Harike śa and Hira ṇyākṣa.  (42) 
Thereafter , King Vatsaka, by the womb of his 
wife, Mi śrakeśī, who was an Apsar ā, begot 
sons headed by V ṛka. V ṛka, by his wife, 
Durv ākṣī, begot Tak ṣa, Pu ṣkara, Śāla and so 
on.  (43) From Sam īka, by the womb of his 
wife, Sud āmanī, came Sumitra, Arjunap āla and 
other so ns. King Ānaka, by his wife, Kar ṇikā, 
begot two sons, namely Ṛtadhāmā and Jaya.  
(44)  

Devak ī, Paurav ī, Rohi ṇī, Bhadr ā, Madir ā, 
Rocan ā, Ilā and others were all wives of Ānaka-
dundubhi [Vasudeva]. Among them all, Devak ī 
was the chief.  (45) Vasudeva, by the  womb of 
his wife Rohi ṇī, begot sons such as Bala, Gada, 
Sāraṇa, Durmada, Vipula, Dhruva, K ṛta and 
others.  (46)  

From the womb of Paurav ī came twelve 
sons, including Bh ūta, Subhadra, Bhadrab āhu, 
Durmada and Bhadra. Nanda, Upananda, 
Kṛtaka, Śūra and other s were born from the 
womb of Madir ā. Bhadr ā [Kau śalyā] gave birth 
to only one son, named Ke śī.  (47 -48) 
Vasudeva, by another of his wives, whose 
name was Rocan ā, begot Hasta, Hem āṅgada 
and other sons. And by his wife named Il ā he 
begot sons headed by Uruva lka, all of whom 
were chief personalities in the dynasty of Yadu.  
(49) From the womb of Dh ṛtadev ā, one of the 
wives of Ānakadundubhi [Vasudeva], came a 
son named Vip ṛṣṭha. The sons of Śāntidev ā, an-
other wife of Vasudeva, were Pra śama, Prasita 
and others.  (50) Vasudeva also had a wife 
named Upadev ā, from whom came ten sons, 
headed by R ājanya, Kalpa and Var ṣa. From 
Śrīdevā, another wife, came six sons, such as 
Vasu, Ha ṁsa and Suva ṁśa.  (51) By the semen 
of Vasudeva in the womb of Devarak ṣitā, nine 
sons were  born, headed by Gad ā. Vasudeva, 
who was religion personified, also had a wife 
named Sahadev ā, by whose womb he begot 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

581 
 eight sons, headed by Śruta and Pravara.  (52) 
The eight sons born of Sahadev ā such as 
Pravara and Śruta, were exact incarnations of 
the e ight Vasus in the heavenly planets. 
Vasudeva also begot eight highly qualified 
sons through the womb of Devak ī. These in-
cluded K īrtimān, Su ṣeṇa, Bhadrasena, Ṛju, 
Sammardana, Bhadra and Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, the con-
troller and serpent incarnation. The eighth son 
was the Supreme Personality of Godhead Him-
selfK ṛṣṇa. The highly fortunate Subhadr ā, the 
one daughter, was your grandmother.  (53 -55)  

Whenever the principles of religion deterio-
rate and the principles of irreligion increase, the 
supreme controller, the Person ality of Godhead 
Śrī Hari, appears by His own will.  (56) O King, 
Mahārāja Par īkṣit, but for the Lord’s personal 
desire, there is no cause for His appearance, 
disappearance or activities. As the Supersoul, 
He knows everything. Consequently there is no 
cause that affects Him, not even the results of 
fruitive activities.  (57) The Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead acts through His material en-
ergy in the creation, maintenance and annihila-
tion of this cosmic manifestation just to deliver 
the living entity by His c ompassion and stop the 
living entity’s birth, death and duration of ma-
terialistic life. Thus He enables the living being 
to return home, back to Godhead.  (58) Alt-
hough the demons who take possession of the 
government are dressed like men of govern-
ment, th ey do not know the duty of the govern-
ment. Consequently, by the arrangement of 
God, such demons, who possess great military 
strength, fight with one another, and thus the 
great burden of demons on the surface of the 
earth is reduced. The demons increase th eir 
military power by the will of the Supreme, so 
that their numbers will be diminished and the 
devotees will have a chance to advance in 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness.  (59) The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, with the coopera-
tion of Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, Balar āma, pe rformed activ-
ities beyond the mental comprehension of even 
such personalities as Lord Brahm ā and Lord 
Śiva. [For instance, K ṛṣṇa arranged the Battle 
of Kuruk ṣetra to kill many demons for the relief of the entire world.]  (60)  

To show causeless mercy to t he devotees 
who would take birth in the future in this Age 
of Kali, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa, acted in such a way that simply by re-
membering Him one will be freed from all the 
lamentation and unhappiness of material exist-
ence. [In other wo rds, He acted so that all future 
devotees, by accepting the instructions of 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness stated in Bhagavad -gītā, 
could be relieved from the pangs of material ex-
istence.]  (61) Simply by receiving the glories 
of the Lord through purified transcenden tal 
ears, the devotees of the Lord are immediately 
freed from strong material desires and engage-
ment in fruitive activities.  (62) Assisted by the 
descendants of Bhoja, V ṛṣṇi, Andhaka, Madhu, 
Śūrasena, Da śārha, Kuru, S ṛñjaya and P āṇḍu, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa performed  various activities. By 
His pleasing smiles, His affectionate behavior, 
His instructions and His uncommon pastimes 
like raising Govardhana Hill, the Lord, appear-
ing in His transcendental body, pleased all of 
human society.  (63 -64) K ṛṣṇa’s face is deco-
rated with ornaments, such as earrings resem-
bling sharks. His ears are beautiful, His cheeks 
brilliant, and His smiling attractive to every-
one. Whoever sees Lord K ṛṣṇa sees a festival. 
His face and body are fully satisfying for eve-
ryone to see, but the devotee s are angry at the 
creator for the disturbance caused by the mo-
mentary blinking of their eyes.  (65) The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, 
known as l īlā-puruṣottama, appeared as the son 
of Vasudeva but immediately left His father’s 
home and went t o Vṛndāvana to expand His 
loving relationship with His confidential devo-
tees. In V ṛndāvana the Lord killed many de-
mons, and afterwards He returned to Dv ārakā, 
where according to Vedic principles, He mar-
ried many wives who were the best of women, 
begot thro ugh them hundreds of sons, and per-
formed sacrifices for His own worship to estab-
lish the principles of householder life.  (66) 
Thereafter, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa created a misunder-
standing between family members just to di-
minish the burden of the world. Simply by His 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

582 
 glance, He annihilated all the demoniac kings 
on the Battlefield of Kuruk ṣetra and declared 
victory for Arjuna. Finally, He instructed Ud-
dhava about transcendental life and devotion 
and then returned to His abode in His original 
form.  (67)  

Canto 10 : The Summum Bonum  

SB 10.1: The Advent of Lord Kṛṣṇa  

King Parīkṣit said:  My dear lord, you have 
elaborately described the dynasties of both the 
moon -god and the sun -god, with the exalted 
and wonderful character of their kings. (1) O 
best of munis, you ha ve also described the de-
scendants of Yadu, who were very pious and 
strictly adherent to religious principles. Now, if 
you will, kindly describe the wonderful, glori-
ous activities of Lord Viṣṇu, or Kṛṣṇa, who ap-
peared in that Yadu dynasty with Baladeva, His  
plenary expansion. (2) The Supersoul, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the 
cause of the cosmic manifestation, appeared in 
the dynasty of Yadu. Please tell me elaborately 
about His glorious activities and character, 
from the beginning to the end of His life. (3) 
Glorification of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is performed in the paramparā sys-
tem, that is, it is conveyed from the spiritual 
master to disciple. Such glorification is relished 
by those no longer interested in the false, tem-
porary glorification of this cosmic manifesta-
tion. Descriptions of the Lord are the right med-
icine for the conditioned soul undergoing re-
peated birth and death. Therefore, who will 
cease hearing such glorification of the Lord ex-
cept a butcher or one who is kil ling his own 
self? (4) Taking the boat of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, 
my grandfather Arjuna and others crossed the 
ocean of the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, in which 
such commanders as Bhīṣmadeva resembled 
great fish that could very easily have swal-
lowed them. By th e mercy of Lord Kṛṣṇa, my 
grandfathers crossed this ocean, which was 
very difficult to cross, as easily as one steps over the hoofprint of a calf. Because my mother 
surrendered unto Lord Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, the 
Lord, Sudarśana -cakra in hand, entered her 
womb and saved my body, the body of the last 
remaining descendant of the Kurus and the 
Pāṇḍavas, which was almost destroyed by the 
fiery weapon of Aśvatthāmā. Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, 
appearing within and outside of all materially 
embodied living beings by His own po tency in 
the forms of eternal time that is, as Paramātmā 
and as virāṭ -rūpa gave liberation to everyone, 
either as cruel death or as life. Kindly enlighten 
me by describing His transcendental character-
istics. (5 -7) 

My dear Śukadeva Gosvāmī , you have al-
ready explained that Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, who belongs 
to the second quadruple, appeared as the son of 
Rohi ṇī named Balarāma. If Balarāma was not 
transferred from one body to another, how is it 
possible that He was first in the womb of 
Devakī and then in the womb of Roh iṇī? 
Kindly explain this to me. (8) Why did K ṛṣṇa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, leave the 
house of His father, Vasudeva, and transfer 
Himself to the house of Nanda in V ṛndāvana? 
Where did the Lord, the master of the Yadu 
dynasty, live with His relat ives in V ṛndāvana? 
(9) Lord K ṛṣṇa lived both in V ṛndāvana and in 
Mathurā. What did He do there? Why did He 
kill Ka ṁsa, His mother’s brother? Such killing 
is not at all sanctioned in the śāstras. (10) 
Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
has no materi al body, yet He appears as a hu-
man being. For how many years did He live 
with the descendants of V ṛṣṇi? How many 
wives did He marry, and for how many years 
did He live in Dvārakā? (11) O great sage, who 
know everything about K ṛṣṇa, please describe 
in detai l all the activities of which I have in-
quired and also those of which I have not, for I 
have full faith and am very eager to hear of 
them. (12) Because of my vow on the verge of 
death, I have given up even drinking water, yet 
because I am drinking the nect ar of topics about 
Kṛṣṇa, which is flowing from the lotus mouth 
of your Lordship, my hunger and thirst, which 
are extremely difficult to bear, cannot hinder 
me. (13)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

583 
 Sūta Gosvāmī said: O son of Bh ṛgu, after 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the most respectable devo-
tee, t he son of Vyāsadeva, heard the pious ques-
tions of Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, he thanked the King 
with great respect. Then he began to discourse 
on topics concerning K ṛṣṇa, which are the rem-
edy for all sufferings in this Age of Kali. (14) 
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī sai d: O Your Majesty, 
best of all saintly kings, because you are greatly 
attracted to topics of Vāsudeva, it is certain that 
your intelligence is firmly fixed in spiritual un-
derstanding, which is the only true goal for hu-
manity. Because that attraction is unc easing, it 
is certainly sublime. (15) The Ganges, emanat-
ing from the toe of Lord Vi ṣṇu, purifies the 
three worlds, the upper, middle and lower plan-
etary systems. Similarly, when one asks ques-
tions about the pastimes and characteristics of 
Lord Vāsudeva, K ṛṣṇa, three varieties of men 
are purified: the speaker or preacher, he who 
inquires, and the people in general who listen. 
(16) 

Once when mother earth was overburdened 
by hundreds of thousands of military phalanxes 
of various conceited demons dressed like kings, 
she approached Lord Brahmā for relief. (17) 
Mother earth assumed the form of a cow. Very 
much distressed, with tears in her eyes, she ap-
peared before Lord Brahmā and told him about 
her misfortune(18) Thereafter, having heard of 
the distress of mothe r earth, Lord Brahmā, with 
mother earth, Lord Śiva and all the other demi-
gods, approached the shore of the Ocean of 
Milk. (19) After reaching the shore of the 
Ocean of Milk, the demigods worshiped the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Lord Vi ṣṇu, the 
master of the whole universe, the supreme God 
of all gods, who provides for everyone and di-
minishes everyone’s suffering. With great at-
tention, they worshiped Lord Vi ṣṇu, who lies 
on the Ocean of Milk, by reciting the Vedic 
mantras known as the Puru ṣa-sūkta. (20)  While 
in trance, Lord Brahmā heard the words of Lord 
Viṣṇu vibrating in the sky. Thus he told the 
demigods: O demigods, hear from me the order 
of K ṣīrodakaśāyī Vi ṣṇu, the Supreme Person, 
and execute it attentively without delay. (21) 
Lord Brahmā informed the demigods: Before we submitted our petition to the Lord, He was 
already aware of the distress on earth. Conse-
quently, for as long as the Lord moves on earth 
to diminish its burden by His own potency in 
the form of time, all of you demigods should 
appear  through plenary portions as sons and 
grandsons in the family of the Yadus. (22) The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, 
who has full potency, will personally appear as 
the son of Vasudeva. Therefore, all the wives 
of the demigods should also appear  in order to 
satisfy Him. (23)  

The foremost manifestation of K ṛṣṇa is 
Saṅkarṣaṇa, who is known as Ananta. He is the 
origin of all incarnations within this material 
world. Previous to the appearance of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, this original Sa ṅkarṣaṇa will appear as 
Baladeva, just to please the Supreme Lord 
Kṛṣṇa in His transcendental pastimes. (24) The 
potency of the Lord, known as vi ṣṇu-māyā, 
who is as good as the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, will also appear with Lord K ṛṣṇa. 
This potency, acting in different capac ities, 
captivates all the worlds, both material and 
spiritual. At the request of her master, she will 
appear with her different potencies in order to 
execute the work of the Lord. (25)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  After thus 
advising the demigods and pacif ying mother 
earth, the very powerful Lord Brahmā, who is 
the master of all other Prajāpatis and is there-
fore known as Prajāpati -pati, returned to his 
own abode, Brahmaloka. (26) Formerly, 
Śūrasena, the chief of the Yadu dynasty, had 
gone to live in the cit y of Mathurā. There he 
enjoyed the places known as Māthura and 
Śūrasena. (27) Since that time, the city of Ma-
thurā had been the capital of all the kings of the 
Yadu dynasty. The city and district of Mathurā 
are very intimately connected with K ṛṣṇa, for 
Lord Kṛṣṇa lives there eternally. (28) Some 
time ago, Vasudeva, who belonged to the dem-
igod family [or to the Śūra dynasty], married 
Devakī. After the marriage, he mounted his 
chariot to return home with his newly married 
wife. (29) Ka ṁsa, the son of King Ugr asena, in 
order to please his sister Devakī on the occasion 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

584 
 of her marriage, took charge of the reins of the 
horses and became the chariot driver. He was 
surrounded by hundreds of golden chariots. 
(30) Devakī’s father, King Devaka, was very 
much affectiona te to his daughter. Therefore, 
while she and her husband were leaving home, 
he gave her a dowry of four hundred elephants 
nicely decorated with golden garlands. He also 
gave ten thousand horses, eighteen hundred 
chariots, and two hundred very beautiful you ng 
maidservants, fully decorated with ornaments. 
(31-32) O beloved son, Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, 
when the bride and bridegroom were ready to 
start, conch shells, bugles, drums and kettle-
drums all vibrated in concert for their auspi-
cious departure. (33) While Ka ṁsa, controlling 
the reins of the horses, was driving the chariot 
along the way, an unembodied voice addressed 
him, “You foolish rascal, the eighth child of the 
woman you are carrying will kill you!” (34)  

Kaṁsa was a condemned personality in the 
Bhoja dyna sty because he was envious and sin-
ful. Therefore, upon hearing this omen from the 
sky, he caught hold of his sister’s hair with his 
left hand and took up his sword with his right 
hand to sever her head from her body. (35) 
Wanting to pacify Ka ṁsa, who was s o cruel 
and envious that he was shamelessly ready to 
kill his sister, the great soul Vasudeva, who was 
to be the father of K ṛṣṇa, spoke to him in the 
following words. (36)  

Vasudeva said:  My dear brother -in-law 
Kaṁsa, you are the pride of your family, the 
Bhoja dynasty, and great heroes praise your 
qualities. How could such a qualified person as 
you kill a woman, your own sister, especially 
on the occasion of her marriage? (37) O great 
hero, one who takes birth is sure to die, for 
death is born with the bod y. One may die today 
or after hundreds of years, but death is sure for 
every living entity. (38) When the present body 
turns to dust and is again reduced to five ele-
ments: earth, water, fire, air and ether, the pro-
prietor of the body, the living being, aut omati-
cally receives another body of material ele-
ments according to his fruitive activities. When the next body is obtained, he gives up the pre-
sent body. (39) Just as a person traveling on the 
road rests one foot on the ground and then lifts 
the other, or as a worm on a vegetable transfers 
itself to one leaf and then gives up the previous 
one, the conditioned soul takes shelter of an-
other body and then gives up the one he had be-
fore. (40) Having experienced a situation by 
seeing or hearing about it, one con templates 
and speculates about that situation, and thus 
one surrenders to it, not considering his present 
body. Similarly, by mental adjustments one 
dreams at night of living under different cir-
cumstances, in different bodies, and forgets his 
actual positi on. Under this same process, one 
gives up his present body and accepts another 
[tathā dehāntara -prāpti ḥ]. (41) At the time of 
death, according to the thinking, feeling and 
willing of the mind, which is involved in frui-
tive activities, one receives a partic ular body. 
In other words, the body develops according to 
the activities of the mind. Changes of body are 
due to the flickering of the mind, for otherwise 
the soul could remain in its original, spiritual 
body. (42) When the luminaries in the sky, such 
as the moon, the sun and the stars, are reflected 
in liquids like oil or water, they appear to be of 
different shapes sometimes round, sometimes 
long, and so on because of the movements of 
the wind. Similarly, when the living entity, the 
soul, is absorbed in m aterialistic thoughts, he 
accepts various manifestations as his own iden-
tity because of ignorance. In other words, one 
is bewildered by mental concoctions because of 
agitation from the material modes of nature. 
(43) Therefore, since envious, impious activi-
ties cause a body in which one suffers in the 
next life, why should one act impiously? Con-
sidering one’s welfare, one should not envy an-
yone, for an envious person must always fear 
harm from his enemies, either in this life or in 
the next. (44) As your you nger sister, this poor 
girl Devakī is like your own daughter and de-
serves to be affectionately maintained. You are 
merciful, and therefore you should not kill her. 
Indeed, she deserves your affection. (45)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  O best of 
the Kuru dy nasty, Ka ṁsa was fiercely cruel and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

585 
 was actually a follower of the Rāk ṣasas. There-
fore, he could be neither pacified nor terrified 
by the good instructions given by Vasudeva. He 
did not care about the results of sinful activities, 
either in this life or in  the next. (46) When 
Vasudeva saw that Ka ṁsa was determined to 
kill his sister Devakī, he thought to himself 
very deeply. Considering the imminent danger 
of death, he thought of another plan to stop 
Kaṁsa. (47) As long as he has intelligence and 
bodily str ength, an intelligent person must try 
to avoid death. This is the duty of every embod-
ied person. But if death cannot be avoided in 
spite of one’s endeavors, a person facing death 
commits no offense. (48) Vasudeva consid-
ered: By delivering all my sons to Ka ṁsa, who 
is death personified, I shall save the life of 
Devakī. Perhaps Ka ṁsa will die before my sons 
take birth, or, since he is already destined to die 
at the hands of my son, one of my sons may kill 
him. For the time being, let me promise to hand 
over m y sons so that Ka ṁsa will give up this 
immediate threat, and if in due course of time 
Kaṁsa dies, I shall have nothing to fear. (49 -
50) When a fire, for some unseen reason, leaps 
over one piece of wood and sets fire to the next, 
the reason is destiny. Simi larly, when a living 
being accepts one kind of body and leaves aside 
another, there is no other reason than unseen 
destiny. (51) After thus considering the matter 
as far as his knowledge would allow, Vasudeva 
submitted his proposal to the sinful Ka ṁsa with  
great respect. (52) Vasudeva’s mind was full of 
anxiety because his wife was facing danger, but 
in order to please the cruel, shameless and sin-
ful Ka ṁsa, he externally smiled and spoke to 
him as follows. (53)  

Vasudeva said:  O best of the sober, you 
have nothing to fear from your sister Devakī 
because of what you have heard from the un-
seen omen. The cause of death will be her sons. 
Therefore, I promise that when she gives birth 
to the sons from whom your fear has arisen, I 
shall deliver them all unto your hands. (54)  

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  
Kaṁsa agreed to the logical arguments of 
Vasudeva, and, having full faith in Vasudeva’s words, he refrained from killing his sister. 
Vasudeva, being pleased with Ka ṁsa, pacified 
him further and entered his own  house. (55) 
Each year thereafter, in due course of time, 
Devakī, the mother of God and all the demi-
gods, gave birth to a child. Thus she bore eight 
sons, one after another, and a daughter named 
Subhadrā. (56) Vasudeva was very much dis-
turbed by fear of be coming a liar by breaking 
his promise. Thus with great pain he delivered 
his first -born son, named Kīrtimān, into the 
hands of Ka ṁsa. (57) What is painful for 
saintly persons who strictly adhere to the truth? 
How could there not be independence for pure 
devotees who know the Supreme Lord as the 
substance? What deeds are forbidden for per-
sons of the lowest character? And what cannot 
be given up for the sake of Lord K ṛṣṇa by those 
who have fully surrendered at His lotus feet? 
(58) My dear King Parīk ṣit, when Kaṁsa saw 
that Vasudeva, being situated in truthfulness, 
was completely equipoised in giving him the 
child, he was very happy. Therefore, with a 
smiling face, he spoke as follows. (59) O 
Vasudeva, you may take back your child and 
go home. I have no fear of  your first child. It is 
the eighth child of you and Devakī I am con-
cerned with because that is the child by whom 
I am destined to be killed. (60) Vasudeva 
agreed and took his child back home, but be-
cause Ka ṁsa had no character and no self -con-
trol, Vasudev a knew that he could not rely on 
Kaṁsa’s word. (61)  

The inhabitants of V ṛndāvana, headed by 
Nanda Mahārāja and including his associate 
cowherd men and their wives, were none but 
denizens of the heavenly planets, O Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit, best of the descendant s of Bharata, and 
so too were the descendants of the V ṛṣṇi dyn-
asty, headed by Vasudeva and Devakī and the 
other women of the dynasty of Yadu. The 
friends, relatives and well -wishers of both 
Nanda Mahārāja and Vasudeva and even those 
who externally appeared  to be followers of 
Kaṁsa were all demigods. (62 -63) Once the 
great saint Nārada approached Ka ṁsa and in-
formed him of how the demoniac persons who 
were a great burden on the earth were going to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

586 
 be killed. Thus Ka ṁsa was placed into great 
fear and doubt. (6 4) After the departure of the 
great saint Nārada, Ka ṁsa thought that all the 
members of the Yadu dynasty were demigods 
and that any of the children born from the 
womb of Devakī might be Vi ṣṇu. Fearing his 
death, Ka ṁsa arrested Vasudeva and Devakī 
and chain ed them with iron shackles. Suspect-
ing each of the children to be Vi ṣṇu, Ka ṁsa 
killed them one after another because of the 
prophecy that Vi ṣṇu would kill him. (65 -66) 
Kings greedy for sense gratification on this 
earth almost always kill their enemies indi s-
criminately. To satisfy their own whims, they 
may kill anyone, even their mothers, fathers, 
brothers or friends. (67) In his previous birth, 
Kaṁsa had been a great demon named 
Kālanemi and been killed by Vi ṣṇu. Upon 
learning this information from Nārada, Kaṁsa 
became envious of everyone connected with 
the Yadu dynasty. (68) Ka ṁsa, the most pow-
erful son of Ugrasena, even imprisoned his own 
father, the King of the Yadu, Bhoja and 
Andhaka dynasties, and personally ruled the 
states known as Śūrasena. (69)  

SB 10.2: Prayers by the Demigods for 
Lord K ṛṣṇa in the Womb  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said : Under the protec-
tion of Magadharāja, Jarāsandha, the powerful 
Kaṁsa began persecuting the kings of the Yadu 
dynasty. In this he had the cooperation of de-
mons like Pralamba, Ba ka, Cā ṇūra, T ṛṇāvarta, 
Aghāsura, Mu ṣṭika, Ari ṣṭa, Dvivida, Pūtanā, 
Keśī, Dhenuka, Bā ṇāsura, Narakāsura and 
many other demoniac kings on the surface of 
the earth. (1 -2) 

Persecuted by the demoniac kings, the 
Yādavas left their own kingdom and entered 
variou s others, like those of the Kurus, 
Pañcālas, Kekayas, Śālvas, Vidarbhas, 
Niṣadhas, Videhas and Kośalas. (3) Some of 
their relatives, however, began to follow 
Kaṁsa’s principles and act in his service. After 
Kaṁsa, the son of Ugrasena, killed the six sons 
of Devakī, a plenary portion of K ṛṣṇa entered 
her womb as her seventh child, arousing her pleasure and her lamentation. That plenary por-
tion is celebrated by great sages as Ananta, who 
belongs to K ṛṣṇa’s second quadruple expan-
sion. (4 -5) 

To protect the Yad us, His personal devotees, 
from Ka ṁsa’s attack, the Personality of God-
head, Viśvātmā, the Supreme Soul of everyone, 
ordered Yoga -māyā as follows. (6)  
The Lord ordered Yoga -māyā: O My po-
tency, who are worshipable for the entire world 
and whose nature is to bestow good fortune 
upon all living entities, go to Vraja, where there 
live many cowherd men and their wives. In that 
very beautiful land, where many cows reside, 
Rohi ṇī, the wife of Vasudeva, is living at the 
home of Nanda Mahārāja. Other wives of 
Vasudev a are also living there incognito be-
cause of fear of Ka ṁsa. Please go there. (7) 
Within the womb of Devakī is My partial ple-
nary expansion known as Sa ṅkarṣaṇa or Śe ṣa. 
Without difficulty, transfer Him into the womb 
of Rohi ṇī. (8) O all -auspicious Yoga -māyā , I 
shall then appear with My full six opulences as 
the son of Devakī, and you will appear as the 
daughter of mother Yaśodā, the queen of 
Mahārāja Nanda. (9) By sacrifices of animals, 
ordinary human beings will worship you gor-
geously, with various parapher nalia, because 
you are supreme in fulfilling the material de-
sires of everyone. (10) Lord K ṛṣṇa blessed 
Māyādevī by saying: In different places on the 
surface of the earth, people will give you dif-
ferent names, such as Durgā, Bhadrakālī, Vi-
jayā, Vai ṣṇavī, K umudā, Ca ṇḍikā, K ṛṣṇā, 
Mādhavī, Kanyakā, Māyā, Nārāya ṇī, Īśānī, 
Śāradā and Ambikā. (11 -12) 

The son of Rohi ṇī will also be celebrated as 
Saṅkarṣaṇa because of being sent from the 
womb of Devakī to the womb of Rohi ṇī. He 
will be called Rāma because of His a bility to 
please all the inhabitants of Gokula, and He 
will be known as Balabhadra because of His ex-
tensive physical strength. (13)  

Thus instructed by the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Yoga -māyā immediately agreed. 
With the Vedic mantra om, she confirme d that 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

587 
 she would do what He asked. Thus having ac-
cepted the order of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, she circumambulated Him and 
started for the place on earth known as Nanda -
gokula. There she did everything just as she had 
been told. (14) When the chi ld of Devakī was 
attracted and transferred into the womb of Ro-
hiṇī by Yoga -māyā, Devakī seemed to have a 
miscarriage. Thus all the inhabitants of the pal-
ace loudly lamented, “Alas, Devakī has lost her 
child!” (15)  

Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is the Supersoul of all living entities and 
who vanquishes all the fear of His devotees, en-
tered the mind of Vasudeva in full opulence. 
(16) While carrying the form of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead within the core of his 
heart, Vasudeva bore the L ord’s transcenden-
tally illuminating effulgence, and thus he be-
came as bright as the sun. He was therefore 
very difficult to see or approach through sen-
sory perception. Indeed, he was unapproacha-
ble and unperceivable even for such formidable 
men as Ka ṁsa, and not only for Ka ṁsa but for 
all living entities. (17) Thereafter, accompanied 
by plenary expansions, the fully opulent Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, who is all -aus-
picious for the entire universe, was transferred 
from the mind of Vasudeva to the mind of  
Devakī. Devakī, having thus been initiated by 
Vasudeva, became beautiful by carrying Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the original consciousness for everyone, 
the cause of all causes, within the core of her 
heart, just as the east becomes beautiful by car-
rying the rising moon . (18) Devakī then kept 
within herself the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the cause of all causes, the foundation of 
the entire cosmos, but because she was under 
arrest in the house of Ka ṁsa, she was like the 
flames of a fire covered by the walls of a pot , 
or like a person who has knowledge but cannot 
distribute it to the world for the benefit of hu-
man society. (19) Because the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead was within her womb, Devakī 
illuminated the entire atmosphere in the place 
where she was confined. Seeing her jubilant, 
pure and smiling, Ka ṁsa thought, “The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, who is now within her, will kill me. Devakī has never 
before looked so brilliant and jubilant.” (20) 
Kaṁsa thought: What is my duty now? The Su-
preme Lord, who  knows His purpose will not 
give up His prowess. Devakī is a woman, she is 
my sister, and moreover she is now pregnant. If 
I kill her, my reputation, opulence and duration 
of life will certainly be vanquished. (21) A per-
son who is very cruel is regarded as  dead even 
while living, for while he is living or after his 
death, everyone condemns him. And after the 
death of a person in the bodily concept of life, 
he is undoubtedly transferred to the hell known 
as Andhatama. (22) Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: 
Deliberating  in this way, Ka ṁsa, although de-
termined to continue in enmity toward the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, refrained from 
the vicious killing of his sister. He decided to 
wait until the Lord was born and then do what 
was needed. (23) While sitting on his th rone or 
in his sitting room, while lying on his bed, or, 
indeed, while situated anywhere, and while eat-
ing, sleeping or walking, Ka ṁsa saw only his 
enemy, the Supreme Lord, H ṛṣīkeśa. In other 
words, by thinking of his all -pervading enemy, 
Kaṁsa became unfa vorably K ṛṣṇa conscious. 
(24) 

Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, accompanied 
by great sages like Nārada, Devala and Vyāsa 
and by other demigods like Indra, Candra and 
Varu ṇa, invisibly approached the room of 
Devakī, where they all joined in offering their 
respect ful obeisances and prayers to please the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can be-
stow blessings upon everyone. (25)  

The demigods prayed:  O Lord, You never 
deviate from Your vow, which is always per-
fect because whatever You decide is perfectly 
correct an d cannot be stopped by anyone. Being 
present in the three phases of cosmic manifes-
tation, creation, maintenance and annihilation, 
You are the Supreme Truth. Indeed, unless one 
is completely truthful, one cannot achieve Your 
favor, which therefore cannot be  achieved by 
hypocrites. You are the active principle, the 
real truth, in all the ingredients of creation, and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

588 
 therefore You are known as antaryāmī, the in-
ner force. You are equal to everyone, and Your 
instructions apply for everyone, for all time. 
You are  the beginning of all truth. Therefore, 
offering our obeisances, we surrender unto 
You. Kindly give us protection. (26) The body 
[the total body and the individual body are of 
the same composition] may figuratively be 
called “the original tree.” From this tree, which 
fully depends on the ground of material nature, 
come two kinds of fruit the enjoyment of hap-
piness and the suffering of distress. The cause 
of the tree, forming its three roots, is associa-
tion with the three modes of material nature 
goodness, p assion and ignorance. The fruits of 
bodily happiness have four tastes religiosity, 
economic development, sense gratification and 
liberation which are experienced through five 
senses for acquiring knowledge in the midst of 
six circumstances: lamentation, il lusion, old 
age, death, hunger and thirst. The seven layers 
of bark covering the tree are skin, blood, mus-
cle, fat, bone, marrow and semen, and the eight 
branches of the tree are the five gross and three 
subtle elements earth, water, fire, air, ether, 
mind , intelligence and false ego. The tree of the 
body has nine hollows the eyes, the ears, the 
nostrils, the mouth, the rectum and the genitals 
and ten leaves, the ten airs passing through the 
body. In this tree of the body there are two 
birds: one is the ind ividual soul, and the other 
is the Supersoul. (27) The efficient cause of this 
material world, manifested with its many vari-
eties as the original tree, is You, O Lord. You 
are also the maintainer of this material world, 
and after annihilation You are the o ne in whom 
everything is conserved. Those who are cov-
ered by Your external energy cannot see You 
behind this manifestation, but theirs is not the 
vision of learned devotees. (28) O Lord, You 
are always in full knowledge, and to bring all 
good fortune to al l living entities, You appear 
in different incarnations, all of them transcen-
dental to the material creation. When You ap-
pear in these incarnations, You are pleasing to 
the pious and religious devotees, but for non-
devotees You are the annihilator. (29) O l otus-
eyed Lord, by concentrating one’s meditation 
on Your lotus feet, which are the reservoir of all existence, and by accepting those lotus feet 
as the boat by which to cross the ocean of nes-
cience, one follows in the footsteps of mahāja-
nas [great saints,  sages and devotees]. By this 
simple process, one can cross the ocean of nes-
cience as easily as one steps over the hoofprint 
of a calf. (30) O Lord, who resemble the shin-
ing sun, You are always ready to fulfill the de-
sire of Your devotee, and therefore You  are 
known as a desire tree [vāñchā -kalpataru]. 
When ācāryas completely take shelter under 
Your lotus feet in order to cross the fierce ocean 
of nescience, they leave behind on earth the 
method by which they cross, and because You 
are very merciful to Your  other devotees, You 
accept this method to help them. (31) [Someone 
may say that aside from devotees, who always 
seek shelter at the Lord’s lotus feet, there are 
those who are not devotees but who have ac-
cepted different processes for attaining salva-
tion. What happens to them? In answer to this 
question, Lord Brahmā and the other demigods 
said:] O lotus -eyed Lord, although nondevotees 
who accept severe austerities and penances to 
achieve the highest position may think them-
selves liberated, their intelligenc e is impure. 
They fall down from their position of imagined 
superiority because they have no regard for 
Your lotus feet. (32) O Mādhava, Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Lord of the goddess of 
fortune, if devotees completely in love with 
You sometimes fall from the path of devotion, 
they do not fall like nondevotees, for You still 
protect them. Thus they fearlessly traverse the 
heads of their opponents and continue to pro-
gress in devotional service. (33) O Lord, during 
the time of maintenance You manifest se veral 
incarnations, all with transcendental bodies, be-
yond the material modes of nature. When You 
appear in this way, You bestow all good fortune 
upon the living entities by teaching them to per-
form Vedic activities such as ritualistic ceremo-
nies, mystic y oga, austerities, penances, and ul-
timately samādhi, ecstatic absorption in 
thoughts of You. Thus You are worshiped by 
the Vedic principles. (34) O Lord, cause of all 
causes, if Your transcendental body were not 
beyond the modes of material nature, one coul d 
not understand the difference between matter 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

589 
 and transcendence. Only by Your presence can 
one understand the transcendental nature of 
Your Lordship, who are the controller of mate-
rial nature. Your transcendental nature is very 
difficult to understand unl ess one is influenced 
by the presence of Your transcendental form. 
(35) O Lord, Your transcendental name and 
form are not ascertained by those who merely 
speculate on the path of imagination. Your 
name, form and attributes can be ascertained 
only through d evotional service. (36) Even 
while engaged in various activities, devotees 
whose minds are completely absorbed at Your 
lotus feet, and who constantly hear, chant, con-
template and cause others to remember Your 
transcendental names and forms, are always on 
the transcendental platform, and thus they can 
understand the Supreme Personality of God-
head. (37) O Lord, we are fortunate because the 
heavy burden of the demons upon this earth is 
immediately removed by Your appearance. In-
deed, we are certainly fortunate,  for we shall be 
able to see upon this earth and in the heavenly 
planets the marks of lotus, conchshell, club and 
disc that adorn Your lotus feet. (38) O Supreme 
Lord, You are not an ordinary living entity ap-
pearing in this material world as a result of fr u-
itive activities. Therefore, Your appearance or 
birth in this world has no other cause than Your 
pleasure potency. Similarly, the living entities, 
who are part of You, have no cause for miseries 
like birth, death and old age, except when these 
living enti ties are conducted by Your external 
energy. (39) O supreme controller, Your Lord-
ship previously accepted incarnations as a fish, 
a horse, a tortoise, Narasi ṁhadeva, a boar, a 
swan, Lord Rāmacandra, Paraśurāma and, 
among the demigods, Vāmanadeva, to protect  
the entire world by Your mercy. Now please 
protect us again by Your mercy by diminishing 
the disturbances in this world. O K ṛṣṇa, best of 
the Yadus, we respectfully offer our obeisances 
unto You. (40) O mother Devakī, by your good 
fortune and ours, the Su preme Personality of 
Godhead Himself, with all His plenary por-
tions, such as Baladeva, is now within your 
womb. Therefore, you need not fear Ka ṁsa, 
who has decided to be killed by the Lord. Your eternal son, K ṛṣṇa, will be the protector of the 
entire Yadu dynasty. (41)  

After thus offering prayers to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Lord Vi ṣṇu, the Tran-
scendence, all the demigods, with Lord Brahmā 
and Lord Śiva before them, returned to their 
homes in the heavenly planets. (42)  

SB 10.3: The Birth of Lord  Kṛṣṇa 

Thereafter, at the auspicious time for the ap-
pearance of the Lord, the entire universe was 
surcharged with all the qualities of goodness, 
beauty and peace. The constellation Rohi ṇī ap-
peared, as did stars like Aśvinī. The sun, the 
moon and the other  stars and planets were very 
peaceful. All directions appeared extremely 
pleasing, and the beautiful stars twinkled in the 
cloudless sky. Decorated with towns, villages, 
mines and pasturing grounds, the earth seemed 
all-auspicious. The rivers flowed with c lear wa-
ter, and the lakes and vast reservoirs, full of lil-
ies and lotuses, were extraordinarily beautiful. 
In the trees and green plants, full of flowers and 
leaves, pleasing to the eyes, birds like cuckoos 
and swarms of bees began chanting with sweet 
voices for the sake of the demigods. A pure 
breeze began to blow, pleasing the sense of 
touch and bearing the aroma of flowers, and 
when the brāhma ṇas engaging in ritualistic cer-
emonies ignited their fires according to Vedic 
principles, the fires burned steadi ly, undis-
turbed by the breeze. Thus when the birthless 
Lord Vi ṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, was about to appear, the saints and 
brāhma ṇas, who had always been disturbed by 
demons like Ka ṁsa and his men, felt peace 
within the core of their hearts , and kettledrums 
simultaneously vibrated from the upper plane-
tary system. (1 -5) 

The Kinnaras and Gandharvas began to sing 
auspicious songs, the Siddhas and Cāra ṇas of-
fered auspicious prayers, and the Vidyādharīs, 
along with the Apsarās, began to dance in  jubi-
lation. (6) The demigods and great saintly per-
sons showered flowers in a joyous mood, and 
clouds gathered in the sky and very mildly 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

590 
 thundered, making sounds like those of the 
ocean’s waves. Then the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, who is situa ted in the core 
of everyone’s heart, appeared from the heart of 
Devakī in the dense darkness of night, like the 
full moon rising on the eastern horizon, because 
Devakī was of the same category as Śrī K ṛṣṇa. 
(7-8) 

Vasudeva then saw the newborn child, who 
had very wonderful lotuslike eyes and who 
bore in His four hands the four weapons 
śaṅkha, cakra, gadā and padma. On His chest 
was the mark of Śrīvatsa and on His neck the 
brilliant Kaustubha gem. Dressed in yellow, 
His body blackish like a dense cloud, His scat-
tered hair fully grown, and His helmet and ear-
rings sparkling uncommonly with the valuable 
gem Vaidūrya, the child, decorated with a bril-
liant belt, armlets, bangles and other orna-
ments, appeared very wonderful. (9 -10) When 
Vasudeva saw his extraordina ry son, his eyes 
were struck with wonder. In transcendental ju-
bilation, he mentally collected ten thousand 
cows and distributed them among the 
brāhma ṇas as a transcendental festival. (11) O 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, descendant of King Bharata, 
Vasudeva could unde rstand that this child was 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāya ṇa. Having concluded this without a 
doubt, he became fearless. Bowing down with 
folded hands and concentrating his attention, he 
began to offer prayers to the child, who illumi-
nated His b irthplace by His natural influence. 
(12) 

Vasudeva said:  My Lord, You are the Su-
preme Person, beyond material existence, and 
You are the Supersoul. Your form can be per-
ceived by transcendental knowledge, by which 
You can be understood as the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. I now understand Your posi-
tion perfectly. (13) My Lord, You are the same 
person who in the beginning created this mate-
rial world by His personal external energy. Af-
ter the creation of this world of three gu ṇas 
[sattva, rajas and tamas], Y ou appear to have 
entered it, although in fact You have not. (14) 
The mahat -tattva, the total material energy, is undivided, but because of the material modes 
of nature, it appears to separate into earth, wa-
ter, fire, air and ether. Because of the living e n-
ergy [jīva -bhūta], these separated energies 
combine to make the cosmic manifestation vis-
ible, but in fact, before the creation of the cos-
mos, the total energy is already present. There-
fore, the total material energy never actually 
enters the creation. Sim ilarly, although You are 
perceived by our senses because of Your pres-
ence, You cannot be perceived by the senses, 
nor experienced by the mind or words [avā ṅ-
mānasa -gocara]. With our senses we can per-
ceive some things, but not everything; for ex-
ample, we ca n use our eyes to see, but not to 
taste. Consequently, You are beyond percep-
tion by the senses. Although in touch with the 
modes of material nature, You are unaffected 
by them. You are the prime factor in every-
thing, the all -pervading, undivided Supersoul.  
For You, therefore, there is no external or inter-
nal. You never entered the womb of Devakī; ra-
ther, You existed there already. (15 -17) One 
who considers his visible body, which is a 
product of the three modes of nature, to be in-
dependent of the soul is un aware of the basis of 
existence, and therefore he is a rascal. Those 
who are learned have rejected this conclusion 
because one can understand through full dis-
cussion that with no basis in soul, the visible 
body and senses would be insubstantial. None-
theles s, although his conclusion has been re-
jected, a foolish person considers it a reality. 
(18) O my Lord, learned Vedic scholars con-
clude that the creation, maintenance and anni-
hilation of the entire cosmic manifestation are 
performed by You, who are free fro m en-
deavor, unaffected by the modes of material na-
ture, and changeless in Your spiritual situation. 
There are no contradictions in You, who are the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Parabrah-
man. Because the three modes of material na-
turesattva, rajas and tam asare under Your con-
trol, everything takes place automatically. (19) 
My Lord, Your form is transcendental to the 
three material modes, yet for the maintenance 
of the three worlds, You assume the white color 
of Vi ṣṇu in goodness; for creation, which is 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

591 
 surrounded by the quality of passion, You ap-
pear reddish; and at the end, when there is a 
need for annihilation, which is surrounded by 
ignorance, You appear blackish. (20) O my 
Lord, proprietor of all creation, You have now 
appeared in my house, desiring to p rotect this 
world. I am sure that You will kill all the armies 
that are moving all over the world under the 
leadership of politicians who are dressed as 
kṣatriya rulers but who are factually demons. 
They must be killed by You for the protection 
of the inno cent public. (21) O my Lord, Lord of 
the demigods, after hearing the prophecy that 
You would take birth in our home and kill him, 
this uncivilized Ka ṁsa killed so many of Your 
elder brothers. As soon as he hears from his 
lieutenants that You have appeared,  he will im-
mediately come with weapons to kill You. (22)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Thereafter, 
having seen that her child had all the symptoms 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Devakī, who was very much afraid of Ka ṁsa 
and unusually astonished, beg an to offer pray-
ers to the Lord. (23)  

Śrī Devakī said:  My dear Lord, there are 
different Vedas, some of which describe You 
as unperceivable through words and the mind. 
Yet You are the origin of the entire cosmic 
manifestation. You are Brahman, the greates t 
of everything, full of effulgence like the sun. 
You have no material cause, You are free from 
change and deviation, and You have no mate-
rial desires. Thus the Vedas say that You are 
the substance. Therefore, my Lord, You are di-
rectly the origin of all Ve dic statements, and by 
understanding You, one gradually understands 
everything. You are different from the light of 
Brahman and Paramātmā, yet You are not dif-
ferent from them. Everything emanates from 
You. Indeed, You are the cause of all causes, 
Lord Vi ṣṇu, the light of all transcendental 
knowledge. (24)  

After millions of years, at the time of cosmic 
annihilation, when everything, manifested and 
unmanifested, is annihilated by the force of time, the five gross elements enter into the sub-
tle conception, an d the manifested categories 
enter into the unmanifested substance. At that 
time, You alone remain, and You are known as 
Ananta Śe ṣa-nāga. (25) O inaugurator of the 
material energy, this wonderful creation works 
under the control of powerful time, which is di-
vided into seconds, minutes, hours and years. 
This element of time, which extends for many 
millions of years, is but another form of Lord 
Viṣṇu. For Your pastimes, You act as the con-
troller of time, but You are the reservoir of all 
good fortune. Let me o ffer my full surrender 
unto Your Lordship. (26) No one in this mate-
rial world has become free from the four prin-
ciples birth, death, old age and disease, even by 
fleeing to various planets. But now that You 
have appeared, My Lord, death is fleeing in fear 
of You, and the living entities, having obtained 
shelter at Your lotus feet by Your mercy, are 
sleeping in full mental peace. (27) My Lord, be-
cause You dispel all the fear of Your devotees, 
I request You to save us and give us protection 
from the terrible fear of Ka ṁsa. Your form as 
Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is 
appreciated by yogīs in meditation. Please 
make this form invisible to those who see with 
material eyes. (28) O Madhusūdana, because of 
Your appearance, I am becoming more and 
more a nxious in fear of Ka ṁsa. Therefore, 
please arrange for that sinful Ka ṁsa to be una-
ble to understand that You have taken birth 
from my womb. (29) O my Lord, You are the 
all-pervading Supreme Personality of God-
head, and Your transcendental four -armed 
form, h olding conchshell, disc, club and lotus, 
is unnatural for this world. Please withdraw this 
form [and become just like a natural human 
child so that I may try to hide You somewhere]. 
(30) At the time of devastation, the entire cos-
mos, containing all created  moving and non-
moving entities, enters Your transcendental 
body and is held there without difficulty. But 
now this transcendental form has taken birth 
from my womb. People will not be able to be-
lieve this, and I shall become an object of ridi-
cule. (31)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

592 
 The Supreme Personality of Godhead re-
plied:  My dear mother, best of the chaste, in 
your previous birth, in the Svāyambhuva mil-
lennium, you were known as P ṛśni, and 
Vasudeva, who was the most pious Prajāpati, 
was named Sutapā. (32) When both of you 
were order ed by Lord Brahmā to create prog-
eny, you first underwent severe austerities by 
controlling your senses. (33) My dear father 
and mother, you endured rain, wind, strong sun, 
scorching heat and severe cold, suffering all 
sorts of inconvenience according to di fferent 
seasons. By practicing prā ṇāyāma to control 
the air within the body through yoga, and by 
eating only air and dry leaves fallen from the 
trees, you cleansed from your minds all dirty 
things. In this way, desiring a benediction from 
Me, you worshiped  Me with peaceful minds. 
(34-35) 

Thus you spent twelve thousand celestial 
years performing difficult activities of tapasya 
in consciousness of Me [K ṛṣṇa consciousness]. 
(36) 

O sinless mother Devakī, after the expiry of 
twelve thousand celestial years, in  which you 
constantly contemplated Me within the core of 
your heart with great faith, devotion and auster-
ity, I was very much satisfied with you. Since I 
am the best of all bestowers of benediction, I 
appeared in this same form as K ṛṣṇa to ask you 
to take from Me the benediction you desired. 
You then expressed your desire to have a son 
exactly like Me. (37 -38) Being husband and 
wife but always sonless, you were attracted by 
sexual desires, for by the influence of de-
vamāyā, transcendental love, you wanted to  
have Me as your son. Therefore, you never de-
sired to be liberated from this material world. 
(39) After you received that benediction and I 
disappeared, you engaged yourselves in sex to 
have a son like Me, and I fulfilled your desire. 
(40) Since I found no  one else as highly ele-
vated as you in simplicity and other qualities of 
good character, I appeared in this world as 
Pṛśnigarbha, or one who is celebrated as having 
taken birth from P ṛśni. (41) In the next millen-
nium, I again appeared from the two of you, who appeared as My mother, Aditi, and My fa-
ther, Kaśyapa. I was known as Upendra, and 
because of being a dwarf, I was also known as 
Vāmana. (42) O supremely chaste mother, I, 
the same personality, have now appeared of 
you both as your son for the third tim e. Take 
My words as the truth. (43) I have shown you 
this form of Vi ṣṇu just to remind you of My 
previous births. Otherwise, if I appeared like an 
ordinary human child, you would not believe 
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Viṣṇu, has indeed appear ed. (44)  

Both of you, husband and wife, constantly 
think of Me as your son, but always know that 
I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By 
thus thinking of Me constantly with love and 
affection, you will achieve the highest perfec-
tion: returning home, b ack to Godhead. (45)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After thus in-
structing His father and mother, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, remained si-
lent. In their presence, by His internal energy, 
He then transformed Himself into a small hu-
man child. [In othe r words, He transformed 
Himself into His original form: k ṛṣṇas tu bha-
gavān svayam.] (46) Thereafter, exactly when 
Vasudeva, being inspired by the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, was about to take the 
newborn child from the delivery room, Yoga -
māyā, the Lor d’s spiritual energy, took birth as 
the daughter of the wife of Mahārāja Nanda. 
(47) By the influence of Yoga -māyā, all the 
doorkeepers fell fast asleep, their senses unable 
to work, and the other inhabitants of the house 
also fell deeply asleep. When the sun rises, the 
darkness automatically disappears; similarly, 
when Vasudeva appeared, the closed doors, 
which were strongly pinned with iron and 
locked with iron chains, opened automatically. 
Since the clouds in the sky were mildly thun-
dering and showering,  Ananta -nāga, an expan-
sion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
followed Vasudeva, beginning from the door, 
with hoods expanded to protect Vasudeva and 
the transcendental child. (48 -49) Because of 
constant rain sent by the demigod Indra, the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

593 
 river Yamunā  was filled with deep water, foam-
ing about with fiercely whirling waves. But as 
the great Indian Ocean had formerly given way 
to Lord Rāmacandra by allowing Him to con-
struct a bridge, the river Yamunā gave way to 
Vasudeva and allowed him to cross. (50) Whe n 
Vasudeva reached the house of Nanda 
Mahārāja, he saw that all the cowherd men 
were fast asleep. Thus he placed his own son on 
the bed of Yaśodā, picked up her daughter, an 
expansion of Yoga -māyā, and then returned to 
his residence, the prison house of Ka ṁsa. (51)  

Vasudeva placed the female child on the bed 
of Devakī, bound his legs with the iron shack-
les, and thus remained there as before. (52) Ex-
hausted by the labor of childbirth, Yaśodā was 
overwhelmed with sleep and unable to under-
stand what kind of c hild had been born to her. 
(53) 

SB 10.4: The Atrocities of King Ka ṁsa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  My dear 
King Parīk ṣit, the doors inside and outside the 
house closed as before. Thereafter, the inhabit-
ants of the house, especially the watchmen, 
heard the  crying of the newborn child and thus 
awakened from their beds. (1) Thereafter, all 
the watchmen very quickly approached King 
Kaṁsa, the ruler of the Bhoja dynasty, and sub-
mitted the news of the birth of Devakī’s child. 
Kaṁsa, who had awaited this news ver y anx-
iously, immediately took action. (2) Ka ṁsa im-
mediately got up from bed, thinking, “Here is 
Kāla, the supreme time factor, which has taken 
birth to kill me!” Thus overwhelmed, Ka ṁsa, 
his hair scattered on his head, at once ap-
proached the place where th e child had been 
born. (3) Devakī helplessly, piteously appealed 
to Ka ṁsa: My dear brother, all good fortune 
unto you. Don’t kill this girl. She will be your 
daughter -in-law. Indeed, it is unworthy of you 
to kill a woman. (4)  

My dear brother, by the influ ence of destiny 
you have already killed many babies, each of 
them as bright and beautiful as fire. But kindly 
spare this daughter. Give her to me as your gift. (5) My lord, my brother, I am very poor, being 
bereft of all my children, but still I am your 
younger sister, and therefore it would be wor-
thy of you to give me this last child as a gift. (6)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Piteously 
embracing her daughter and crying, Devakī 
begged Ka ṁsa for the child, but he was so cruel 
that he chastised her and forci bly snatched the 
child from her hands. (7) Having uprooted all 
relationships with his sister because of intense 
selfishness, Ka ṁsa, who was sitting on his 
knees, grasped the newborn child by the legs 
and tried to dash her against the surface of a 
stone. (8 ) 

The child, Yoga -māyā -devī, the younger 
sister of Lord Vi ṣṇu, slipped upward from 
Kaṁsa’s hands and appeared in the sky as 
Devī, the goddess Durgā, with eight arms, com-
pletely equipped with weapons. (9) The god-
dess Durgā was decorated with flower gar-
lands, smeared with sandalwood pulp and 
dressed with excellent garments and ornaments 
made of valuable jewels. Holding in her hands 
a bow, a trident, arrows, a shield, a sword, a 
conchshell, a disc and a club, and being praised 
by celestial beings like Apsarās , Kinnaras, Ura-
gas, Siddhas, Cāra ṇas and Gandharvas, who 
worshiped her with all kinds of presentations, 
she spoke as follows. (10 -11) O Ka ṁsa, you 
fool, what will be the use of killing me? The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has 
been your enemy from th e very beginning and 
who will certainly kill you, has already taken 
His birth somewhere else. Therefore, do not un-
necessarily kill other children. (12) After 
speaking to Ka ṁsa in this way, the goddess 
Durgā, Yoga -māyā, appeared in different 
places, such as  Vārā ṇasī, and became cele-
brated by different names, such as Annapūr ṇā, 
Durgā, Kālī and Bhadrā. (13)  

After hearing the words of the goddess 
Durgā, Ka ṁsa was struck with wonder. Thus 
he approached his sister Devakī and brother -in-
law Vasudeva, released the m immediately 
from their shackles, and very humbly spoke as 
follows. (14) Alas, my sister! Alas, my brother -
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

594 
 in-law! I am indeed so sinful that exactly like a 
man-eater [Rāk ṣasa] who eats his own child, I 
have killed so many sons born of you. (15) Be-
ing mer ciless and cruel, I have forsaken all my 
relatives and friends. Therefore, like a person 
who has killed a brāhma ṇa, I do not know to 
which planet I shall go, either after death or 
while breathing. (16) Alas, not only human be-
ings but sometimes even provide nce lies. And I 
am so sinful that I believed the omen of provi-
dence and killed so many of my sister’s chil-
dren. (17) O great souls, your children have suf-
fered their own misfortune. Therefore, please 
do not lament for them. All living entities are 
under th e control of the Supreme, and they can-
not always live together. (18) In this world, we 
can see that pots, dolls and other products of the 
earth appear, break and then disappear, mixing 
with the earth. Similarly, the bodies of all con-
ditioned living entitie s are annihilated, but the 
living entities, like the earth itself, are unchang-
ing and never annihilated [na hanyate han-
yamāne śarīre]. (19)  

One who does not understand the constitu-
tional position of the body and the soul [ātmā] 
becomes too attached to the  bodily concept of 
life. Consequently, because of attachment to 
the body and its by -products, he feels affected 
by union with and separation from his family, 
society and nation. As long as this continues, 
one continues his material life. [Otherwise, one 
is liberated.] (20) My dear sister Devakī, all 
good fortune unto you. Everyone suffers and 
enjoys the results of his own work under the 
control of providence. Therefore, although 
your sons have unfortunately been killed by 
me, please do not lament for them. (21) In the 
bodily conception of life, one remains in dark-
ness, without self -realization, thinking, “I am 
being killed” or “I have killed my enemies.” As 
long as a foolish person thus considers the self 
to be the killer or the killed, he continues to be 
responsible for material obligations, and conse-
quently he suffers the reactions of happiness 
and distress. (22) Ka ṁsa begged, “My dear sis-
ter and brother -in-law, please be merciful to 
such a poor -hearted person as me, since both of 
you are saintly persons. P lease excuse my atrocities.” Having said this, Ka ṁsa fell at the 
feet of Vasudeva and Devakī, his eyes full of 
tears of regret. (23) Fully believing in the words 
of the goddess Durgā, Ka ṁsa exhibited his fa-
milial affection for Devakī and Vasudeva by 
immedi ately releasing them from their iron 
shackles. (24) When Devakī saw her brother 
actually repentant while explaining ordained 
events, she was relieved of all anger. Similarly, 
Vasudeva was also free from anger. Smiling, he 
spoke to Ka ṁsa as follows. (25) O great per-
sonality Ka ṁsa, only by the influence of igno-
rance does one accept the material body and 
bodily ego. What you have said about this phi-
losophy is correct. Persons in the bodily con-
cept of life, lacking self -realization, differenti-
ate in terms of “T his is mine” and “This be-
longs to another.” (26) Persons with the vision 
of differentiation are imbued with the material 
qualities lamentation, jubilation, fear, envy, 
greed, illusion and madness. They are influ-
enced by the immediate cause, which they are 
busy counteracting, because they have no 
knowledge of the remote, supreme cause, the 
Personality of Godhead. (27)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued : Thus hav-
ing been addressed in purity by Devakī and 
Vasudeva, who were very much appeased, 
Kaṁsa felt pleased, and  with their permission 
he entered his home. (28) After that night 
passed, Ka ṁsa summoned his ministers and in-
formed them of all that had been spoken by 
Yoga -māyā [who had revealed that He who 
was to slay Ka ṁsa had already been born some-
where else]. (29) Af ter hearing their master’s 
statement, the envious asuras, who were ene-
mies of the demigods and were not very expert 
in their dealings, advised Ka ṁsa as follows. 
(30) If this is so, O King of the Bhoja dynasty, 
beginning today we shall kill all the children  
born in all the villages, towns and pasturing 
grounds within the past ten days or slightly 
more. (31) The demigods always fear the sound 
of your bowstring. They are constantly in anx-
iety, afraid of fighting. Therefore, what can 
they do by their endeavors to harm you? (32) 
While being pierced by your arrows, which you 
discharged on all sides, some of them, who 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

595 
 were injured by the multitude of arrows but 
who desired to live, fled the battlefield, intent 
on escaping. (33) Defeated and bereft of all 
weapons, s ome of the demigods gave up 
fighting and praised you with folded hands, and 
some of them, appearing before you with loos-
ened garments and hair, said, “O lord, we are 
very much afraid of you.” (34) When the dem-
igods are bereft of their chariots, when they f or-
get how to use weapons, when they are fearful 
or attached to something other than fighting, or 
when their bows are broken and they have thus 
lost the ability to fight, Your Majesty does not 
kill them. (35) The demigods boast uselessly 
while away from the  battlefield. Only where 
there is no fighting can they show their prow-
ess. Therefore, from such demigods we have 
nothing to fear. As for Lord Vi ṣṇu, He is in se-
clusion in the core of the hearts of the yogīs. As 
for Lord Śiva, he has gone to the forest. And  as 
for Lord Brahmā, he is always engaged in aus-
terities and meditation. The other demigods, 
headed by Indra, are devoid of prowess. There-
fore, you have nothing to fear. (36) Nonethe-
less, because of their enmity, our opinion is that 
the demigods should not  be neglected. There-
fore, to uproot them completely, engage us in 
fighting with them, for we are ready to follow 
you. (37) As a disease, if initially neglected, be-
comes acute and impossible to cure, or as the 
senses, if not controlled at first, are impossi ble 
to control later, an enemy, if neglected in the 
beginning, later becomes insurmountable. (38) 
The foundation of all the demigods is Lord 
Viṣṇu, who lives and is worshiped wherever 
there are religious principles, traditional cul-
ture, the Vedas, cows, br āhma ṇas, austerities, 
and sacrifices with proper remuneration. (39) O 
King, we, who are your adherents in all re-
spects, shall therefore kill the Vedic 
brāhma ṇas, the persons engaged in offering 
sacrifices and austerities, and the cows that sup-
ply milk, fro m which clarified butter is ob-
tained for the ingredients of sacrifice. (40) The 
brāhma ṇas, the cows, Vedic knowledge, aus-
terity, truthfulness, control of the mind and 
senses, faith, mercy, tolerance and sacrifice are 
the different parts of the body of Lord  Viṣṇu, and they are the paraphernalia for a godly civi-
lization. (41) Lord Vi ṣṇu, the Supersoul within 
the core of everyone’s heart, is the ultimate en-
emy of the asuras and is therefore known as 
asura -dviṭ. He is the leader of all the demigods 
because all the demigods, including Lord Śiva 
and Lord Brahmā, exist under His protection. 
The great saintly persons, sages and Vai ṣṇavas 
also depend upon Him. To persecute the 
Vaiṣṇavas, therefore, is the only way to kill 
Viṣṇu. (42)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued : Thus , hav-
ing considered the instructions of his bad min-
isters, Ka ṁsa, who was bound by the laws of 
Yamarāja and devoid of good intelligence be-
cause he was a demon, decided to persecute the 
saintly persons, the brāhma ṇas, as the only way 
to achieve his own good  fortune. (43) These de-
mons, the followers of Ka ṁsa, were expert at 
persecuting others, especially the Vai ṣṇavas, 
and could assume any form they desired. After 
giving these demons permission to go every-
where and persecute the saintly persons, Ka ṁsa 
entered  his palace. (44) Surcharged with pas-
sion and ignorance and not knowing what was 
good or bad for them, the asuras, for whom im-
pending death was waiting, began the persecu-
tion of the saintly persons. (45) My dear King, 
when a man persecutes great souls, all  his ben-
edictions of longevity, beauty, fame, religion, 
blessings and promotion to higher planets will 
be destroyed. (46)  

SB 10.5: The Meeting of Nanda Mahārāja 
and Vasudeva  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Nanda Mahārāja 
was naturally very magnanimous, and when 
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa appeared as his son, he was 
overwhelmed by jubilation. Therefore, after 
bathing and purifying himself and dressing 
himself properly, he invited brāhma ṇas who 
knew how to recite Vedic mantras. After hav-
ing these qualified brāhma ṇas recite ausp icious 
Vedic hymns, he arranged to have the Vedic 
birth ceremony celebrated for his newborn 
child according to the rules and regulations, and 
he also arranged for worship of the demigods 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

596 
 and forefathers. (1 -2) Nanda Mahārāja gave 
two million cows, complete ly decorated with 
cloth and jewels, in charity to the brāhma ṇas. 
He also gave them seven hills of grain, covered 
with jewels and with cloth decorated with 
golden embroidery. (3)  
O King, by the passing of time, land and 
other material possessions are purifi ed; by 
bathing, the body is purified; and by being 
cleansed, unclean things are purified. By purifi-
catory ceremonies, birth is purified; by auster-
ity, the senses are purified; and by worship and 
charity offered to the brāhma ṇas, material pos-
sessions are pu rified. By satisfaction, the mind 
is purified; and by self -realization, or K ṛṣṇa 
consciousness, the soul is purified. (4) The 
brāhma ṇas recited auspicious Vedic hymns, 
which purified the environment by their vibra-
tion. The experts in reciting old histories  like 
the Purā ṇas, the experts in reciting the histories 
of royal families, and general reciters all 
chanted, while singers sang and many kinds of 
musical instruments, like bherīs and dundubhis, 
played in accompaniment. (5) Vrajapura, the 
residence of Nand a Mahārāja, was fully deco-
rated with varieties of festoons and flags, and 
in different places, gates were made with vari-
eties of flower garlands, pieces of cloth, and 
mango leaves. The courtyards, the gates near 
the roads, and everything within the rooms o f 
the houses were perfectly swept and washed 
with water. (6)  

The cows, the bulls and the calves were thor-
oughly smeared with a mixture of turmeric and 
oil, mixed with varieties of minerals. Their 
heads were bedecked with peacock feathers, 
and they were ga rlanded and covered with cloth 
and golden ornaments. (7) O King Parīk ṣit, the 
cowherd men dressed very opulently with val-
uable ornaments and garments such as coats 
and turbans. Decorated in this way and carrying 
various presentations in their hands, they a p-
proached the house of Nanda Mahārāja. (8)  

The gopī wives of the cowherd men were 
very pleased to hear that mother Yaśodā had 
given birth to a son, and they began to decorate themselves very nicely with proper dresses, or-
naments, black ointment for the ey es, and so 
on. (9) Their lotuslike faces extraordinarily 
beautiful, being decorated with saffron and 
newly grown ku ṅkuma, the wives of the cow-
herd men hurried to the house of mother 
Yaśodā with presentations in their hands. Be-
cause of natural beauty, the w ives had full hips 
and full breasts, which moved as they hurried 
along. (10) In the ears of the gopīs were bril-
liantly polished jeweled earrings, and from 
their necks hung metal lockets. Their hands 
were decorated with bangles, their dresses were 
of varied  colors, and from their hair, flowers 
fell onto the street like showers. Thus while go-
ing to the house of Mahārāja Nanda, the gopīs, 
their earrings, breasts and garlands moving, 
were brilliantly beautiful. (11) Offering bless-
ings to the newborn child, K ṛṣṇa, the wives and 
daughters of the cowherd men said, “May You 
become the King of Vraja and long maintain all 
its inhabitants.” They sprinkled a mixture of 
turmeric powder, oil and water upon the birth-
less Supreme Lord and offered their prayers. 
(12) Now tha t the all -pervading, unlimited 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the master of the cosmic manifes-
tation, had arrived within the estate of Mahārāja 
Nanda, various types of musical instruments re-
sounded to celebrate the great festival. (13) In 
gladness, the cowherd men enjoyed th e great 
festival by splashing one another’s bodies with 
a mixture of curd, condensed milk, butter and 
water. They threw butter on one another and 
smeared it on one another’s bodies. (14) The 
great -minded Mahārāja Nanda gave clothing, 
ornaments and cows in charity to the cowherd 
men in order to please Lord Vi ṣṇu, and thus he 
improved the condition of his own son in all re-
spects. He distributed charity to the sūtas, the 
māgadhas, the vandīs, and men of all other pro-
fessions, according to their educational qua lifi-
cations, and satisfied everyone’s desires. (15 -
16) The most fortunate Rohi ṇī, the mother of 
Baladeva, was honored by Nanda Mahārāja and 
Yaśodā, and thus she also dressed gorgeously 
and decorated herself with a necklace, a garland 
and other ornaments. S he was busy wandering 
here and there to receive the women who were 
guests at the festival. (17) O Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

597 
 the home of Nanda Mahārāja is eternally the 
abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
and His transcendental qualities and is there-
fore a lways naturally endowed with the opu-
lence of all wealth. Yet beginning from Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s appearance there, it became the place 
for the pastimes of the goddess of fortune. (18)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Thereafter, 
my dear King Parīk ṣit, O best protector  of the 
Kuru dynasty, Nanda Mahārāja appointed the 
local cowherd men to protect Gokula and then 
went to Mathurā to pay the yearly taxes to King 
Kaṁsa. (19) When Vasudeva heard that Nanda 
Mahārāja, his very dear friend and brother, had 
come to Mathurā and a lready paid the taxes to 
Kaṁsa, he went to Nanda Mahārāja’s resi-
dence. (20) When Nanda Mahārāja heard that 
Vasudeva had come, he was overwhelmed with 
love and affection, being as pleased as if his 
body had regained its life. Seeing Vasudeva 
suddenly presen t, he got up and embraced him 
with both arms. (21) O Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, hav-
ing thus been received and welcomed by Nanda 
Mahārāja with honor, Vasudeva sat down very 
peacefully and inquired about his own two sons 
because of intense love for them. (22)  

My de ar brother Nanda Mahārāja, at an ad-
vanced age you had no son at all and were 
hopeless of having one. Therefore, that you 
now have a son is a sign of great fortune. (23) 
It is also by good fortune that I am seeing you. 
Having obtained this opportunity, I fe el as if I 
have taken birth again. Even though one is pre-
sent in this world, to meet with intimate friends 
and dear relatives in this material world is ex-
tremely difficult. (24) Many planks and sticks, 
unable to stay together, are carried away by the 
force  of a river’s waves. Similarly, although we 
are intimately related with friends and family 
members, we are unable to stay together be-
cause of our varied past deeds and the waves of 
time. (25) My dear friend Nanda Mahārāja, in 
the place where you are living  with your 
friends, is the forest favorable for the animals, 
the cows? I hope there is no disease or incon-
venience. The place must be full of water, grass 
and other plants. (26) My son Baladeva, being raised by you and your wife, Yaśodādevī, con-
siders you His father and mother. Is He living 
very peacefully in your home with His real 
mother, Rohi ṇī? (27) When one’s friends and 
relatives are properly situated, one’s religion, 
economic development and sense gratification, 
as described in the Vedic literatures,  are bene-
ficial. Otherwise, if one’s friends and relatives 
are in distress, these three cannot offer any hap-
piness. (28)  

Nanda Mahārāja said:  Alas, King Ka ṁsa 
killed so many of your children, born of 
Devakī. And your one daughter, the youngest 
child of al l, entered the heavenly planets. (29) 
Every man is certainly controlled by destiny, 
which determines the results of one’s fruitive 
activities. In other words, one has a son or 
daughter because of unseen destiny, and when 
the son or daughter is no longer pr esent, this 
also is due to unseen destiny. Destiny is the ul-
timate controller of everyone. One who knows 
this is never bewildered. (30) Vasudeva said to 
Nanda Mahārāja: Now, my dear brother, since 
you have paid the annual taxes to Ka ṁsa and 
have also seen me, do not stay in this place for 
many days. It is better to return to Gokula, since 
I know that there may be some disturbances 
there. (31)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After Vasudeva 
advised Nanda Mahārāja in this way, Nanda 
Mahārāja and his associates, the co wherd men, 
took permission from Vasudeva, yoked their 
bulls to the bullock carts, and started riding for 
Gokula. (32)  

SB 10.6: The Killing of the Demon Pūtanā  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  My dear 
King, while Nanda Mahārāja was on the way 
home, he consider ed that what Vasudeva had 
said could not be false or useless. There must 
have been some danger of disturbances in 
Gokula. As Nanda Mahārāja thought about the 
danger for his beautiful son, K ṛṣṇa, he was 
afraid, and he took shelter at the lotus feet of 
the s upreme controller. (1) While Nanda 
Mahārāja was returning to Gokula, the same 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

598 
 fierce Pūtanā whom Ka ṁsa had previously en-
gaged to kill babies was wandering about in the 
towns, cities and villages, doing her nefarious 
duty. (2) My dear King, wherever people in any 
position perform their occupational duties of 
devotional service by chanting and hearing 
[śrava ṇaṁ kīrtana ṁ viṣṇoḥ], there cannot be 
any danger from bad elements. Therefore, there 
was no need for anxiety about Gokula while the 
Supreme Personality of  Godhead was person-
ally present. (3) Once upon a time, Pūtanā 
Rākṣasī, who could move according to her de-
sire and was wandering in outer space, con-
verted herself by mystic power into a very 
beautiful woman and thus entered Gokula, the 
abode of Nanda Mahārā ja. (4) Her hips were 
full, her breasts were large and firm, seeming to 
overburden her slim waist, and she was dressed 
very nicely. Her hair, adorned with a garland of 
mallikā flowers, was scattered about her beau-
tiful face. Her earrings were brilliant, an d as she 
smiled very attractively, glancing upon every-
one, her beauty drew the attention of all the in-
habitants of Vraja, especially the men. When 
the gopīs saw her, they thought that the beauti-
ful goddess of fortune, holding a lotus flower in 
her hand, ha d come to see her husband, K ṛṣṇa. 
(5-6) 

While searching for small children, Pūtanā, 
whose business was to kill them, entered the 
house of Nanda Mahārāja unobstructed, having 
been sent by the superior potency of the Lord. 
Without asking anyone’s permission , she en-
tered Nanda Mahārāja’s room, where she saw 
the child sleeping in bed, His unlimited power 
covered like a powerful fire covered by ashes. 
She could understand that this child was not or-
dinary, but was meant to kill all demons. (7)  

Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the all -pervading Supersoul, 
lying on the bed, understood that Pūtanā, a 
witch who was expert in killing small children, 
had come to kill Him. Therefore, as if afraid of 
her, K ṛṣṇa closed His eyes. Thus Pūtanā took 
upon her lap Him who was to be her own ann i-
hilation, just as an unintelligent person places a 
sleeping snake on his lap, thinking the snake to 
be a rope. (8) Pūtanā Rāk ṣasī’s heart was fierce and cruel, but she looked like a very affection-
ate mother. Thus she resembled a sharp sword 
in a soft shea th. Although seeing her within the 
room, Yaśodā and Rohi ṇī, overwhelmed by her 
beauty, did not stop her, but remained silent be-
cause she treated the child like a mother. (9)  

On that very spot, the fiercely dangerous 
Rākṣasī took K ṛṣṇa on her lap and pushe d her 
breast into His mouth. The nipple of her breast 
was smeared with a dangerous, immediately ef-
fective poison, but the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, becoming very angry at her, 
took hold of her breast, squeezed it very hard 
with both hands, and  sucked out both the poi-
son and her life. (10) Unbearably pressed in 
every vital point, the demon Pūtanā began to 
cry, “Please leave me, leave me! Suck my 
breast no longer!” Perspiring, her eyes wide 
open and her arms and legs flailing, she cried 
very loud ly again and again. (11) As Pūtanā 
screamed loudly and forcefully, the earth with 
its mountains, and outer space with its planets, 
trembled. The lower planets and all directions 
vibrated, and people fell down, fearing that 
thunderbolts were falling upon th em. (12) In 
this way the demon Pūtanā, very much ag-
grieved because her breast was being attacked 
by K ṛṣṇa, lost her life. O King Parīk ṣit, opening 
her mouth wide and spreading her arms, legs 
and hair, she fell down in the pasturing ground 
in her original f orm as a Rāk ṣasī, as V ṛtrāsura 
had fallen when killed by the thunderbolt of In-
dra. (13)  

O King Parīk ṣit, when the gigantic body of 
Pūtanā fell to the ground, it smashed all the 
trees within a limit of twelve miles. Appearing 
in a gigantic body, she was ce rtainly extraordi-
nary. (14) The Rāk ṣasī’s mouth was full of 
teeth, each resembling the front of a plow, her 
nostrils were deep like mountain caves, and her 
breasts resembled big slabs of stone fallen from 
a hill. Her scattered hair was the color of cop-
per. The sockets of her eyes appeared like deep 
blind wells, her fearful thighs resembled the 
banks of a river, her arms, legs and feet seemed 
like big bridges, and her abdomen appeared like 
a dried -up lake. The hearts, ears and heads of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

599 
 the cowherd men and wo men were already 
shocked by the Rāk ṣasī’s screaming, and when 
they saw the fierce wonder of her body, they 
were even more frightened. (15 -17) Without 
fear, the child K ṛṣṇa was playing on the upper 
portion of Pūtanā Rāk ṣasī’s breast, and when 
the gopīs saw the child’s wonderful activities, 
they immediately came forward with great ju-
bilation and picked Him up. (18)  

Thereafter, mother Yaśodā and Rohi ṇī, 
along with the other elderly gopīs, waved about 
the switch of a cow to give full protection to the 
child Śr ī Kṛṣṇa. (19) The child was thoroughly 
washed with cow urine and then smeared with 
the dust raised by the movements of the cows. 
Then different names of the Lord were applied 
with cow dung on twelve different parts of His 
body, beginning with the forehead,  as done in 
applying tilaka. In this way, the child was given 
protection. (20) The gopīs first executed the 
process of ācamana, drinking a sip of water 
from the right hand. They purified their bodies 
and hands with the nyāsa -mantra and then ap-
plied the sam e mantra upon the body of the 
child. (21)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī informed Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit that the gopīs, following the proper 
system, protected K ṛṣṇa, their child, with this 
mantra.] May Aja protect Your legs, may 
Maṇimān protect Your knees, Yajña Your 
thighs, Acyuta the upper part of Your waist, 
and Hayagrīva Your abdomen. May Keśava 
protect Your heart, Īśa Your chest, the sun -god 
Your neck, Vi ṣṇu Your arms, Urukrama Your 
face, and Īśvara Your head. May Cakrī protect 
You from the front; may Śrī Hari, Gadādh arī, 
the carrier of the club, protect You from the 
back; and may the carrier of the bow, who is 
known as the enemy of Madhu, and Lord 
Ajana, the carrier of the sword, protect Your 
two sides. May Lord Urugāya, the carrier of the 
conchshell, protect You from  all corners; may 
Upendra protect You from above; may Garu ḍa 
protect You on the ground; and may Lord 
Haladhara, the Supreme Person, protect You on 
all sides. (22 -23) May H ṛṣīkeśa protect Your 
senses, and Nārāya ṇa Your life air. May the master of Śvetadvīpa  protect the core of Your 
heart, and may Lord Yogeśvara protect Your 
mind. (24) May Lord P ṛśnigarbha protect Your 
intelligence, and the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead Your soul. While You are playing, 
may Govinda protect You, and while You are 
sleeping may  Mādhava protect You. May Lord 
Vaiku ṇṭha protect You while You are walking, 
and may Lord Nārāya ṇa, the husband of the 
goddess of fortune, protect You while You are 
sitting. Similarly, may Lord Yajñabhuk, the 
fearful enemy of all evil planets, always protec t 
You while You enjoy life. (25 -26) The evil 
witches known as Ḍākinīs, Yātudhānīs and 
Kuṣmāṇḍas are the greatest enemies of chil-
dren, and the evil spirits like Bhūtas, Pretas, 
Piśācas, Yak ṣas, Rāk ṣasas and Vināyakas, as 
well as witches like Ko ṭarā, Revatī,  Jyeṣṭhā, 
Pūtanā and Māt ṛkā, are always ready to give 
trouble to the body, the life air and the senses, 
causing loss of memory, madness and bad 
dreams. Like the most experienced evil stars, 
they all create great disturbances, especially for 
children, but o ne can vanquish them simply by 
uttering Lord Vi ṣṇu’s name, for when Lord 
Viṣṇu’s name resounds, all of them become 
afraid and go away. (27 -29) 

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued : All 
the gopīs, headed by mother Yaśodā, were 
bound by maternal affection. Afte r they thus 
chanted mantras to protect the child, mother 
Yaśodā gave the child the nipple of her breast 
to suck and then got Him to lie down on His 
bed. (30) Meanwhile, all the cowherd men, 
headed by Nanda Mahārāja, returned from Ma-
thurā, and when they saw  on the way the gigan-
tic body of Pūtanā lying dead, they were struck 
with great wonder. (31) Nanda Mahārāja and 
the other gopas exclaimed: My dear friends, 
you must know that Ānakadundubhi, 
Vasudeva, has become a great saint or a master 
of mystic power. Ot herwise how could he have 
foreseen this calamity and predicted it to us? 
(32)  The inhabitants of Vraja cut the gigantic 
body of Pūtanā into pieces with the help of 
axes. Then they threw the pieces far away, cov-
ered them with wood and burned them to ashes.  
(33) Because of K ṛṣṇa’s having sucked the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

600 
 breast of the Rāk ṣasī Pūtanā, when K ṛṣṇa killed 
her she was immediately freed of all material 
contamination. Her sinful reactions automati-
cally vanished, and therefore when her gigantic 
body was being burnt, the s moke emanating 
from her body was fragrant like aguru incense. 
(34) Pūtanā was always hankering for the blood 
of human children, and with that desire she 
came to kill K ṛṣṇa; but because she offered her 
breast to the Lord, she attained the greatest 
achieveme nt. What then is to be said of those 
who had natural devotion and affection for 
Kṛṣṇa as mothers and who offered Him their 
breasts to suck or offered something very dear, 
as a mother offers something to a child? (35 -
36) The Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa, is always situated within the core of the 
heart of the pure devotee, and He is always of-
fered prayers by such worshipable personalities 
as Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva. Because K ṛṣṇa 
embraced Pūtanā’s body with great pleasure 
and sucked her breast, alt hough she was a great 
witch, she attained the position of a mother in 
the transcendental world and thus achieved the 
highest perfection. What then is to be said of 
the cows whose nipples K ṛṣṇa sucked with 
great pleasure and who offered their milk very 
jubilantly with affection exactly like that of a 
mother? (37 -38) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, is the bestower of many ben-
edictions, including liberation [kaivalya], or 
oneness with the Brahman effulgence. For that 
Personality of Godhead, the gopī s always felt 
maternal love, and K ṛṣṇa sucked their breasts 
with full satisfaction. Therefore, because of 
their relationship as mother and son, although 
the gopīs were engaged in various family activ-
ities, one should never think that they returned 
to this material world after leaving their bodies. 
(39-40) 

Upon smelling the fragrance of the smoke 
emanating from Pūtanā’s burning body, many 
inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi in distant places 
were astonished. “Where is this fragrance com-
ing from?” they asked. Thus the y went to the 
spot where Pūtanā’s body was being burnt. (41) 
When the inhabitants of Vraja who had come 
from distant places heard the whole story of how Pūtanā had come and then been killed by 
Kṛṣṇa, they were certainly astonished, and they 
offered their b lessings to the child for His won-
derful deed of killing Pūtanā. Nanda Mahārāja, 
of course, was very much obliged to Vasudeva, 
who had foreseen the incident, and simply 
thanked him, thinking how wonderful 
Vasudeva was. (42) O Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, best 
of the Kurus, Nanda Mahārāja was very liberal 
and simple. He immediately took his son K ṛṣṇa 
on his lap as if K ṛṣṇa had returned from death, 
and by formally smelling his son’s head, Nanda 
Mahārāja undoubtedly enjoyed transcendental 
bliss. (43) Any person who hears  with faith and 
devotion about how K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, killed Pūtanā, and who 
thus invests his hearing in such childhood pas-
times of K ṛṣṇa, certainly attains attachment for 
Govinda, the supreme, original person. (44)  

SB 10.7: The Ki lling of the Demon 
Tṛṇāvarta  

King Parīk ṣit said:  My lord, Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī, all the various activities exhibited by 
the incarnations of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead are certainly pleasing to the ear and to 
the mind. Simply by one’s hearing of these ac-
tivities, the dirty things in one’s mind immedi-
ately vanish. Generally we are reluctant to hear 
about the activities of the Lord, but K ṛṣṇa’s 
childhood activities are so attractive that they 
are automatically pleasing to the mind and ear. 
Thus one’s atta chment for hearing about mate-
rial things, which is the root cause of material 
existence, vanishes, and one gradually devel-
ops devotional service to the Supreme Lord, at-
tachment for Him, and friendship with devotees 
who give us the contribution of K ṛṣṇa con-
sciousness. If you think it fit, kindly speak 
about those activities of the Lord. (1 -2) Please 
describe other pastimes of K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme 
Personality, who appeared on this planet earth, 
imitating a human child and performing won-
derful activities like ki lling Pūtanā. (3)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  When mother 
Yaśodā’s baby was slanting His body to at-
tempt to rise and turn around, this attempt was 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

601 
 observed by a Vedic ceremony. In such a cere-
mony, called utthāna, which is performed when 
a child is due to leave  the house for the first 
time, the child is properly bathed. Just after 
Kṛṣṇa turned three months old, mother Yaśodā 
celebrated this ceremony with other women of 
the neighborhood. On that day, there was a con-
junction of the moon with the constellation Ro-
hiṇī. As the brāhma ṇas joined by chanting Ve-
dic hymns and professional musicians also took 
part, this great ceremony was observed by 
mother Yaśodā. (4) After completing the bath-
ing ceremony for the child, mother Yaśodā re-
ceived the brāhma ṇas by worshiping th em with 
proper respect and giving them ample food 
grains and other eatables, clothing, desirable 
cows, and garlands. The brāhma ṇas properly 
chanted Vedic hymns to observe the auspicious 
ceremony, and when they finished and mother 
Yaśodā saw that the child felt sleepy, she lay 
down on the bed with the child until He was 
peacefully asleep. (5) The liberal mother 
Yaśodā, absorbed in celebrating the utthāna 
ceremony, was busy receiving guests, worship-
ing them with all respect and offering them 
clothing, cows, g arlands and grains. Thus she 
could not hear the child crying for His mother. 
At that time, the child K ṛṣṇa, demanding to 
drink the milk of His mother’s breast, angrily 
threw His legs upward. (6) Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa was 
lying down underneath the handcart in one cor-
ner of the courtyard, and although His little legs 
were as soft as leaves, when He struck the cart 
with His legs, it turned over violently and col-
lapsed. The wheels separated from the axle, the 
hubs and spokes fell apart, and the pole of the 
handcart br oke. On the cart there were many lit-
tle utensils made of various metals, and all of 
them scattered hither and thither. (7) When 
mother Yaśodā and the other ladies who had as-
sembled for the utthāna festival, and all the 
men, headed by Nanda Mahārāja, saw th e won-
derful situation, they began to wonder how the 
handcart had collapsed by itself. They began to 
wander here and there, trying to find the cause, 
but were unable to do so. (8) The assembled 
cowherd men and ladies began to contemplate 
how this thing had happened. “Is it the work of 
some demon or evil planet?” they asked. At that time, the small children present asserted that 
the cart had been kicked apart by the baby 
Kṛṣṇa. As soon as the crying baby had kicked 
the cart’s wheel, the cart had collapsed. Th ere 
was no doubt about it. (9) The assembled gopīs 
and gopas, unaware that K ṛṣṇa is always unlim-
ited, could not believe that baby K ṛṣṇa had such 
inconceivable power. They could not believe 
the statements of the children, and therefore 
they neglected these statements as being child-
ish talk. (10)  

Thinking that some bad planet had attacked 
Kṛṣṇa, mother Yaśodā picked up the crying 
child and allowed Him to suck her breast. Then 
she called for experienced brāhma ṇas to chant 
Vedic hymns and perform an auspicious  ritual-
istic ceremony. (11) After the strong, stout 
cowherd men assembled the pots and parapher-
nalia on the handcart and set it up as before, the 
brāhma ṇas performed a ritualistic ceremony 
with a fire sacrifice to appease the bad planet, 
and then, with ric e grains, kuśa, water and curd, 
they worshiped the Supreme Lord. (12) When 
brāhma ṇas are free from envy, untruthfulness, 
unnecessary pride, grudges, disturbance by the 
opulence of others, and false prestige, their 
blessings never go in vain. Considering th is, 
Nanda Mahārāja soberly took K ṛṣṇa on his lap 
and invited such truthful brāhma ṇas to perform 
a ritualistic ceremony according to the holy 
hymns of the Sāma Veda, Ṛg Veda and Yajur 
Veda. Then, while the hymns were being 
chanted, he bathed the child with water mixed 
with pure herbs, and after performing a fire cer-
emony, he sumptuously fed all the brāhma ṇas 
with first -class grains and other food. (13 -15) 
Nanda Mahārāja, for the sake of the affluence 
of his own son K ṛṣṇa, gave the brāhma ṇas cows 
fully decora ted with garments, flower garlands 
and gold necklaces. These cows, fully qualified 
to give ample milk, were given to the 
brāhma ṇas in charity, and the brāhma ṇas ac-
cepted them and bestowed blessings upon the 
whole family, and especially upon K ṛṣṇa. (16) 
The brāhma ṇas, who were completely expert in 
chanting the Vedic hymns, were all yogīs fully 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

602 
 equipped with mystic powers. Whatever bless-
ings they spoke were certainly never fruitless. 
(17) 

One day, a year after K ṛṣṇa’s appearance, 
mother Yaśodā was patting he r son on her lap. 
But suddenly she felt the child to be heavier 
than a mountain peak, and she could no longer 
bear His weight. (18) Feeling the child to be as 
heavy as the entire universe and therefore being 
anxious, thinking that perhaps the child was be-
ing attacked by some other ghost or demon, the 
astonished mother Yaśodā put the child down 
on the ground and began to think of Nārāya ṇa. 
Foreseeing disturbances, she called for the 
brāhma ṇas to counteract this heaviness, and 
then she engaged in her other ho usehold affairs. 
She had no alternative than to remember the lo-
tus feet of Nārāya ṇa, for she could not under-
stand that K ṛṣṇa was the original source of eve-
rything. (19)  

While the child was sitting on the ground, a 
demon named T ṛṇāvarta, who was a servant of 
Kaṁsa’s, came there as a whirlwind, at 
Kaṁsa’s instigation, and very easily carried the 
child away into the air. (20) Covering the whole 
land of Gokula with particles of dust, that de-
mon, acting as a strong whirlwind, covered 
everyone’s vision and began  vibrating every-
where with a greatly fearful sound. (21) For a 
moment, the whole pasturing ground was over-
cast with dense darkness from the dust storm, 
and mother Yaśodā was unable to find her son 
where she had placed Him. (22) Because of the 
bits of sand thrown about by T ṛṇāvarta, people 
could not see themselves or anyone else, and 
thus they were illusioned and disturbed. (23) 
Because of the dust storm stirred up by the 
strong whirlwind, mother Yaśodā could find no 
trace of her son, nor could she understan d why. 
Thus she fell down on the ground like a cow 
who has lost her calf and began to lament very 
pitifully. (24)  

When the force of the dust storm and the 
winds subsided, Yaśodā’s friends, the other go-
pīs, approached mother Yaśodā, hearing her 
pitiful cry ing. Not seeing K ṛṣṇa present, they too felt very much aggrieved and joined mother 
Yaśodā in crying, their eyes full of tears. (25)  

Having assumed the form of a forceful 
whirlwind, the demon T ṛṇāvarta took K ṛṣṇa 
very high in the sky, but when K ṛṣṇa became  
heavier than the demon, the demon had to stop 
his force and could go no further. (26)  

Because of K ṛṣṇa’s weight, T ṛṇāvarta con-
sidered Him to be like a great mountain or a 
hunk of iron. But because K ṛṣṇa had caught the 
demon’s neck, the demon was unable t o throw 
Him off. He therefore thought of the child as 
wonderful, since he could neither bear the child 
nor cast aside the burden. (27) With K ṛṣṇa 
grasping him by the throat, T ṛṇāvarta choked, 
unable to make even a sound or even to move 
his hands and legs. His eyes popping out, the 
demon lost his life and fell, along with the little 
boy, down to the ground of Vraja. (28) While 
the gopīs who had gathered were crying for 
Kṛṣṇa, the demon fell from the sky onto a big 
slab of stone, his limbs dislocated, as if h e had 
been pierced by the arrow of Lord Śiva like 
Tripurāsura. (29) The gopīs immediately 
picked K ṛṣṇa up from the chest of the demon 
and delivered Him, free from all inauspicious-
ness, to mother Yaśodā. Because the child, alt-
hough taken into the sky by the  demon, was un-
hurt and now free from all danger and misfor-
tune, the gopīs and cowherd men, headed by 
Nanda Mahārāja, were extremely happy. (30) It 
is most astonishing that although this innocent 
child was taken away by the Rāk ṣasa to be 
eaten, He has retur ned without having been 
killed or even injured. Because this demon was 
envious, cruel and sinful, he has been killed for 
his own sinful activities. This is the law of na-
ture. An innocent devotee is always protected 
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, an d a 
sinful person is always vanquished for his sin-
ful life. (31) Nanda Mahārāja and the others 
said: We must previously have performed aus-
terities for a very long time, worshiped the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, performed pi-
ous activities for public lif e, constructing pub-
lic roads and wells, and also given charity, as a 
result of which this boy, although faced with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

603 
 death, has returned to give happiness to His rel-
atives. (32) Having seen all these incidents in 
Bṛhadvana, Nanda Mahārāja became more and 
more astonished, and he remembered the words 
spoken to him by Vasudeva in Mathurā. (33)  

One day, mother Yaśodā, having taken 
Kṛṣṇa up and placed Him on her lap, was feed-
ing Him milk from her breast with maternal af-
fection. The milk was flowing from her breas t, 
and the child was drinking it. (34) O King 
Parīk ṣit, when the child K ṛṣṇa was almost fin-
ished drinking His mother’s milk and mother 
Yaśodā was touching Him and looking at His 
beautiful, brilliantly smiling face, the baby 
yawned, and mother Yaśodā saw in  His mouth 
the whole sky, the higher planetary system and 
the earth, the luminaries in all directions, the 
sun, the moon, fire, air, the seas, islands, moun-
tains, rivers, forests, and all kinds of living en-
tities, moving and nonmoving. (35 -36) When 
mother Yaśodā saw the whole universe within 
the mouth of her child, her heart began to throb, 
and in astonishment she wanted to close her 
restless eyes. (37)  

SB 10.8: Lord K ṛṣṇa Shows the Universal 
Form Within His Mouth  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit, the priest of the Yadu dynasty, namely 
Garga Muni, who was highly elevated in aus-
terity and penance, was then inspired by 
Vasudeva to go see Nanda Mahārāja at his 
home. (1) When Nanda Mahārāja saw Garga 
Muni present at his home, Nanda was so 
pleased tha t he stood up to receive him with 
folded hands. Although seeing Garga Muni 
with his eyes, Nanda Mahārāja could appreci-
ate that Garga Muni was adhok ṣaja; that is, he 
was not an ordinary person seen by material 
senses. (2) When Garga Muni had been 
properly r eceived as a guest and was very com-
fortably seated, Nanda Mahārāja submitted 
with gentle and submissive words: Dear sir, be-
cause you are a devotee, you are full in every-
thing. Yet my duty is to serve you. Kindly order 
me. What can I do for you? (3) O my lo rd, O 
great devotee, persons like you move from one place to another not for their own interests but 
for the sake of poor -hearted g ṛhasthas [house-
holders]. Otherwise they have no interest in go-
ing from one place to another. (4) O great 
saintly person, you have compiled the astrolog-
ical knowledge by which one can understand 
past and present unseen things. By the strength 
of this knowledge, any human being can under-
stand what he has done in his past life and how 
it affects his present life. This is known to y ou. 
(5) My lord, you are the best of the brāhma ṇas, 
especially because you are fully aware of the 
jyotiḥ-śāstra, the astrological science. There-
fore, you are naturally the spiritual master of 
every human being. This being so, since you 
have kindly come to my house, kindly execute 
the reformatory activities for my two sons. (6)  

Garga Muni said:  My dear Nanda 
Mahārāja, I am the priestly guide of the Yadu 
dynasty. This is known everywhere. Therefore, 
if I perform the purificatory process for your 
sons, Ka ṁsa will consider Them the sons of 
Devakī. (7) Ka ṁsa is both a great diplomat and 
a very sinful man. Therefore, having heard 
from Yoga -māyā, the daughter of Devakī, that 
the child who will kill him has already been 
born somewhere else, having heard that the 
eighth pregnancy of Devakī could not bring 
forth a female child, and having understood 
your friendship with Vasudeva, Ka ṁsa, upon 
hearing that the purificatory process has been 
performed by me, the priest of the Yadu dyn-
asty, may certainly consider all these  points and 
suspect that K ṛṣṇa is the son of Devakī and 
Vasudeva. Then he might take steps to kill 
Kṛṣṇa. That would be a catastrophe. (8 -9) 

Nanda Mahārāja said:  My dear great sage, 
if you think that your performing this process 
of purification will make Kaṁsa suspicious, 
then secretly chant the Vedic hymns and per-
form the purifying process of second birth here 
in the cow shed of my house, without the 
knowledge of anyone else, even my relatives, 
for this process of purification is essential. (10)  

Śukadeva  Gosvāmī continued:  Having 
thus been especially requested by Nanda 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

604 
 Mahārāja to do that which he already desired to 
do, Garga Muni performed the name -giving 
ceremony for K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma in a solitary 
place. (11)  

Garga Muni said:  This child, the son of R o-
hiṇī, will give all happiness to His relatives and 
friends by His transcendental qualities. There-
fore, He will be known as Rāma. And because 
He will manifest extraordinary bodily strength, 
He will also be known as Bala. Moreover, be-
cause He unites two fam iliesVasudeva’s family 
and the family of Nanda MahārājaHe will be 
known as Sa ṅkarṣaṇa. (12) Your son K ṛṣṇa ap-
pears as an incarnation in every millennium. In 
the past, He assumed three different col-
orswhite, red and yellowand now He has ap-
peared in a blacki sh color. [In another Dvāpara -
yuga, He appeared (as Lord Rāmacandra) in the 
color of śuka, a parrot. All such incarnations 
have now assembled in K ṛṣṇa.] (13) For many 
reasons, this beautiful son of yours sometimes 
appeared previously as the son of Vasudeva . 
Therefore, those who are learned sometimes 
call this child Vāsudeva. (14) For this son of 
yours there are many forms and names accord-
ing to His transcendental qualities and activi-
ties. These are known to me, but people in gen-
eral do not understand them. (15) To increase 
the transcendental bliss of the cowherd men of 
Gokula, this child will always act auspiciously 
for you. And by His grace only, you will sur-
pass all difficulties. (16) O Nanda Mahārāja, as 
recorded in history, when there was an irregu-
lar, i ncapable government, Indra having been 
dethroned, and people were being harassed and 
disturbed by thieves, this child appeared in or-
der to protect the people and enable them to 
flourish, and He curbed the rogues and thieves. 
(17) Demons [asuras] cannot har m the demi-
gods, who always have Lord Vi ṣṇu on their 
side. Similarly, any person or group attached to 
Kṛṣṇa is extremely fortunate. Because such 
persons are very much affectionate toward 
Kṛṣṇa, they cannot be defeated by demons like 
the associates of Ka ṁsa [or by the internal en-
emies, the senses]. (18) In conclusion, there-
fore, O Nanda Mahārāja, this child of yours is 
as good as Nārāya ṇa. In His transcendental qualities, opulence, name, fame and influence, 
He is exactly like Nārāya ṇa. You should all 
raise th is child very carefully and cautiously. 
(19) Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After 
Garga Muni, having instructed Nanda 
Mahārāja about K ṛṣṇa, departed for his own 
home, Nanda Mahārāja was very pleased and 
considered himself full of all good fortune. (20)  

After a short time passed, both brothers, 
Rāma and K ṛṣṇa, began to crawl on the ground 
of Vraja with the strength of Their hands and 
knees and thus enjoy Their childhood play. (21)  

When K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, with the 
strength of Their legs, crawled in the muddy 
places created in Vraja by cow dung and cow 
urine, Their crawling resembled the crawling of 
serpents, and the sound of Their ankle bells was 
very charming. Very much pleased by the 
sound of other people’s ankle bells, They used 
to follow these people  as if going to Their 
mothers, but when They saw that these were 
other people, They became afraid and returned 
to Their real mothers, Yaśodā and Rohi ṇī. (22) 
Dressed with muddy earth mixed with cow 
dung and cow urine, the babies looked very 
beautiful, and when They went to Their moth-
ers, both Yaśodā and Rohi ṇī picked Them up 
with great affection, embraced Them and al-
lowed Them to suck the milk flowing from 
their breasts. While sucking the breast, the ba-
bies smiled, and Their small teeth were visible. 
Their mothers, upon seeing those beautiful 
teeth, enjoyed great transcendental bliss. (23) 
Within the house of Nanda Mahārāja, the cow-
herd ladies would enjoy seeing the pastimes of 
the babies Rāma and K ṛṣṇa. The babies would 
catch the ends of the calves’ tails, and the 
calves would drag Them here and there. When 
the ladies saw these pastimes, they certainly 
stopped their household activities and laughed 
and enjoyed the incidents. (24) When mother 
Yaśodā and Rohi ṇī were unable to protect the 
babies from calamities  threatened by horned 
cows, by fire, by animals with claws and teeth 
such as monkeys, dogs and cats, and by thorns, 
swords and other weapons on the ground, they 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

605 
 were always in anxiety, and their household en-
gagements were disturbed. At that time, they 
were  fully equipoised in the transcendental ec-
stasy known as the distress of material affec-
tion, for this was aroused within their minds. 
(25) 

O King Parīk ṣit, within a very short time 
both Rāma and K ṛṣṇa began to walk very easily 
in Gokula on Their legs, by Their own strength, 
without the need to crawl. (26) Thereafter, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, along with Balarāma, began to play with 
the other children of the cowherd men, thus 
awakening the transcendental bliss of the cow-
herd women. (27) Observing the very attractive 
childish restlessness of K ṛṣṇa, all the gopīs in 
the neighborhood, to hear about K ṛṣṇa’s activ-
ities again and again, would approach mother 
Yaśodā and speak to her as follows. (28)  

“Our dear friend Yaśodā, your son some-
times comes to our houses before the milk ing 
of the cows and releases the calves, and when 
the master of the house becomes angry, your 
son merely smiles. Sometimes He devises some 
process by which He steals palatable curd, but-
ter and milk, which He then eats and drinks. 
When the monkeys assemble,  He divides it 
with them, and when the monkeys have their 
bellies so full that they won’t take more, He 
breaks the pots. Sometimes, if He gets no op-
portunity to steal butter or milk from a house, 
He will be angry at the householders, and for 
His revenge He  will agitate the small children 
by pinching them. Then, when the children 
begin crying, K ṛṣṇa will go away. (29) “When 
the milk and curd are kept high on a swing 
hanging from the ceiling and K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma cannot reach it, They arrange to reach 
it by piling up various planks and turning up-
side down the mortar for grinding spices. Being 
quite aware of the contents of a pot, They poke 
holes in it. While the elderly gopīs go about 
their household affairs, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
sometimes go into a dark room, brightening the 
place with the valuable jewels and ornaments 
on Their bodies and taking advantage of this 
light by stealing. (30) “When K ṛṣṇa is caught 
in His naughty activities, the master of the house will say to Him,  ‘Oh, You are a thief,’ 
and artificia lly express anger at K ṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa 
will then reply,  ‘I am not a thief. You are a 
thief.’ Sometimes, being angry, K ṛṣṇa passes 
urine and stool in a neat, clean place in our 
houses. But now, our dear friend Yaśodā, this 
expert thief is sitting before you like  a very 
good boy.” Sometimes all the gopīs would look 
at Kṛṣṇa sitting there, His eyes fearful so that 
His mother would not chastise Him, and when 
they saw K ṛṣṇa’s beautiful face, instead of 
chastising Him they would simply look upon 
His face and enjoy tra nscendental bliss. Mother 
Yaśodā would mildly smile at all this fun, and 
she would not want to chastise her blessed tran-
scendental child. (31)  

One day while K ṛṣṇa was playing with His 
small playmates, including Balarāma and other 
sons of the gopas, all Hi s friends came together 
and lodged a complaint to mother Yaśodā. 
“Mother,” they submitted, “K ṛṣṇa has eaten 
earth.” (32) Upon hearing this from K ṛṣṇa’s 
playmates, mother Yaśodā, who was always 
full of anxiety over K ṛṣṇa’s welfare, picked 
Kṛṣṇa up with her hands to look into His mouth 
and chastise Him. Her eyes fearful, she spoke 
to her son as follows. (33) Dear K ṛṣṇa, why are 
You so restless that You have eaten dirt in a 
solitary place? This complaint has been lodged 
against You by all Your playmates, inclu ding 
Your elder brother, Balarāma. How is this? (34)  

Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa replied:  My dear mother, I 
have never eaten dirt. All My friends complain-
ing against Me are liars. If you think they are 
being truthful, you can directly look into My 
mouth and examine it . (35) Mother Yaśodā 
challenged K ṛṣṇa, “If You have not eaten earth, 
then open Your mouth wide.” When challenged 
by His mother in this way, K ṛṣṇa, the son of 
Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā, to exhibit pas-
times like a human child, opened His mouth. 
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa, who is full of all opulences, did not dis-
turb His mother’s parental affection, His opu-
lence was automatically displayed, for K ṛṣṇa’s 
opulence is never lost at any stage, but is man-
ifest at the proper time. (36)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

606 

When Kṛṣṇa opened His mouth wide by the 
order of mother Yaśodā, she saw within His 
mouth all moving and nonmoving entities, 
outer space, and all directions, along with 
mountains, islands, oceans, the surface of the 
earth, the blowing wind, fire, the moon and th e 
stars. She saw the planetary systems, water, 
light, air, sky, and creation by transformation of 
ahaṅkāra. She also saw the senses, the mind, 
sense perception, and the three qualities, good-
ness, passion and ignorance. She saw the time 
allotted for the liv ing entities, she saw natural 
instinct and the reactions of karma, and she saw 
desires and different varieties of bodies, mov-
ing and nonmoving. Seeing all these aspects of 
the cosmic manifestation, along with herself 
and V ṛndāvana -dhāma, she became doubtfu l 
and fearful of her son’s nature. (37 -39) [Mother 
Yaśodā began to argue within herself:] Is this a 
dream, or is it an illusory creation by the exter-
nal energy? Has this been manifested by my 
own intelligence, or is it some mystic power of 
my child? (40) T herefore, let me surrender unto 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offer 
my obeisances unto Him, who is beyond the 
conception of human speculation, the mind, ac-
tivities, words and arguments, who is the origi-
nal cause of this cosmic manifestation, by 
whom the entire cosmos is maintained, and by 
whom we can conceive of its existence. Let me 
simply offer my obeisances, for He is beyond 
my contemplation, speculation and meditation. 
He is beyond all of my material activities. (41) 
It is by the influence of t he Supreme Lord’s 
māyā that I am wrongly thinking that Nanda 
Mahārāja is my husband, that K ṛṣṇa is my son, 
and that because I am the queen of Nanda 
Mahārāja, all the wealth of cows and calves are 
my possessions and all the cowherd men and 
their wives are m y subjects. Actually, I also am 
eternally subordinate to the Supreme Lord. He 
is my ultimate shelter. (42) Mother Yaśodā, by 
the grace of the Lord, could understand the real 
truth. But then again, the supreme master, by 
the influence of the internal potenc y, Yoga -
māyā, inspired her to become absorbed in in-
tense maternal affection for her son. (43) Im-
mediately forgetting Yoga -māyā’s illusion that Kṛṣṇa had shown the universal form within His 
mouth, mother Yaśodā took her son on her lap 
as before, feeling inc reased affection in her 
heart for her transcendental child. (44) The glo-
ries of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are 
studied through the three Vedas, the Upani ṣads, 
the literature of Sā ṅkhya -yoga, and other 
Vaiṣṇava literature, yet mother Yaśodā consid-
ered that Supreme Person her ordinary child. 
(45) 

Having heard of the great fortune of mother 
Yaśodā, Parīk ṣit Mahārāja inquired from 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī: O learned brāhma ṇa, 
mother Yaśodā’s breast milk was sucked by the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. What pa st 
auspicious activities did she and Nanda 
Mahārāja perform to achieve such perfection in 
ecstatic love? (46) Although K ṛṣṇa was so 
pleased with Vasudeva and Devakī that He de-
scended as their son, they could not enjoy 
Kṛṣṇa’s magnanimous childhood pastimes , 
which are so great that simply chanting about 
them vanquishes the contamination of the ma-
terial world. Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā, 
however, enjoyed these pastimes fully, and 
therefore their position is always better than 
that of Vasudeva and Devakī. (47)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  To follow the or-
ders of Lord Brahmā, Dro ṇa, the best of the Va-
sus, along with his wife, Dharā, spoke to Lord 
Brahmā in this way. (48) Dro ṇa and Dharā said: 
Please permit us to be born on the planet earth 
so that after our appearance , the Supreme Lord, 
the Personality of Godhead, the supreme con-
troller and master of all planets, will also ap-
pear and spread devotional service, the ultimate 
goal of life, so that those born in this material 
world may very easily be delivered from the 
miserable condition of materialistic life by ac-
cepting this devotional service. (49) When 
Brahmā said, “Yes, let it be so,” the most for-
tune Dro ṇa, who was equal to Bhagavān, ap-
peared in Vrajapura, V ṛndāvana, as the most fa-
mous Nanda Mahārāja, and his wife, D harā, ap-
peared as mother Yaśodā. (50) Thereafter, O 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, best of the Bhāratas, when 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead became 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

607 
 the son of Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā, they 
maintained continuous, unswerving devotional 
love in parental affection. And in their associa-
tion, all the other inhabitants of V ṛndāvana, the 
gopas and gopīs, developed the culture of 
kṛṣṇa-bhakti. (51) Thus the Supreme Personal-
ity, K ṛṣṇa, along with Balarāma, lived in Vra-
jabhūmi, V ṛndāvana, just to substantiate the 
benedictio n of Brahmā. By exhibiting different 
pastimes in His childhood, He increased the 
transcendental pleasure of Nanda and the other 
inhabitants of V ṛndāvana. (52)  

SB 10.9: Mother Yaśodā Binds Lord 
Kṛṣṇa 

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  One 
day when mother Yaśo dā saw that all the maid-
servants were engaged in other household af-
fairs, she personally began to churn the yogurt. 
While churning, she remembered the childish 
activities of K ṛṣṇa, and in her own way she 
composed songs and enjoyed singing to herself 
about all those activities. (1 -2) 

Dressed in a saffron -yellow sari, with a belt 
tied about her full hips, mother Yaśodā pulled 
on the churning rope, laboring considerably, 
her bangles and earrings moving and vibrating 
and her whole body shaking. Because of her in-
tense love for her child, her breasts were wet 
with milk. Her face, with its very beautiful eye-
brows, was wet with perspiration, and mālatī 
flowers were falling from her hair. (3)  

While mother Yaśodā was churning butter, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, desiring to drink th e milk of her 
breast, appeared before her, and in order to in-
crease her transcendental pleasure, He caught 
hold of the churning rod and began to prevent 
her from churning. (4) Mother Yaśodā then em-
braced K ṛṣṇa, allowed Him to sit down on her 
lap, and began  to look upon the face of the Lord 
with great love and affection. Because of her 
intense affection, milk was flowing from her 
breast. But when she saw that the milk pan on 
the oven was boiling over, she immediately left 
her son to take care of the overflow ing milk, 
although the child was not yet fully satisfied with drinking the milk of His mother’s breast. 
(5) Being very angry and biting His reddish lips 
with His teeth, K ṛṣṇa, with false tears in His 
eyes, broke the container of yogurt with a piece 
of ston e. Then He entered a room and began to 
eat the freshly churned butter in a solitary 
place. (6)  

Mother Yaśodā, after taking down the hot 
milk from the oven, returned to the churning 
spot, and when she saw that the container of yo-
gurt was broken and that K ṛṣṇa was not present, 
she concluded that the breaking of the pot was 
the work of K ṛṣṇa. (7) K ṛṣṇa, at that time, was 
sitting on an upside -down wooden mortar for 
grinding spices and was distributing milk prep-
arations such as yogurt and butter to the mon-
keys as He liked. Because of having stolen, He 
was looking all around with great anxiety, sus-
pecting that He might be chastised by His 
mother. Mother Yaśodā, upon seeing Him, very 
cautiously approached Him from behind. (8) 
When Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa saw His mother, st ick in 
hand, He very quickly got down from the top of 
the mortar and began to flee as if very much 
afraid. Although yogīs try to capture Him as 
Paramātmā by meditation, desiring to enter into 
the effulgence of the Lord with great austerities 
and penances, they fail to reach Him. But 
mother Yaśodā, thinking that same Personality 
of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, to be her son, began fol-
lowing K ṛṣṇa to catch Him. (9) While follow-
ing K ṛṣṇa, mother Yaśodā, her thin waist over-
burdened by her heavy breasts, naturally had to 
reduce her speed. Because of following K ṛṣṇa 
very swiftly, her hair became loose, and the 
flowers in her hair were falling after her. Yet 
she did not fail to capture her son, K ṛṣṇa. (10) 
When caught by mother Yaśodā, K ṛṣṇa became 
more and more afraid and admi tted to being an 
offender. As she looked upon Him, she saw that 
He was crying, His tears mixing with the black 
ointment around His eyes, and as He rubbed 
His eyes with His hands, He smeared the oint-
ment all over His face. Mother Yaśodā, catch-
ing her beauti ful son by the hand, mildly began 
to chastise Him. (11)  
Mother Yaśodā was always overwhelmed 
by intense love for K ṛṣṇa, not knowing who 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

608 
 Kṛṣṇa was or how powerful He was. Because 
of maternal affection for K ṛṣṇa, she never even 
cared to know who He was. Ther efore, when 
she saw that her son had become excessively 
afraid, she threw the stick away and desired to 
bind Him so that He would not commit any fur-
ther naughty activities. (12)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no 
beginning and no end, no exterior a nd no inte-
rior, no front and no rear. In other words, He is 
all-pervading. Because He is not under the in-
fluence of the element of time, for Him there is 
no difference between past, present and future; 
He exists in His own transcendental form at all 
times.  Being absolute, beyond relativity, He is 
free from distinctions between cause and effect, 
although He is the cause and effect of every-
thing. That unmanifested person, who is be-
yond the perception of the senses, had now ap-
peared as a human child, and mothe r Yaśodā, 
considering Him her own ordinary child, bound 
Him to the wooden mortar with a rope. (13 -14) 
When mother Yaśodā was trying to bind the 
offending child, she saw that the binding rope 
was short by a distance the width of two fin-
gers. Thus she brough t another rope to join to 
it. (15)  
This new rope also was short by a measure-
ment of two fingers, and when another rope 
was joined to it, it was still two fingers too 
short. As many ropes as she joined, all of them 
failed; their shortness could not be overc ome. 
(16) Thus mother Yaśodā joined whatever 
ropes were available in the household, but still 
she failed in her attempt to bind K ṛṣṇa. Mother 
Yaśodā’s friends, the elderly gopīs in the neigh-
borhood, were smiling and enjoying the fun. 
Similarly, mother Yaśo dā, although laboring in 
that way, was also smiling. All of them were 
struck with wonder. (17) Because of mother 
Yaśodā’s hard labor, her whole body became 
covered with perspiration, and the flowers and 
comb were falling from her hair. When child 
Kṛṣṇa saw  His mother thus fatigued, He be-
came merciful to her and agreed to be bound. 
(18) O Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, this entire universe, 
with its great, exalted demigods like Lord Śiva, Lord Brahmā and Lord Indra, is under the con-
trol of the Supreme Personality of God head. 
Yet the Supreme Lord has one transcendental 
attribute: He comes under the control of His 
devotees. This was now exhibited by K ṛṣṇa in 
this pastime. (19)  

Neither Lord Brahmā, nor Lord Śiva, nor 
even the goddess of fortune, who is always the 
better ha lf of the Supreme Lord, can obtain 
from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
deliverer from this material world, such mercy 
as received by mother Yaśodā. (20) The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, the son 
of mother Yaśodā, is accessible to devotees  en-
gaged in spontaneous loving service, but He is 
not as easily accessible to mental speculators, 
to those striving for self -realization by severe 
austerities and penances, or to those who con-
sider the body the same as the self. (21)  

While mother Yaśodā w as very busy with 
household affairs, the Supreme Lord, K ṛṣṇa, 
observed twin trees known as yamala -arjuna, 
which in a former millennium had been the 
demigod sons of Kuvera. (22) In their former 
birth, these two sons, known as Nalakūvara and 
Maṇigrīva, were extremely opulent and fortu-
nate. But because of pride and false prestige, 
they did not care about anyone, and thus 
Nārada Muni cursed them to become trees. (23)  

SB 10.10: The Deliverance of the Yamala -
arjuna Trees  

King Parīk ṣit inquired from Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī:  O great and powerful saint, what 
was the cause of Nalakūvara’s and Ma ṇigrīva’s 
having been cursed by Nārada Muni? What did 
they do that was so abominable that even 
Nārada, the great sage, became angry at them? 
Kindly describe this to me. (1)  

Śukadev a Gosvāmī said:  O King Parīk ṣit, 
because the two sons of Kuvera had been ele-
vated to the association of Lord Śiva, of which 
they were very much proud, they were allowed 
to wander in a garden attached to Kailāsa Hill, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

609 
 on the bank of the Mandākinī River. Tak ing ad-
vantage of this, they used to drink a kind of liq-
uor called Vāru ṇī. Accompanied by women 
singing after them, they would wander in that 
garden of flowers, their eyes always rolling in 
intoxication. (2 -3) 

Within the waters of the Mandākinī Ganges, 
which were crowded with gardens of lotus 
flowers, the two sons of Kuvera would enjoy 
young girls, just like two male elephants enjoy-
ing in the water with female elephants. (4)  

O Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, by some auspicious 
opportunity for the two boys, the great sa int 
Devar ṣi Nārada once appeared there by chance. 
Seeing them intoxicated, with rolling eyes, he 
could understand their situation. (5) Upon see-
ing Nārada, the naked young girls of the demi-
gods were very much ashamed. Afraid of being 
cursed, they covered th eir bodies with their gar-
ments. But the two sons of Kuvera did not do 
so; instead, not caring about Nārada, they re-
mained naked. (6) Seeing the two sons of the 
demigods naked and intoxicated by opulence 
and false prestige, Devar ṣi Nārada, in order to 
show them special mercy, desired to give them 
a special curse. Thus he spoke as follows. (7)  

Nārada Muni said:  Among all the attrac-
tions of material enjoyment, the attraction of 
riches bewilders one’s intelligence more than 
having beautiful bodily features, ta king birth in 
an aristocratic family, and being learned. When 
one is uneducated but falsely puffed up by 
wealth, the result is that one engages his wealth 
in enjoying wine, women and gambling. (8) 
Unable to control their senses, rascals who are 
falsely pro ud of their riches or their birth in 
aristocratic families are so cruel that to main-
tain their perishable bodies, which they think 
will never grow old or die, they kill poor ani-
mals without mercy. Sometimes they kill ani-
mals merely to enjoy an excursion. ( 9) While 
living one may be proud of one’s body, think-
ing oneself a very big man, minister, president 
or even demigod, but whatever one may be, af-
ter death this body will turn either into worms, 
into stool or into ashes. If one kills poor animals to satisfy  the temporary whims of this body, 
one does not know that he will suffer in his next 
birth, for such a sinful miscreant must go to hell 
and suffer the results of his actions. (10) While 
alive, does this body belong to its employer, to 
the self, to the fath er, the mother, or the 
mother’s father? Does it belong to the person 
who takes it away by force, to the slave master 
who purchases it, or to the sons who burn it in 
the fire? Or, if the body is not burned, does it 
belong to the dogs that eat it? Among the many 
possible claimants, who is the rightful claim-
ant? Not to ascertain this but instead to main-
tain the body by sinful activities is not good. 
(11) This body, after all, is produced by the un-
manifested nature and again annihilated and 
merged in the natura l elements. Therefore, it is 
the common property of everyone. Under the 
circumstances, who but a rascal claims this 
property as his own and while maintaining it 
commits such sinful activities as killing ani-
mals just to satisfy his whims? Unless one is a 
rascal, one cannot commit such sinful activi-
ties. (12) Atheistic fools and rascals who are 
very much proud of wealth fail to see things as 
they are. Therefore, returning them to poverty 
is the proper ointment for their eyes so they 
may see things as they are . At least a poverty -
stricken man can realize how painful poverty is, 
and therefore he will not want others to be in a 
painful condition like his own. (13) By seeing 
their faces, one whose body has been pricked 
by pins can understand the pain of others who  
are pinpricked. Realizing that this pain is the 
same for everyone, he does not want others to 
suffer in this way. But one who has never been 
pricked by pins cannot understand this pain. 
(14) A poverty -stricken man must automati-
cally undergo austerities an d penances because 
he does not have the wealth to possess any-
thing. Thus his false prestige is vanquished. Al-
ways in need of food, shelter and clothing, he 
must be satisfied with what is obtained by the 
mercy of providence. Undergoing such com-
pulsory auste rities is good for him because this 
purifies him and completely frees him from 
false ego. (15) Always hungry, longing for suf-
ficient food, a poverty -stricken man gradually 
becomes weaker and weaker. Having no extra 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

610 
 potency, his senses are automatically pac ified. 
A poverty -stricken man, therefore, is unable to 
perform harmful, envious activities. In other 
words, such a man automatically gains the re-
sults of the austerities and penances adopted 
voluntarily by saintly persons. (16)  

Saintly persons may freely associate with 
those who are poverty -stricken, but not with 
those who are rich. A poverty -stricken man, by 
association with saintly persons, very soon be-
comes uninterested in material desires, and the 
dirty things within the core of his heart are 
cleansed away. (17) Saintly persons [sādhus] 
think of K ṛṣṇa twenty -four hours a day. They 
have no other interest. Why should people ne-
glect the association of such exalted spiritual 
personalities and try to associate with material-
ists, taking shelter of nondevotees , most of 
whom are proud and rich? (18) Therefore, since 
these two persons, drunk with the liquor named 
Vāru ṇī, or Mādhvī, and unable to control their 
senses, have been blinded by the pride of celes-
tial opulence and have become attached to 
women, I shall r elieve them of their false pres-
tige. (19) These two young men, Nalakūvara 
and Ma ṇigrīva, are by fortune the sons of the 
great demigod Kuvera, but because of false 
prestige and madness after drinking liquor, they 
are so fallen that they are naked but cannot  un-
derstand that they are. Therefore, because they 
are living like trees(for trees are naked but are 
not conscious), these two young men should re-
ceive the bodies of trees. This will be proper 
punishment. Nonetheless, after they become 
trees and until they  are released, by my mercy 
they will have remembrance of their past sinful 
activities. Moreover, by my special favor, after 
the expiry of one hundred years by the meas-
urement of the demigods, they will be able to 
see the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Vāsudeva, face to face, and thus revive their 
real position as devotees. (20 -22) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Having 
thus spoken, the great saint Devar ṣi Nārada re-
turned to his āśrama, known as Nārāya ṇa-
āśrama, and Nalakūvara and Ma ṇigrīva became twin arjuna trees. (23) The Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, to fulfill the truth-
fulness of the words of the greatest devotee, 
Nārada, slowly went to that spot where the twin 
arjuna trees were standing. (24)  

“Although these two young men are the sons 
of the  very rich Kuvera and I have nothing to 
do with them, Devar ṣi Nārada is My very dear 
and affectionate devotee, and therefore because 
he wanted Me to come face to face with them, 
I must do so for their deliverance.” (25) Having 
thus spoken, K ṛṣṇa soon enter ed between the 
two arjuna trees, and thus the big mortar to 
which He was bound turned crosswise and 
stuck between them. (26) By dragging behind 
Him with great force the wooden mortar tied to 
His belly, the boy K ṛṣṇa uprooted the two trees. 
By the great str ength of the Supreme Person, 
the two trees, with their trunks, leaves and 
branches, trembled severely and fell to the 
ground with a great crash. (27) Thereafter, in 
that very place where the two arjuna trees had 
fallen, two great, perfect personalities, wh o ap-
peared like fire personified, came out of the two 
trees. The effulgence of their beauty illuminat-
ing all directions, with bowed heads they of-
fered obeisances to K ṛṣṇa, and with hands 
folded they spoke the following words. (28)  

O Lord K ṛṣṇa, Lord K ṛṣṇa, Your opulent 
mysticism is inconceivable. You are the su-
preme, original person, the cause of all causes, 
immediate and remote, and You are beyond this 
material creation. Learned brāhma ṇas know 
[on the basis of the Vedic statement sarva ṁ 
khalv ida ṁ brahma]  that You are everything 
and that this cosmic manifestation, in its gross 
and subtle aspects, is Your form. (29) You are 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the con-
troller of everything. The body, life, ego and 
senses of every living entity are Your own se lf. 
You are the Supreme Person, Vi ṣṇu, the imper-
ishable controller. You are the time factor, the 
immediate cause, and You are material nature, 
consisting of the three modes passion, good-
ness and ignorance. You are the original cause 
of this material manife station. You are the Su-
persoul, and therefore You know everything 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

611 
 within the core of the heart of every living en-
tity. (30 -31) O Lord, You exist before the crea-
tion. Therefore, who, trapped by a body of ma-
terial qualities in this material world, can un-
derstand You? (32) O Lord, whose glories are 
covered by Your own energy, You are the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. You are 
Saṅkarṣaṇa, the origin of creation, and You are 
Vāsudeva, the origin of the caturvyūha. Be-
cause You are everything and are therefore th e 
Supreme Brahman, we simply offer our re-
spectful obeisances unto You. (33) Appearing 
in bodies like those of an ordinary fish, tortoise 
and hog, You exhibit activities impossible for 
such creatures to performextraordinary, incom-
parable, transcendental act ivities of unlimited 
power and strength. These bodies of Yours, 
therefore, are not made of material elements, 
but are incarnations of Your Supreme Person-
ality. You are the same Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who have now appeared, with full 
potency, for t he benefit of all living entities 
within this material world. (34 -35) 

O supremely auspicious, we offer our re-
spectful obeisances unto You, who are the su-
preme good. O most famous descendant and 
controller of the Yadu dynasty, O son of 
Vasudeva, O most pea ceful, let us offer our 
obeisances unto Your lotus feet. (36) O su-
preme form, we are always servants of Your 
servants, especially of Nārada Muni. Now give 
us permission to leave for our home. It is by the 
grace and mercy of Nārada Muni that we have 
been ab le to see You face to face. (37) Hence-
forward, may all our words describe Your pas-
times, may our ears engage in aural reception 
of Your glories, may our hands, legs and other 
senses engage in actions pleasing to You, and 
may our minds always think of Your lotus feet. 
May our heads offer our obeisances to every-
thing within this world, because all things are 
also Your different forms, and may our eyes see 
the forms of Vai ṣṇavas, who are nondifferent 
from You. (38)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  The two 
young de migods thus offered prayers to the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Godhead, is the master of 
all and was certainly Gokuleśvara, the master 
of Gokula, He was bound to the wooden mortar 
by the ropes of the gopīs, and therefore , smiling 
widely, He spoke to the sons of Kuvera the fol-
lowing words. (39)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  The great saint Nārada Muni is very mer-
ciful. By his curse, he showed the greatest favor 
to both of you, who were mad after material op-
ulence and who had thus become blind. Alt-
hough you fell from the higher planet Svar-
galoka and became trees, you were most fa-
vored by him. I knew of all these incidents from 
the very beginning. (40)  
When one is face to face with the sun, there 
is no longer dark ness for one’s eyes. Similarly, 
when one is face to face with a sādhu, a devo-
tee, who is fully determined and surrendered to 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one will 
no longer be subject to material bondage. (41) 
O Nalakūvara and Ma ṇigrīva, now you may  
both return home. Since you desire to be always 
absorbed in My devotional service, your desire 
to develop love and affection for Me will be 
fulfilled, and now you will never fall from that 
platform. (42)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead having spoken to the 
two demigods in this way, they circumambu-
lated the Lord, who was bound to the wooden 
mortar, and offered obeisances to Him. After 
taking the permission of Lord K ṛṣṇa, they re-
turned to their respective homes. (43)  

SB 10.11: The  Childhood Pastimes of 
Kṛṣṇa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  O 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, when the yamala -arjuna 
trees fell, all the cowherd men in the neighbor-
hood, hearing the fierce sound and fearing 
thunderbolts, went to the spot. (1) There they 
saw the fallen ya mala -arjuna trees on the 
ground, but they were bewildered because even 
though they could directly perceive that the 
trees had fallen, they could not trace out the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

612 
 cause for their having done so. (2) K ṛṣṇa was 
bound by the rope to the ulūkhala, the mortar, 
which He was dragging. But how could He 
have pulled down the trees? Who had actually 
done it? Where was the source for this incident? 
Considering all these astounding things, the 
cowherd men were doubtful and bewildered. 
(3) 

Then all the cowherd boys said : It is K ṛṣṇa 
who has done this. When He was in between 
the two trees, the mortar fell crosswise. K ṛṣṇa 
dragged the mortar, and the two trees fell down. 
After that, two beautiful men came out of the 
trees. We have seen this with our own eyes. (4) 
Because o f intense paternal affection, the cow-
herd men, headed by Nanda, could not believe 
that K ṛṣṇa could have uprooted the trees in such 
a wonderful way. Therefore, they could not put 
their faith in the words of the boys. Some of the 
men, however, were in doubt.  “Since K ṛṣṇa 
was predicted to equal Nārāya ṇa,” they 
thought, “it might be that He could have done 
it.” (5) When Nanda Mahārāja saw his own son 
bound with ropes to the wooden mortar and 
dragging it, he smiled and released K ṛṣṇa from 
His bonds. (6)  

The gop īs would say, “If You dance, my 
dear K ṛṣṇa, then I shall give You half a sweet-
meat.” By saying these words or by clapping 
their hands, all the gopīs encouraged K ṛṣṇa in 
different ways. At such times, although He was 
the supremely powerful Personality of Go d-
head, He would smile and dance according to 
their desire, as if He were a wooden doll in their 
hands. Sometimes He would sing very loudly, 
at their bidding. In this way, K ṛṣṇa came com-
pletely under the control of the gopīs. (7) 
Sometimes mother Yaśodā and  her gopī friends 
would tell K ṛṣṇa, “Bring this article” or “Bring 
that article.” Sometimes they would order Him 
to bring a wooden plank, wooden shoes or a 
wooden measuring pot, and K ṛṣṇa, when thus 
ordered by the mothers, would try to bring 
them. Sometime s, however, as if unable to raise 
these things, He would touch them and stand 
there. Just to invite the pleasure of His relatives, 
He would strike His body with His arms to show that He had sufficient strength. (8) To 
pure devotees throughout the world who  could 
understand His activities, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, exhibited how much 
He can be subdued by His devotees, His serv-
ants. In this way He increased the pleasure of 
the Vrajavāsīs by His childhood activities. (9)  

Once a woman selling fruit was calling, “O 
inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi, if you want to pur-
chase some fruits, come here!” Upon hearing 
this, K ṛṣṇa immediately took some grains and 
went to barter as if He needed some fruits. (10)  

While K ṛṣṇa was going to the fruit vendor 
very has tily, most of the grains He was holding 
fell. Nonetheless, the fruit vendor filled 
Kṛṣṇa’s hands with fruits, and her fruit basket 
was immediately filled with jewels and gold. 
(11) 

Once, after the uprooting of the yamala -ar-
juna trees, Rohi ṇīdevī went to c all Rāma and 
Kṛṣṇa, who had both gone to the riverside and 
were playing with the other boys with deep at-
tention. (12) Because of being too attached to 
playing with the other boys, K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma did not return upon being called by 
Rohi ṇī. Therefore, Ro hiṇī sent mother Yaśodā 
to call Them back, because mother Yaśodā was 
more affectionate to K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma. (13) 
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, being attached to Their 
play, were playing with the other boys although 
it was very late. Therefore, mother Yaśodā 
called  Them back for lunch. Because of her ec-
static love and affection for K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma, milk flowed from her breasts. (14) 
Mother Yaśodā said: My dear son K ṛṣṇa, lotus -
eyed K ṛṣṇa, come here and drink the milk of 
my breast. My dear darling, You must be ver y 
tired because of hunger and the fatigue of play-
ing so long. There is no need to play any more. 
(15) My dear Baladeva, best of our family, 
please come immediately with Your younger 
brother, K ṛṣṇa. You both ate in the morning, 
and now You ought to eat some thing more. (16) 
Nanda Mahārāja, the King of Vraja, is now 
waiting to eat. O my dear son Balarāma, he is 
waiting for You. Therefore, come back to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

613 
 please us. All the boys playing with You and 
Kṛṣṇa should now go to their homes. (17) 
Mother Yaśodā further to ld K ṛṣṇa: My dear 
son, because of playing all day, Your body has 
become covered with dust and sand. Therefore, 
come back, take Your bath and cleanse Your-
self. Today the moon is conjoined with the aus-
picious star of Your birth. Therefore, be pure 
and give c ows in charity to the brāhma ṇas. (18) 
Just see how all Your playmates of Your own 
age have been cleansed and decorated with 
beautiful ornaments by their mothers. You 
should come here, and after You have taken 
Your bath, eaten Your lunch and been deco-
rated with ornaments, You may play with Your 
friends again. (19) My dear Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, 
because of intense love and affection, mother 
Yaśodā, K ṛṣṇa’s mother, considered K ṛṣṇa, 
who was at the peak of all opulences, to be her 
own son. Thus she took K ṛṣṇa by th e hand, 
along with Balarāma, and brought Them home, 
where she performed her duties by fully bath-
ing Them, dressing Them and feeding Them. 
(20) 

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Then 
one time, having seen the great disturbances in 
Bṛhadvana, all the elderly p ersons among the 
cowherd men, headed by Nanda Mahārāja, as-
sembled and began to consider what to do to 
stop the continuous disturbing situations in 
Vraja. (21) At this meeting of all the inhabitants 
of Gokula, a cowherd man named Upananda, 
who was the most mature in age and knowledge 
and was very experienced according to time, 
circumstances and country, made this sugges-
tion for the benefit of Rāma and K ṛṣṇa. (22) He 
said: My dear friends the cowherd men, in or-
der to do good to this place, Gokula, we should 
leave it, because so many disturbances are al-
ways occurring here, just for the purpose of 
killing Rāma and K ṛṣṇa. (23) The child K ṛṣṇa, 
simply by the mercy of the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, was somehow or other rescued 
from the hands of the Rāk ṣasī Pūt anā, who was 
determined to kill Him. Then, again by the 
mercy of the Supreme Godhead, the handcart 
missed falling upon the child. (24) Then again, the demon T ṛṇāvarta, in the form of a whirl-
wind, took the child away into the dangerous 
sky to kill Him, but the demon fell down onto a 
slab of stone. In that case also, by the mercy of 
Lord Vi ṣṇu or His associates, the child was 
saved. (25)  
Even the other day, neither K ṛṣṇa nor any of 
His playmates died from the falling of the two 
trees, although the children we re near the trees 
or even between them. This also is to be con-
sidered the mercy of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. (26) All these incidents are being 
caused by some unknown demon. Before he 
comes here to create another disturbance, it is 
our duty to go  somewhere else with the boys 
until there are no more disturbances. (27) Be-
tween Nandeśvara and Mahāvana is a place 
named V ṛndāvana. This place is very suitable 
because it is lush with grass, plants and 
creepers for the cows and other animals. It has 
nice gardens and tall mountains and is full of 
facilities for the happiness of all the gopas and 
gopīs and our animals. (28) Therefore, let us 
immediately go today. There is no need to wait 
any further. If you agree to my proposal, let us 
prepare all the bulloc k carts and put the cows in 
front of us, and let us go there. (29)  

Upon hearing this advice from Upananda, 
the cowherd men unanimously agreed. “Very 
nice,” they said. “Very nice.” Thus they sorted 
out their household affairs, placed their cloth-
ing and oth er paraphernalia on the carts, and 
immediately started for V ṛndāvana. (30) Keep-
ing all the old men, women, children and 
household paraphernalia on the bullock carts 
and keeping all the cows in front, the cowherd 
men picked up their bows and arrows with gre at 
care and sounded bugles made of horn. O King 
Parīk ṣit, in this way, with bugles vibrating all 
around, the cowherd men, accompanied by 
their priests, began their journey. (31 -32) The 
cowherd women, riding on the bullock carts, 
were dressed very nicely wi th excellent gar-
ments, and their bodies, especially their breasts, 
were decorated with fresh ku ṅkuma powder. 
As they rode, they began to chant with great 
pleasure the pastimes of K ṛṣṇa. (33) Thus hear-
ing about the pastimes of K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

614 
 with great pleasure, mother Yaśodā and Ro-
hiṇīdevī, so as not to be separated from K ṛṣṇa 
and Balarāma for even a moment, got up with 
Them on one bullock cart. In this situation, they 
all looked very beautiful. (34) In this way they 
entered V ṛndāvana, where it is alway s pleasing 
to live in all seasons. They made a temporary 
place to inhabit by placing their bullock carts 
around them in the shape of a half moon. (35) 
O King Parīk ṣit, when Rāma and K ṛṣṇa saw 
Vṛndāvana, Govardhana and the banks of the 
river Yamunā, They bo th enjoyed great pleas-
ure. (36)  

In this way, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, acting like 
small boys and talking in half -broken language, 
gave transcendental pleasure to all the inhabit-
ants of Vraja. In due course of time, They be-
came old enough to take care of the ca lves. (37) 
Not far away from Their residential quarters, 
both K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, equipped with all 
kinds of playthings, played with other cowherd 
boys and began to tend the small calves. (38) 
Sometimes K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma would play on 
Their flutes, someti mes They would throw 
ropes and stones devised for getting fruits from 
the trees, sometimes They would throw only 
stones, and sometimes, Their ankle bells tin-
kling, They would play football with fruits like 
bael and āmalakī. Sometimes They would 
cover Thems elves with blankets and imitate 
cows and bulls and fight with one another, roar-
ing loudly, and sometimes They would imitate 
the voices of the animals. In this way They en-
joyed sporting, exactly like two ordinary hu-
man children. (39 -40) 

One day while Rāma and K ṛṣṇa, along with 
Their playmates, were tending the calves on the 
bank of the river Yamunā, another demon ar-
rived there, desiring to kill Them. (41) When 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead saw that 
the demon had assumed the form of a calf and 
entered a mong the groups of other calves, He 
pointed out to Baladeva, “Here is another de-
mon.” Then He very slowly approached the de-
mon, as if He did not understand the demon’s 
intentions. (42) Thereafter, Śrī K ṛṣṇa caught 
the demon by the hind legs and tail, twirl ed the demon’s whole body very strongly until the de-
mon was dead, and threw him into the top of a 
kapittha tree, which then fell down, along with 
the body of the demon, who had assumed a 
great form. (43) Upon seeing the dead body of 
the demon, all the cowh erd boys exclaimed, 
“Well done, K ṛṣṇa! Very good, very good! 
Thank You.” In the upper planetary system, all 
the demigods were pleased, and therefore they 
showered flowers on the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. (44)  

After the killing of the demon, K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma finished Their breakfast in the morn-
ing, and while continuing to take care of the 
calves, They wandered here and there. K ṛṣṇa 
and Balarāma, the Supreme Personalities of 
Godhead, who maintain the entire creation, 
now took charge of the calves as if cowherd 
boys. (45) One day all the boys, including 
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, each boy taking his own 
group of calves, brought the calves to a reser-
voir of water, desiring to allow them to drink. 
After the animals drank water, the boys drank 
water there also. (46) Right by the reservoir, the 
boys saw a gigantic body resembling a moun-
tain peak broken and struck down by a thunder-
bolt. They were afraid even to see such a huge 
living being. (47) That great -bodied demon was 
named Bakāsura. He had assumed the body of  
a duck with a very sharp beak. Having come 
there, he immediately swallowed K ṛṣṇa. (48) 
When Balarāma and the other boys saw that 
Kṛṣṇa had been devoured by the gigantic duck, 
they became almost unconscious, like senses 
without life. (49) K ṛṣṇa, who was th e father of 
Lord Brahmā but who was acting as the son of 
a cowherd man, became like fire, burning the 
root of the demon’s throat, and the demon 
Bakāsura immediately disgorged Him. When 
the demon saw that K ṛṣṇa, although having 
been swallowed, was unharmed,  he immedi-
ately attacked K ṛṣṇa again with his sharp beak. 
(50) 

When K ṛṣṇa, the leader of the Vai ṣṇavas, 
saw that the demon Bakāsura, the friend of 
Kaṁsa, was endeavoring to attack Him, with 
His arms He captured the demon by the two 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

615 
 halves of the beak, and  in the presence of all the 
cowherd boys K ṛṣṇa very easily bifurcated 
him, as a child splits a blade of vīra ṇa grass. By 
thus killing the demon, K ṛṣṇa very much 
pleased the denizens of heaven. (51) At that 
time, the celestial denizens of the higher plane-
tary system showered mallikā -puṣpa, flowers 
grown in Nandana -kānana, upon K ṛṣṇa, the en-
emy of Bakāsura. They also congratulated Him 
by sounding celestial kettledrums and 
conchshells and by offering prayers. Seeing 
this, the cowherd boys were struck with won-
der. (52) Just as the senses are pacified when 
consciousness and life return, so when K ṛṣṇa 
was freed from this danger, all the boys, includ-
ing Balarāma, thought that their life had been 
restored. They embraced K ṛṣṇa in good con-
sciousness, and then they col lected their own 
calves and returned to Vrajabhūmi, where they 
declared the incident loudly. (53)  

When the cowherd men and women heard 
about the killing of Bakāsura in the forest, they 
were very much astonished. Upon seeing K ṛṣṇa 
and hearing the story, th ey received K ṛṣṇa very 
eagerly, thinking that K ṛṣṇa and the other boys 
had returned from the mouth of death. Thus 
they looked upon K ṛṣṇa and the boys with si-
lent eyes, not wanting to turn their eyes aside 
now that the boys were safe. (54) The cowherd 
men, headed by Nanda Mahārāja, began to con-
template: It is very astonishing that although 
this boy K ṛṣṇa has many times faced many var-
ied causes of death, by the grace of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead it was these causes of 
fear that were killed, instead o f Him. (55) Alt-
hough the causes of death, the daityas, were 
very fierce, they could not kill this boy K ṛṣṇa. 
Rather, because they came to kill innocent 
boys, as soon as they approached they them-
selves were killed, exactly like flies attacking a 
fire. (56) The words of persons in full 
knowledge of Brahman never become untrue. 
It is very wonderful that whatever Garga Muni 
predicted we are now actually experiencing in 
all detail. (57) In this way all the cowherd men, 
headed by Nanda Mahārāja, enjoyed topics 
about the pastimes of K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma with 
great transcendental pleasure, and they could not even perceive material tribulations. (58) In 
this way K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma passed Their 
childhood age in Vrajabhūmi by engaging in 
activities of childish play, such  as playing hide -
and-seek, constructing a make -believe bridge 
on the ocean, and jumping here and there like 
monkeys. (59)  

SB 10.12: The Killing of the Demon 
Aghāsura  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  O King, 
one day K ṛṣṇa decided to take His breakfast as 
a pic nic in the forest. Having risen early in the 
morning, He blew His bugle made of horn and 
woke all the cowherd boys and calves with its 
beautiful sound. Then K ṛṣṇa and the boys, 
keeping their respective groups of calves before 
them, proceeded from Vrajabhūm i to the forest. 
(1) At that time, hundreds and thousands of 
cowherd boys came out of their respective 
homes in Vrajabhūmi and joined K ṛṣṇa, keep-
ing before them their hundreds and thousands 
of groups of calves. The boys were very beau-
tiful, and they were e quipped with lunch bags, 
bugles, flutes, and sticks for controlling the 
calves. (2) Along with the cowherd boys and 
their own groups of calves, K ṛṣṇa came out 
with an unlimited number of calves assembled. 
Then all the boys began to sport in the forest in 
a greatly playful spirit. (3) Although all these 
boys were already decorated by their mothers 
with ornaments of kāca, guñjā, pearls and gold, 
when they went into the forest they further dec-
orated themselves with fruits, green leaves, 
bunches of flowers, pea cock feathers and soft 
minerals. (4) All the cowherd boys used to steal 
one another’s lunch bags. When a boy came to 
understand that his bag had been taken away, 
the other boys would throw it farther away, to 
a more distant place, and those standing there 
would throw it still farther. When the proprietor 
of the bag became disappointed, the other boys 
would laugh, the proprietor would cry, and then 
the bag would be returned. (5) Sometimes 
Kṛṣṇa would go to a somewhat distant place to 
see the beauty of the fo rest. Then all the other 
boys would run to accompany Him, each one 
saying, “I shall be the first to run and touch 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

616 
 Kṛṣṇa! I shall touch K ṛṣṇa first!” In this way 
they enjoyed life by repeatedly touching K ṛṣṇa. 
(6) All the boys would be differently engaged. 
Some boys blew their flutes, and others blew 
bugles made of horn. Some imitated the buzz-
ing of the bumblebees, and others imitated the 
voice of the cuckoo. Some boys imitated flying 
birds by running after the birds’ shadows on the 
ground, some imitated the  beautiful move-
ments and attractive postures of the swans, 
some sat down with the ducks, sitting silently, 
and others imitated the dancing of the pea-
cocks. Some boys attracted young monkeys in 
the trees, some jumped into the trees, imitating 
the monkeys, s ome made faces as the monkeys 
were accustomed to do, and others jumped 
from one branch to another. Some boys went to 
the waterfalls and crossed over the river, jump-
ing with the frogs, and when they saw their own 
reflections on the water they would laugh. T hey 
would also condemn the sounds of their own 
echoes. In this way, all the cowherd boys used 
to play with K ṛṣṇa, who is the source of the 
Brahman effulgence for jñānīs desiring to 
merge into that effulgence, who is the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead for d evotees who have 
accepted eternal servitorship, and who for ordi-
nary persons is but another ordinary child. The 
cowherd boys, having accumulated the results 
of pious activities for many lives, were able to 
associate in this way with the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. How can one explain their 
great fortune? (7 -11) Yogīs may undergo se-
vere austerities and penances for many births 
by practicing yama, niyama, āsana and 
prāṇāyāma, none of which are easily per-
formed. Yet in due course of time, when these 
yogīs attain the perfection of controlling the 
mind, they will still be unable to taste even a 
particle of dust from the lotus feet of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. What then can 
we describe about the great fortune of the in-
habitants of Vrajabhūmi, V ṛndāva na, with 
whom the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
personally lived and who saw the Lord face to 
face? (12)  

My dear King Parīk ṣit, thereafter there ap-
peared a great demon named Aghāsura, whose death was being awaited even by the demigods. 
The demigods drank  nectar every day, but still 
they feared this great demon and awaited his 
death. This demon could not tolerate the tran-
scendental pleasure being enjoyed in the forest 
by the cowherd boys. (13) Aghāsura, who had 
been sent by Ka ṁsa, was the younger brother 
of Pūtanā and Bakāsura. Therefore, when he 
came and saw K ṛṣṇa at the head of all the cow-
herd boys, he thought, “This K ṛṣṇa has killed 
my sister and brother, Pūtanā and Bakāsura. 
Therefore, in order to please them both, I shall 
kill this K ṛṣṇa, along with Hi s assistants, the 
other cowherd boys.” (14) Aghāsura thought: If 
somehow or other I can make K ṛṣṇa and His 
associates serve as the last offering of sesame 
and water for the departed souls of my brother 
and sister, then the inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi, 
for wh om these boys are the life and soul, will 
automatically die. If there is no life, there is no 
need for the body; consequently, when their 
sons are dead, naturally all the inhabitants of 
Vraja will die. (15) After thus deciding, that 
crooked Aghāsura assume d the form of a huge 
python, as thick as a big mountain and as long 
as eight miles. Having assumed this wonderful 
python’s body, he spread his mouth like a big 
cave in the mountains and lay down on the 
road, expecting to swallow K ṛṣṇa and His asso-
ciates th e cowherd boys. (16) His lower lip 
rested on the surface of the earth, and his upper 
lip was touching the clouds in the sky. The bor-
ders of his mouth resembled the sides of a big 
cave in a mountain, and the middle of his mouth 
was as dark as possible. His tongue resembled 
a broad traffic -way, his breath was like a warm 
wind, and his eyes blazed like fire. (17)  

Upon seeing this demon’s wonderful form, 
which resembled a great python, the boys 
thought that it must be a beautiful scenic spot 
of V ṛndāvana. Ther eafter, they imagined it to 
be similar to the mouth of a great python. In 
other words, the boys, unafraid, thought that it 
was a statue made in the shape of a great python 
for the enjoyment of their pastimes. (18) The 
boys said: Dear friends, is this creat ure dead, or 
is it actually a living python with its mouth 
spread wide just to swallow us all? Kindly clear 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

617 
 up this doubt. (19) Thereafter they decided: 
Dear friends, this is certainly an animal sitting 
here to swallow us all. Its upper lip resembles a 
cloud reddened by the sunshine, and its lower 
lip resembles the reddish shadows of a cloud. 
(20) 

On the left and right, the two depressions re-
sembling mountain caves are the corners of its 
mouth, and the high mountain peaks are its 
teeth. (21) In length and breadth the animal’s 
tongue resembles a broad traffic -way, and the 
inside of its mouth is very, very dark, like a 
cave in a mountain. (22) The hot fiery wind is 
the breath coming out of his mouth, which is 
giving off the bad smell of burning flesh be-
cause of all the dead bodies he has eaten. (23) 
Then the boys said, “Has this living creature 
come to swallow us? If he does so, he will im-
mediately be killed like Bakāsura, without de-
lay.” Thus they looked at the beautiful face of 
Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Bakāsura, and, laughing 
loudly and clapping their hands, they entered 
the mouth of the python. (24) The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, who is situ-
ated as antaryāmī, the Supersoul, in the core of 
everyone’s heart, heard the boys talking among 
themselves a bout the artificial python. Un-
known to them, it was actually Aghāsura, a de-
mon who had appeared as a python. K ṛṣṇa, 
knowing this, wanted to forbid His associates 
to enter the demon’s mouth. (25) In the mean-
time, while K ṛṣṇa was considering how to stop 
them , all the cowherd boys entered the mouth 
of the demon. The demon, however, did not 
swallow them, for he was thinking of his own 
relatives who had been killed by K ṛṣṇa and was 
just waiting for K ṛṣṇa to enter his mouth. (26) 
Kṛṣṇa saw that all the cowherd bo ys, who did 
not know anyone but Him as their Lord, had 
now gone out of His hand and were helpless, 
having entered like straws into the fire of the 
abdomen of Aghāsura, who was death personi-
fied. It was intolerable for K ṛṣṇa to be sepa-
rated from His friends  the cowherd boys. 
Therefore, as if seeing that this had been ar-
ranged by His internal potency, K ṛṣṇa was mo-
mentarily struck with wonder and unsure of 
what to do. (27) Now, what was to be done? How could both the killing of this demon and 
the saving of the  devotees be performed simul-
taneously? K ṛṣṇa, being unlimitedly potent, de-
cided to wait for an intelligent means by which 
He could simultaneously save the boys and kill 
the demon. Then He entered the mouth of 
Aghāsura. (28) When K ṛṣṇa entered the mouth 
of Aghāsura, the demigods hidden behind the 
clouds exclaimed, “Alas! Alas!” But the friends 
of Aghāsura, like Ka ṁsa and other demons, 
were jubilant. (29)  

When the invincible Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, heard the demigods crying 
“Alas! Alas!” from behind the clouds, He im-
mediately enlarged Himself within the demon’s 
throat, just to save Himself and the cowherd 
boys, His own associates, from the demon who 
wished to smash them. (30) Then, because 
Kṛṣṇa had increased the size of His body, the 
demon ext ended his own body to a very large 
size. Nonetheless, his breathing stopped, he 
suffocated, and his eyes rolled here and there 
and popped out. The demon’s life air, however, 
could not pass through any outlet, and therefore 
it finally burst out through a ho le in the top of 
the demon’s head. (31) When all the demon’s 
life air had passed away through that hole in the 
top of his head, K ṛṣṇa glanced over the dead 
calves and cowherd boys and brought them 
back to life. Then Mukunda, who can give one 
liberation, ca me out from the demon’s mouth 
with His friends and the calves. (32) From the 
body of the gigantic python, a glaring efful-
gence came out, illuminating all directions, and 
stayed individually in the sky until K ṛṣṇa came 
out from the corpse’s mouth. Then, as all the 
demigods looked on, this effulgence entered 
into K ṛṣṇa’s body. (33) Thereafter, everyone 
being pleased, the demigods began to shower 
flowers from Nandana -kānana, the celestial 
dancing girls began to dance, and the Gandhar-
vas, who are famous for sin ging, offered songs 
of prayer. The drummers began to beat their 
kettledrums, and the brāhma ṇas offered Vedic 
hymns. In this way, both in the heavens and on 
earth, everyone began to perform his own du-
ties, glorifying the Lord. (34) When Lord 
Brahmā heard th e wonderful ceremony going 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

618 
 on near his planet, accompanied by music and 
songs and sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!” he immedi-
ately came down to see the function. Upon see-
ing so much glorification of Lord K ṛṣṇa, he was 
completely astonished. (35) O King Parīk ṣit, 
when the python -shaped body of Aghāsura 
dried up into merely a big skin, it became a 
wonderful place for the inhabitants of 
Vṛndāvana to visit, and it remained so for a 
long, long time. (36) This incident of K ṛṣṇa’s 
saving Himself and His associates from deat h 
and of giving deliverance to Aghāsura, who had 
assumed the form of a python, took place when 
Kṛṣṇa was five years old. It was disclosed in 
Vrajabhūmi after one year, as if it had taken 
place on that very day. (37) K ṛṣṇa is the cause 
of all causes. The ca uses and effects of the ma-
terial world, both higher and lower, are all cre-
ated by the Supreme Lord, the original control-
ler. When K ṛṣṇa appeared as the son of Nanda 
Mahārāja and Yaśodā, He did so by His cause-
less mercy. Consequently, for Him to exhibit 
His unlimited opulence was not at all wonder-
ful. Indeed, He showed such great mercy that 
even Aghāsura, the most sinful miscreant, was 
elevated to being one of His associates and 
achieving sārūpya -mukti, which is actually im-
possible for materially contaminate d persons to 
attain. (38) If even only once or even by force 
one brings the form of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead into one’s mind, one can attain the 
supreme salvation by the mercy of K ṛṣṇa, as 
did Aghāsura. What then is to be said of those 
whose hear ts the Supreme Personality of God-
head enters when He appears as an incarnation, 
or those who always think of the lotus feet of 
the Lord, who is the source of transcendental 
bliss for all living entities and by whom all il-
lusion is completely removed? (39)  

Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said:  O learned saints, 
the childhood pastimes of Śrī K ṛṣṇa are very 
wonderful. Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, after hearing 
about those pastimes of K ṛṣṇa, who had saved 
him in the womb of his mother, became steady 
in his mind and again inquired from  Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī to hear about those pious activities. 
(40) 
 Mahārāja Parīk ṣit inquired:  O great sage, 
how could things done in the past have been de-
scribed as being done at the present? Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa performed this pastime of killing 
Aghāsura during His  kaumāra age. How then, 
during His pauga ṇḍa age, could the boys have 
described this incident as having happened re-
cently? (41) O greatest yogī, my spiritual mas-
ter, kindly describe why this happened. I am 
very much curious to know about it. I think that 
it was nothing but another illusion due to 
Kṛṣṇa. (42)  

O my lord, my spiritual master, although we 
are the lowest of k ṣatriyas, we are glorified and 
benefited because we have the opportunity of 
always hearing from you the nectar of the pious 
activities of t he Supreme Personality of God-
head. (43)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  O Śaunaka, greatest of 
saints and devotees, when Mahārāja Parīk ṣit in-
quired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī in this way, 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, immediately remembering 
subject matters about K ṛṣṇa within the core  of 
his heart, externally lost contact with the ac-
tions of his senses. Thereafter, with great diffi-
culty, he revived his external sensory percep-
tion and began to speak to Mahārāja Parīk ṣit 
about k ṛṣṇa-kathā. (44)  

SB 10.13: The Stealing of the Boys and 
Calves by Brahmā  

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O best of 
devotees, most fortunate Parīk ṣit, you have in-
quired very nicely, for although constantly 
hearing the pastimes of the Lord, you are per-
ceiving His activities to be newer and newer. 
(1) Paramaha ṁsas, dev otees who have ac-
cepted the essence of life, are attached to K ṛṣṇa 
in the core of their hearts, and He is the aim of 
their lives. It is their nature to talk only of K ṛṣṇa 
at every moment, as if such topics were newer 
and newer. They are attached to such to pics, 
just as materialists are attached to topics of 
women and sex. (2) O King, kindly hear me 
with great attention. Although the activities of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

619 
 the Supreme Lord are very confidential, no or-
dinary man being able to understand them, I 
shall speak about them to you, for spiritual 
masters explain to a submissive disciple even 
subject matters that are very confidential and 
difficult to understand. (3) Then, after saving 
the boys and calves from the mouth of 
Aghāsura, who was death personified, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the Su preme Personality of Godhead, 
brought them all to the bank of the river and 
spoke the following words. (4) My dear friends, 
just see how this riverbank is extremely beauti-
ful because of its pleasing atmosphere. And just 
see how the blooming lotuses are att racting 
bees and birds by their aroma. The humming 
and chirping of the bees and birds is echoing 
throughout the beautiful trees in the forest. 
Also, here the sands are clean and soft. There-
fore, this must be considered the best place for 
our sporting and p astimes. (5) I think we should 
take our lunch here, since we are already hun-
gry because the time is very late. Here the 
calves may drink water and go slowly here and 
there and eat the grass. (6)  

Accepting Lord K ṛṣṇa’s proposal, the cow-
herd boys allowed th e calves to drink water 
from the river and then tied them to trees where 
there was green, tender grass. Then the boys 
opened their baskets of food and began eating 
with K ṛṣṇa in great transcendental pleasure. (7) 
Like the whorl of a lotus flower surrounded  by 
its petals and leaves, K ṛṣṇa sat in the center, en-
circled by lines of His friends, who all looked 
very beautiful. Every one of them was trying to 
look forward toward K ṛṣṇa, thinking that K ṛṣṇa 
might look toward him. In this way they all en-
joyed their l unch in the forest. (8) Among the 
cowherd boys, some placed their lunch on 
flowers, some on leaves, fruits, or bunches of 
leaves, some actually in their baskets, some on 
the bark of trees and some on rocks. This is 
what the children imagined to be their pl ates as 
they ate their lunch. (9) All the cowherd boys 
enjoyed their lunch with K ṛṣṇa, showing one 
another the different tastes of the different va-
rieties of preparations they had brought from 
home. Tasting one another’s preparations, they 
began to laugh a nd make one another laugh. (10) K ṛṣṇa is yajña -bhukthat is, He eats only 
offerings of yajñabut to exhibit His childhood 
pastimes, He now sat with His flute tucked be-
tween His waist and His tight cloth on His right 
side and with His horn bugle and cow -drivi ng 
stick on His left. Holding in His hand a very 
nice preparation of yogurt and rice, with pieces 
of suitable fruit between His fingers, He sat like 
the whorl of a lotus flower, looking forward to-
ward all His friends, personally joking with 
them and creati ng jubilant laughter among 
them as He ate. At that time, the denizens of 
heaven were watching, struck with wonder at 
how the Personality of Godhead, who eats only 
in yajña, was now eating with His friends in the 
forest. (11)  

O Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, while the  cowherd 
boys, who knew nothing within the core of their 
hearts but K ṛṣṇa, were thus engaged in eating 
their lunch in the forest, the calves went far 
away, deep into the forest, being allured by 
green grass. (12) When K ṛṣṇa saw that His 
friends the cowherd  boys were frightened, He, 
the fierce controller even of fear itself, said, just 
to mitigate their fear, “My dear friends, do not 
stop eating. I shall bring your calves back to 
this spot by personally going after them My-
self.” (13) “Let Me go and search fo r the 
calves,” K ṛṣṇa said. “Don’t disturb your enjoy-
ment.” Then, carrying His yogurt and rice in 
His hand, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Kṛṣṇa, immediately went out to search for the 
calves of His friends. To please His friends, He 
began searching in  all the mountains, mountain 
caves, bushes and narrow passages. (14) O 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, Brahmā, who resides in the 
higher planetary system in the sky, had ob-
served the activities of the most powerful K ṛṣṇa 
in killing and delivering Aghāsura, and he was 
astonished. Now that same Brahmā wanted to 
show some of his own power and see the power 
of K ṛṣṇa, who was engaged in His childhood 
pastimes, playing as if with ordinary cowherd 
boys. Therefore, in K ṛṣṇa’s absence, Brahmā 
took all the boys and calves to anot her place. 
Thus he became entangled, for in the very near 
future he would see how powerful K ṛṣṇa was. 
(15) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

620 

Thereafter, when K ṛṣṇa was unable to find 
the calves, He returned to the bank of the river, 
but there He was also unable to see the cowherd 
boys. Th us He began to search for both the 
calves and the boys, as if He could not under-
stand what had happened. (16) When K ṛṣṇa 
was unable to find the calves and their caretak-
ers, the cowherd boys, anywhere in the forest, 
He could suddenly understand that this wa s the 
work of Lord Brahmā. (17) Thereafter, just to 
create pleasure both for Brahmā and for the 
mothers of the calves and cowherd boys, K ṛṣṇa, 
the creator of the entire cosmic manifestation, 
expanded Himself as calves and boys. (18) By 
His Vāsudeva feature , Kṛṣṇa simultaneously 
expanded Himself into the exact number of 
missing cowherd boys and calves, with their 
exact bodily features, their particular types of 
hands, legs and other limbs, their sticks, bugles 
and flutes, their lunch bags, their particular 
types of dress and ornaments placed in various 
ways, their names, ages and forms, and their 
special activities and characteristics. By ex-
panding Himself in this way, beautiful K ṛṣṇa 
proved the statement samagra -jagad vi ṣṇuma-
yam: “Lord Vi ṣṇu is all -pervading .” (19)  
Now expanding Himself so as to appear as 
all the calves and cowherd boys, all of them as 
they were, and at the same time appear as their 
leader, K ṛṣṇa entered Vrajabhūmi, the land of 
His father, Nanda Mahārāja, just as He usually 
did while enjoying  their company. (20) O 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, K ṛṣṇa, who had divided 
Himself as different calves and also as different 
cowherd boys, entered different cow sheds as 
the calves and then different homes as different 
boys. (21)  

The mothers of the boys, upon heari ng the 
sounds of the flutes and bugles being played by 
their sons, immediately rose from their house-
hold tasks, lifted their boys onto their laps, em-
braced them with both arms and began to feed 
them with their breast milk, which flowed forth 
because of ext reme love specifically for K ṛṣṇa. 
Actually K ṛṣṇa is everything, but at that time, 
expressing extreme love and affection, they took special pleasure in feeding K ṛṣṇa, the Par-
abrahman, and K ṛṣṇa drank the milk from His 
respective mothers as if it were a nect arean bev-
erage. (22) Thereafter, O Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, as 
required according to the scheduled round of 
His pastimes, K ṛṣṇa returned in the evening, 
entered the house of each of the cowherd boys, 
and engaged exactly like the former boys, thus 
enlivening thei r mothers with transcendental 
pleasure. The mothers took care of the boys by 
massaging them with oil, bathing them, smear-
ing their bodies with sandalwood pulp, decorat-
ing them with ornaments, chanting protective 
mantras, decorating their bodies with tilaka  and 
giving them food. In this way, the mothers 
served K ṛṣṇa personally. (23) Thereafter, all 
the cows entered their different sheds and be-
gan mooing loudly, calling for their respective 
calves. When the calves arrived, the mothers 
began licking the calves ’ bodies again and 
again and profusely feeding them with the milk 
flowing from their milk bags. (24) Previously, 
from the very beginning, the gopīs had moth-
erly affection for K ṛṣṇa. Indeed, their affection 
for K ṛṣṇa exceeded even their affection for 
their own sons. In displaying their affection, 
they had thus distinguished between K ṛṣṇa and 
their sons, but now that distinction disappeared. 
(25) Although the inhabitants of Vrajabhūmi, 
the cowherd men and cowherd women, previ-
ously had more affection for K ṛṣṇa than for 
their own children, now, for one year, their af-
fection for their own sons continuously in-
creased, for K ṛṣṇa had now become their sons. 
There was no limit to the increment of their af-
fection for their sons, who were now K ṛṣṇa. 
Every day they found  new inspiration for lov-
ing their children as much as they loved K ṛṣṇa. 
(26) 

In this way, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, having Himself 
become the cowherd boys and groups of calves, 
maintained Himself by Himself. Thus He con-
tinued His pastimes, both in V ṛndāvana and in 
the forest, for one year. (27)  

One day, five or six nights before the com-
pletion of the year, K ṛṣṇa, tending the calves, 
entered the forest along with Balarāma. (28) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

621 
 Thereafter, while pasturing atop Govardhana 
Hill, the cows looked down to find some green  
grass and saw their calves pasturing near 
Vṛndāvana, not very far away. (29) When the 
cows saw their own calves from the top of 
Govardhana Hill, they forgot themselves and 
their caretakers because of increased affection, 
and although the path was very rou gh, they ran 
toward their calves with great anxiety, each 
running as if with one pair of legs. Their milk 
bags full and flowing with milk, their heads and 
tails raised, and their humps moving with their 
necks, they ran forcefully until they reached 
their c alves to feed them. (30) The cows had 
given birth to new calves, but while coming 
down from Govardhana Hill, the cows, because 
of increased affection for the older calves, al-
lowed the older calves to drink milk from their 
milk bags and then began licking t he calves’ 
bodies in anxiety, as if wanting to swallow 
them. (31) The cowherd men, having been un-
able to check the cows from going to their 
calves, felt simultaneously ashamed and angry. 
They crossed the rough road with great diffi-
culty, but when they came  down and saw their 
own sons, they were overwhelmed by great af-
fection. (32) At that time, all the thoughts of the 
cowherd men merged in the mellow of paternal 
love, which was aroused by the sight of their 
sons. Experiencing a great attraction, their an-
ger completely disappearing, they lifted their 
sons, embraced them in their arms and enjoyed 
the highest pleasure by smelling their sons’ 
heads. (33) Thereafter the elderly cowherd 
men, having obtained great feeling from em-
bracing their sons, gradually and wi th great dif-
ficulty and reluctance ceased embracing them 
and returned to the forest. But as the men re-
membered their sons, tears began to roll down 
from their eyes. (34)  

Because of an increase of affection, the 
cows had constant attachment even to those 
calves that were grown up and had stopped 
sucking milk from their mothers. When 
Baladeva saw this attachment, He was unable 
to understand the reason for it, and thus He be-
gan to consider as follows. (35) What is this 
wonderful phenomenon? The affection of a ll the inhabitants of Vraja, including Me, toward 
these boys and calves is increasing as never be-
fore, just like our affection for Lord K ṛṣṇa, the 
Supersoul of all living entities. (36) Who is this 
mystic power, and where has she come from? 
Is she a demigo d or a demoness? She must be 
the illusory energy of My master, Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
for who else can bewilder Me? (37)  

Thinking in this way, Lord Balarāma was 
able to see, with the eye of transcendental 
knowledge, that all these calves and K ṛṣṇa’s 
friends were exp ansions of the form of Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa. (38) Lord Baladeva said, “O supreme 
controller! These boys are not great demigods, 
as I previously thought. Nor are these calves 
great sages like Nārada. Now I can see that You 
alone are manifesting Yourself in all varieti es 
of difference. Although one, You are existing 
in the different forms of the calves and boys. 
Please briefly explain this to Me.” Having thus 
been requested by Lord Baladeva, K ṛṣṇa ex-
plained the whole situation, and Baladeva un-
derstood it. (39)  

When Lor d Brahmā returned after a moment 
of time had passed(according to his own meas-
urement), he saw that although by human meas-
urement a complete year had passed, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, after all that time, was engaged just as 
before in playing with the boys and calves, wh o 
were His expansions. (40) Lord Brahmā 
thought: Whatever boys and calves there were 
in Gokula, I have kept them sleeping on the bed 
of my mystic potency, and to this very day they 
have not yet risen again. (41) A similar number 
of boys and calves have bee n playing with 
Kṛṣṇa for one whole year, yet they are different 
from the ones illusioned by my mystic potency. 
Who are they? Where did they come from? (42) 
Thus Lord Brahmā, thinking and thinking for a 
long time, tried to distinguish between those 
two sets  of boys, who were each separately ex-
isting. He tried to understand who was real and 
who was not real, but he couldn’t understand at 
all. (43)  

Thus because Lord Brahmā wanted to mys-
tify the all -pervading Lord K ṛṣṇa, who can 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

622 
 never be mystified, but who, on  the contrary, 
mystifies the entire universe, he himself was 
put into bewilderment by his own mystic 
power. (44)  
As the darkness of snow on a dark night and 
the light of a glowworm in the light of day have 
no value, the mystic power of an inferior person 
who tries to use it against a person of great 
power is unable to accomplish anything; in-
stead, the power of that inferior person is di-
minished. (45)  

Then, while Lord Brahmā looked on, all the 
calves and the boys tending them immediately 
appeared to have co mplexions the color of blu-
ish rainclouds and to be dressed in yellow 
silken garments. (46) All those personalities 
had four arms, holding conchshell, disc, mace 
and lotus flower in Their hands. They wore hel-
mets on Their heads, earrings on Their ears and 
garlands of forest flowers around Their necks. 
On the upper portion of the right side of Their 
chests was the emblem of the goddess of for-
tune. Furthermore, They wore armlets on Their 
arms, the Kaustubha gem around Their necks, 
which were marked with three lines like a 
conchshell, and bracelets on Their wrists. With 
bangles on Their ankles, ornaments on Their 
feet, and sacred belts around Their waists, They 
all appeared very beautiful. (47 -48) Every part 
of Their bodies, from Their feet to the top of 
Their h eads, was fully decorated with fresh, 
tender garlands of tulasī leaves offered by dev-
otees engaged in worshiping the Lord by the 
greatest pious activities, namely hearing and 
chanting. (49) Those Vi ṣṇu forms, by Their 
pure smiling, which resembled the incr easing 
light of the moon, and by the sidelong glances 
of Their reddish eyes, created and protected the 
desires of Their own devotees, as if by the 
modes of passion and goodness. (50) All be-
ings, both moving and nonmoving, from the 
four-headed Lord Brahmā d own to the most in-
significant living entity, had taken forms and 
were differently worshiping those vi ṣṇu-mūr-
tis, according to their respective capacities, 
with various means of worship, such as dancing 
and singing. (51) All the vi ṣṇu-mūrtis were sur-
rounded  by the opulences, headed by a ṇimā-siddhi; by the mystic potencies, headed by Ajā; 
and by the twenty -four elements for the crea-
tion of the material world, headed by the ma-
hat-tattva. (52) Then Lord Brahmā saw that 
kāla(the time factor), svabhāva(one’s own na-
ture by association), sa ṁskāra(reformation), 
kāma(desire), karma(fruitive activity) and the 
guṇas(the three modes of material nature), their 
own independence being completely subordi-
nate to the potency of the Lord, had all taken 
forms and were also worsh iping those vi ṣṇu-
mūrtis. (53) The vi ṣṇu-mūrtis all had eternal, 
unlimited forms, full of knowledge and bliss 
and existing beyond the influence of time. 
Their great glory was not even to be touched by 
the jñānīs engaged in studying the Upani ṣads. 
(54) Thus  Lord Brahmā saw the Supreme Brah-
man, by whose energy this entire universe, with 
its moving and nonmoving living beings, is 
manifested. He also saw at the same time all the 
calves and boys as the Lord’s expansions. (55)  

Then, by the power of the effulgenc e of 
those vi ṣṇu-mūrtis, Lord Brahmā, his eleven 
senses jolted by astonishment and stunned by 
transcendental bliss, became silent, just like a 
child’s clay doll in the presence of the village 
deity. (56) The Supreme Brahman is beyond 
mental speculation, He  is self -manifest, exist-
ing in His own bliss, and He is beyond the ma-
terial energy. He is known by the crest jewels 
of the Vedas by refutation of irrelevant 
knowledge. Thus in relation to that Supreme 
Brahman, the Personality of Godhead, whose 
glory had be en shown by the manifestation of 
all the four -armed forms of Vi ṣṇu, Lord 
Brahmā, the lord of Sarasvatī, was mystified. 
“What is this?” he thought, and then he was not 
even able to see. Lord K ṛṣṇa, understanding 
Brahmā’s position, then at once removed the 
curtain of His yoga -māyā. (57) Lord Brahmā’s 
external consciousness then revived, and he 
stood up, just like a dead man coming back to 
life. Opening his eyes with great difficulty, he 
saw the universe, along with himself. (58) 
Then, looking in all direction s, Lord Brahmā 
immediately saw V ṛndāvana before him, filled 
with trees, which were the means of livelihood 
for the inhabitants and which were equally 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

623 
 pleasing in all seasons. (59) V ṛndāvana is the 
transcendental abode of the Lord, where there 
is no hunger,  anger or thirst. Though naturally 
inimical, both human beings and fierce animals 
live there together in transcendental friendship. 
(60) Then Lord Brahmā saw the Absolute 
Truthwho is one without a second, who pos-
sesses full knowledge and who is unlimitedas-
suming the role of a child in a family of cow-
herd men and standing all alone, just as before, 
with a morsel of food in His hand, searching 
everywhere for the calves and His cowherd 
friends. (61) After seeing this, Lord Brahmā 
hastily got down from his swan  carrier, fell 
down like a golden rod and touched the lotus 
feet of Lord K ṛṣṇa with the tips of the four 
crowns on his heads. Offering his obeisances, 
he bathed the feet of K ṛṣṇa with the water of his 
tears of joy. (62) Rising and falling again and 
again a t the lotus feet of Lord K ṛṣṇa for a long 
time, Lord Brahmā remembered over and over 
the Lord’s greatness he had just seen. (63) 
Then, rising very gradually and wiping his two 
eyes, Lord Brahmā looked up at Mukunda. 
Lord Brahmā, his head bent low, his mind  con-
centrated and his body trembling, very humbly 
began, with faltering words, to offer praises to 
Lord K ṛṣṇa. (64)  

SB 10.14: Brahmā’s Prayers to Lord 
Kṛṣṇa 

Lord Brahmā said:  My dear Lord, You are 
the only worshipable Lord, the Supreme Per-
sonality of God head, and therefore I offer my 
humble obeisances and prayers just to please 
You. O son of the king of the cowherds, Your 
transcendental body is dark blue like a new 
cloud, Your garment is brilliant like lightning, 
and the beauty of Your face is enhanced by  
Your guñjā earrings and the peacock feather on 
Your head. Wearing garlands of various forest 
flowers and leaves, and equipped with a herd-
ing stick, a buffalo horn and a flute, You stand 
beautifully with a morsel of food in Your hand. 
(1) My dear Lord, nei ther I nor anyone else can 
estimate the potency of this transcendental 
body of Yours, which has shown such mercy to 
me and which appears just to fulfill the desires of Your pure devotees. Although my mind is 
completely withdrawn from material affairs, I 
cannot understand Your personal form. How, 
then, could I possibly understand the happiness 
You experience within Yourself? (2) Those 
who, even while remaining situated in their es-
tablished social positions, throw away the pro-
cess of speculative knowledge and  with their 
body, words and mind offer all respects to de-
scriptions of Your personality and activities, 
dedicating their lives to these narrations, which 
are vibrated by You personally and by Your 
pure devotees, certainly conquer Your Lord-
ship, although Yo u are otherwise unconquera-
ble by anyone within the three worlds. (3) My 
dear Lord, devotional service unto You is the 
best path for self -realization. If someone gives 
up that path and engages in the cultivation of 
speculative knowledge, he will simply unde rgo 
a troublesome process and will not achieve his 
desired result. As a person who beats an empty 
husk of wheat cannot get grain, one who simply 
speculates cannot achieve self -realization. His 
only gain is trouble. (4) O almighty Lord, in the 
past many yog īs in this world achieved the plat-
form of devotional service by offering all their 
endeavors unto You and faithfully carrying out 
their prescribed duties. Through such devo-
tional service, perfected by the processes of 
hearing and chanting about You, they c ame to 
understand You, O infallible one, and could 
easily surrender to You and achieve Your su-
preme abode. (5) Nondevotees, however, can-
not realize You in Your full personal feature. 
Nevertheless, it may be possible for them to re-
alize Your expansion as th e impersonal Su-
preme by cultivating direct perception of the 
Self within the heart. But they can do this only 
by purifying their mind and senses of all con-
ceptions of material distinctions and all attach-
ment to material sense objects. Only in this way 
will Your impersonal feature manifest itself to 
them. (6)  

In time, learned philosophers or scientists 
might be able to count all the atoms of the earth, 
the particles of snow, or perhaps even the shin-
ing molecules radiating from the sun, the stars 
and other l uminaries. But among these learned 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

624 
 men, who could possibly count the unlimited 
transcendental qualities possessed by You, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have de-
scended onto the surface of the earth for the 
benefit of all living entities? (7) My de ar Lord, 
one who earnestly waits for You to bestow 
Your causeless mercy upon him, all the while 
patiently suffering the reactions of his past mis-
deeds and offering You respectful obeisances 
with his heart, words and body, is surely eligi-
ble for liberation,  for it has become his rightful 
claim. (8) My Lord, just see my uncivilized im-
pudence! To test Your power I tried to extend 
my illusory potency to cover You, the unlim-
ited and primeval Supersoul, who bewilder 
even the masters of illusion. What am I com-
pared to You? I am just like a small spark in the 
presence of a great fire. (9) Therefore, O infal-
lible Lord, kindly excuse my offenses. I have 
taken birth in the mode of passion and am 
therefore simply foolish, presuming myself a 
controller independent of You r Lordship. My 
eyes are blinded by the darkness of ignorance, 
which causes me to think of myself as the un-
born creator of the universe. But please con-
sider that I am Your servant and therefore wor-
thy of Your compassion. (10) What am I, a 
small creature mea suring seven spans of my 
own hand? I am enclosed in a potlike universe 
composed of material nature, the total material 
energy, false ego, ether, air, water and earth. 
And what is Your glory? Unlimited universes 
pass through the pores of Your body just as p ar-
ticles of dust pass through the openings of a 
screened window. (11)  

O Lord Adhok ṣaja, does a mother take of-
fense when the child within her womb kicks 
with his legs? And is there anything in exist-
encewhether designated by various philoso-
phers as real or as unrealthat is actually outside 
Your abdomen? (12) My dear Lord, it is said 
that when the three planetary systems are 
merged into the water at the time of dissolution, 
Your plenary portion, Nārāya ṇa, lies down on 
the water, gradually a lotus flower grows  from 
His navel, and Brahmā takes birth upon that lo-
tus flower. Certainly, these words are not false. 
Thus am I not born from You? (13) Are You not the original Nārāya ṇa, O supreme control-
ler, since You are the Soul of every embodied 
being and the eternal witness of all created 
realms? Indeed, Lord Nārāya ṇa is Your expan-
sion, and He is called Nārāya ṇa because He is 
the generating source of the primeval water of 
the universe. He is real, not a product of Your 
illusory Māyā. (14)  

My dear Lord, if Your transc endental body, 
which shelters the entire universe, is actually 
lying upon the water, then why were You not 
seen by me when I searched for You? And why, 
though I could not envision You properly 
within my heart, did You then suddenly reveal 
Yourself? (15)  
My dear Lord, in this incarnation You have 
proved that You are the supreme controller of 
Māyā. Although You are now within this uni-
verse, the whole universal creation is within 
Your transcendental bodya fact You demon-
strated by exhibiting the universe within  Your 
abdomen before Your mother, Yaśodā. (16)  

Just as this entire universe, including You, 
was exhibited within Your abdomen, so it is 
now manifested here externally in the same ex-
act form. How could such things happen unless 
arranged by Your inconceivab le energy? (17) 
Have You not shown me today that both You 
Yourself and everything within this creation are 
manifestations of Your inconceivable potency? 
First You appeared alone, and then You mani-
fested Yourself as all of V ṛndāvana’s calves 
and cowherd boy s, Your friends. Next You ap-
peared as an equal number of four -handed 
Viṣṇu forms, who were worshiped by all living 
beings, including me, and after that You ap-
peared as an equal number of complete uni-
verses. Finally, You have now returned to Your 
unlimited form as the Supreme Absolute Truth, 
one without a second. (18) To persons ignorant 
of Your actual transcendental position, You ap-
pear as part of the material world, manifesting 
Yourself by the expansion of Your inconceiva-
ble energy. Thus for the creation o f the universe 
You appear as me [Brahmā], for its mainte-
nance You appear as Yourself [Vi ṣṇu], and for 
its annihilation You appear as Lord Trinetra 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

625 
 [Śiva]. (19) O Lord, O supreme creator and 
master, You have no material birth, yet to de-
feat the false pride of the faithless demons and 
show mercy to Your saintly devotees, You take 
birth among the demigods, sages, human be-
ings, animals and even the aquatics. (20) O su-
preme great one! O Supreme Personality of 
Godhead! O Supersoul, master of all mystic 
power! You r pastimes are taking place contin-
uously in these three worlds, but who can esti-
mate where, how and when You are employing 
Your spiritual energy and performing these in-
numerable pastimes? No one can understand 
the mystery of how Your spiritual energy acts.  
(21) 

Therefore, this entire universe, which like a 
dream is by nature unreal, nevertheless appears 
real, and thus it covers one’s consciousness and 
assails one with repeated miseries. This uni-
verse appears real because it is manifested by 
the potency of illusion emanating from You, 
whose unlimited transcendental forms are full 
of eternal happiness and knowledge. (22) You 
are the one Supreme Soul, the primeval Su-
preme Personality, the Absolute Truthself -
manifested, endless and beginningless. You are 
eterna l and infallible, perfect and complete, 
without any rival and free from all material des-
ignations. Your happiness can never be ob-
structed, nor have You any connection with 
material contamination. Indeed, You are the in-
destructible nectar of immortality. (2 3) Those 
who have received the clear vision of 
knowledge from the sunlike spiritual master 
can see You in this way, as the very Soul of all 
souls, the Supersoul of everyone’s own self. 
Thus understanding Your original personality, 
they are able to cross ov er the ocean of illusory 
material existence. (24) A person who mistakes 
a rope for a snake becomes fearful, but he then 
gives up his fear upon realizing that the so -
called snake does not exist. Similarly, for those 
who fail to recognize You as the Supreme Soul 
of all souls, the expansive illusory material ex-
istence arises, but knowledge of You at once 
causes it to subside. (25) The conception of ma-
terial bondage and the conception of liberation 
are both manifestations of ignorance. Being outside the scope o f true knowledge, they cease 
to exist when one correctly understands that the 
pure spirit soul is distinct from matter and al-
ways fully conscious. At that time bondage and 
liberation no longer have any significance, just 
as day and night have no significan ce from the 
perspective of the sun. (26) Just see the foolish-
ness of those ignorant persons who consider 
You to be some separated manifestation of illu-
sion and who consider the self, which is actu-
ally You, to be something else, the material 
body. Such fool s conclude that the supreme 
soul is to be searched for somewhere outside 
Your supreme personality. (27)  

O unlimited Lord, the saintly devotees seek 
You out within their own bodies by rejecting 
everything separate from You. Indeed, how can 
discriminating p ersons appreciate the real na-
ture of a rope lying before them until they re-
fute the illusion that it is a snake? (28) My 
Lord, if one is favored by even a slight trace of 
the mercy of Your lotus feet, he can understand 
the greatness of Your personality. Bu t those 
who speculate to understand the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead are unable to know You, 
even though they continue to study the Vedas 
for many years. (29) My dear Lord, I therefore 
pray to be so fortunate that in this life as Lord 
Brahmā or in anothe r life, wherever I take my 
birth, I may be counted as one of Your devo-
tees. I pray that wherever I may be, even among 
the animal species, I can engage in devotional 
service to Your lotus feet. (30) O almighty 
Lord, how greatly fortunate are the cows and 
ladies of V ṛndāvana, the nectar of whose breast 
milk You have happily drunk to Your full sat-
isfaction, taking the form of their calves and 
children! All the Vedic sacrifices performed 
from time immemorial up to the present day 
have not given You as much sati sfaction. (31) 
How greatly fortunate are Nanda Mahārāja, the 
cowherd men and all the other inhabitants of 
Vrajabhūmi! There is no limit to their good for-
tune, because the Absolute Truth, the source of 
transcendental bliss, the eternal Supreme Brah-
man, has become their friend. (32) Yet even 
though the extent of the good fortune of these 
residents of V ṛndāvana is inconceivable, we 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

626 
 eleven presiding deities of the various senses, 
headed by Lord Śiva, are also most fortunate, 
because the senses of these devotees  of 
Vṛndāvana are the cups through which we re-
peatedly drink the nectarean, intoxicating bev-
erage of the honey of Your lotus feet. (33) My 
greatest possible good fortune would be to take 
any birth whatever in this forest of Gokula and 
have my head bathed b y the dust falling from 
the lotus feet of any of its residents. Their entire 
life and soul is the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Mukunda, the dust of whose lotus feet is 
still being searched for in the Vedic mantras. 
(34) 

My mind becomes bewildered just trying to 
think of what reward other than You could be 
found anywhere. You are the embodiment of all 
benedictions, which You bestow upon these 
residents of the cowherd community of 
Vṛndāvana. You have already arranged to give 
Yourself to Pūtanā and her fam ily members in 
exchange for her disguising herself as a devo-
tee. So what is left for You to give these devo-
tees of V ṛndāvana, whose homes, wealth, 
friends, dear relations, bodies, children and 
very lives and hearts are all dedicated only to 
You? (35) My de ar Lord K ṛṣṇa, until people 
become Your devotees, their material attach-
ments and desires remain thieves, their homes 
remain prisons, and their affectionate feelings 
for their family members remain foot -shackles. 
(36) My dear master, although You have noth-
ing to do with material existence, You come to 
this earth and imitate material life just to ex-
pand the varieties of ecstatic enjoyment for 
Your surrendered devotees. (37)  

There are people who say, “I know every-
thing about K ṛṣṇa.” Let them think that way. A s 
far as I am concerned, I do not wish to speak 
very much about this matter. O my Lord, let me 
say this much: As far as Your opulences are 
concerned, they are all beyond the reach of my 
mind, body and words. (38) My dear K ṛṣṇa, I 
now humbly request permiss ion to leave. Actu-
ally, You are the knower and seer of all things. 
Indeed, You are the Lord of all the universes, 
and yet I offer this one universe unto You. (39) My dear Śrī K ṛṣṇa, You bestow happiness upon 
the lotuslike V ṛṣṇi dynasty and expand the 
great  oceans consisting of the earth, the demi-
gods, the brāhma ṇas and the cows. You dispel 
the dense darkness of irreligion and oppose the 
demons who have appeared on this earth. O Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, as long as this 
universe exists and as long as t he sun shines, I 
will offer my obeisances unto You. (40)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having thus of-
fered his prayers, Brahmā circumambulated his 
worshipable Lord, the unlimited Personality of 
Godhead, three times and then bowed down at 
His lotus feet. The appo inted creator of the uni-
verse then returned to his own residence. (41) 
After granting His son Brahmā permission to 
leave, the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
took the calves, who were still where they had 
been a year earlier, and brought them to the 
riverba nk, where He had been taking His meal 
and where His cowherd boyfriends remained 
just as before. (42) O King, although the boys 
had passed an entire year apart from the Lord 
of their very lives, they had been covered by 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s illusory potency and thu s consid-
ered that year merely half a moment. (43) What 
indeed is not forgotten by those whose minds 
are bewildered by the Lord’s illusory potency? 
By that power of Māyā, this entire universe re-
mains in perpetual bewilderment, and in this at-
mosphere of forg etfulness no one can under-
stand his own identity. (44)  

The cowherd boyfriends said to Lord K ṛṣṇa: 
You have returned so quickly! We have not 
eaten even one morsel in Your absence. Please 
come here and take Your meal without distrac-
tion. (45) Then Lord H ṛṣīkeśa, smiling, fin-
ished His lunch in the company of His cowherd 
friends. While they were returning from the for-
est to their homes in Vraja, Lord K ṛṣṇa showed 
the cowherd boys the skin of the dead serpent 
Aghāsura. (46) Lord K ṛṣṇa’s transcendental 
body was decorated with peacock feathers and 
flowers and painted with forest minerals, and 
His bamboo flute loudly and festively re-
sounded. As He called out to His calves by 
name, His cowherd boyfriends purified the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

627 
 whole world by chanting His glories. Thus 
Lord K ṛṣṇa entered the cow pasture of His fa-
ther, Nanda Mahārāja, and the sight of His 
beauty at once produced a great festival for the 
eyes of all the cowherd women. (47) As the 
cowherd boys reached the village of Vraja, they 
sang, “Today K ṛṣṇa saved us by killi ng a great 
serpent!” Some of the boys described K ṛṣṇa as 
the son of Yaśodā, and others as the son of 
Nanda Mahārāja. (48)  

King Parīk ṣit said:  O brāhma ṇa, how could 
the cowherd women have developed for K ṛṣṇa, 
someone else’s son, such unprecedented pure 
love, love they never felt even for their own 
children? Please explain this. (49)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, for 
every created being the dear most thing is cer-
tainly his own self. The dearness of everything 
else children, wealth and so on is due only to 
the dearness of the self. (50) For this reason, O 
best of kings, the embodied soul is self -cen-
tered: he is more attached to his own body and 
self than to his so -called possessions like chil-
dren, wealth and home. (51) Indeed, for persons 
who think the bo dy is the self, O best of kings, 
those things whose importance lies only in their 
relationship to the body are never as dear as the 
body itself. (52) If a person comes to the stage 
of considering the body “mine” instead of 
“me,” he will certainly not consi der the body as 
dear as his own self. After all, even as the body 
is growing old and useless, one’s desire to con-
tinue living remains strong. (53) Therefore, it is 
his own self that is most dear to every embod-
ied living being, and it is simply for the sati s-
faction of this self that the whole material cre-
ation of moving and nonmoving entities exists. 
(54) You should know K ṛṣṇa to be the original 
Soul of all living entities. For the benefit of the 
whole universe, He has, out of His causeless 
mercy, appeared a s an ordinary human being. 
He has done this by the strength of His internal 
potency. (55) Those in this world who under-
stand Lord K ṛṣṇa as He is see all things, 
whether stationary or moving, as manifest 
forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Such enl ightened persons recognize no reality apart from the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa. (56) The 
original, unmanifested form of material nature 
is the source of all material things, and the 
source of even that subtle material nature is the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead,  Kṛṣṇa. What, 
then, could one ascertain to be separate from 
Him? (57) For those who have accepted the 
boat of the lotus feet of the Lord, who is the 
shelter of the cosmic manifestation and is fa-
mous as Murāri, the enemy of the Mura demon, 
the ocean of the material world is like the water 
contained in a calf’s hoof -print. Their goal is 
paraṁ padam, Vaiku ṇṭha, the place where there 
are no material miseries, not the place where 
there is danger at every step. (58)  

Since you inquired from me, I have fully de-
scribed to you those activities of Lord Hari that 
were performed in His fifth year but not cele-
brated until His sixth. (59) Any person who 
hears or chants these pastimes Lord Murāri per-
formed with His cowherd friendsthe killing of 
Aghāsura, the taking of lunc h on the forest 
grass, the Lord’s manifestation of transcenden-
tal forms, and the wonderful prayers offered by 
Lord Brahmāis sure to achieve all his spiritual 
desires. (60) In this way the boys spent their 
childhood in the land of V ṛndāvana playing 
hide-and-go-seek, building play bridges, jump-
ing about like monkeys and engaging in many 
other such games. (61)  

SB 10.15: The Killing of Dhenuka, the Ass 
Demon  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  When Lord 
Rāma and Lord K ṛṣṇa attained the age of pau-
gaṇḍa [six to ten] while l iving in V ṛndāvana, 
the cowherd men allowed Them to take up the 
task of tending the cows. Engaging thus in the 
company of Their friends, the two boys ren-
dered the land of V ṛndāvana most auspicious 
by imprinting upon it the marks of Their lotus 
feet. (1) Th us desiring to enjoy pastimes, Lord 
Mādhava, sounding His flute, surrounded by 
cowherd boys who were chanting His glories, 
and accompanied by Lord Baladeva, kept the 
cows before Him and entered the V ṛndāvana 
forest, which was full of flowers and rich with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

628 
 nourishment for the animals. (2) The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead looked over that forest, 
which resounded with the charming sounds of 
bees, animals and birds, and which was en-
hanced by a lake whose clear water resembled 
the minds of great souls and by a  breeze carry-
ing the fragrance of hundred -petaled lotuses. 
Seeing all this, Lord K ṛṣṇa decided to enjoy the 
auspicious atmosphere. (3) The primeval Lord 
saw that the stately trees, with their beautiful 
reddish buds and their heavy burden of fruits 
and flow ers, were bending down to touch His 
feet with the tips of their branches. Thus He 
smiled gently and addressed His elder brother. 
(4) 

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
O greatest of Lords, just see how these trees are 
bowing their heads at Your lotu s feet, which are 
worshipable by the immortal demigods. The 
trees are offering You their fruits and flowers 
to eradicate the dark ignorance that has caused 
their birth as trees. (5) O Original Personality, 
these bees must all be great sages and most el-
evated devotees of Yours, for they are worship-
ing You by following You along the path and 
chanting Your glories, which are themselves a 
holy place for the entire world. Though You 
have disguised Yourself within this forest, O 
sinless one, they refuse to abando n You, their 
worshipable Lord. (6) O worshipable one, these 
peacocks are dancing before You out of joy, 
these doe are pleasing You with affectionate 
glances, just as the gopīs do, and these cuckoos 
are honoring You with Vedic prayers. All these 
residents o f the forest are most fortunate, and 
their behavior toward You certainly befits great 
souls receiving another great soul at home. (7) 
This earth has now become most fortunate, be-
cause You have touched her grass and bushes 
with Your feet and her trees and c reepers with 
Your fingernails, and because You have graced 
her rivers, mountains, birds and animals with 
Your merciful glances. But above all, You have 
embraced the young cowherd women between 
Your two armsa favor hankered after by the 
goddess of fortune h erself. (8)  
 Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus expressing 
His satisfaction with the beautiful forest of 
Vṛndāvana and its inhabitants, Lord K ṛṣṇa en-
joyed tending the cows and other animals with 
His friends on the banks of the river Yamunā 
below Govardhana Hill. (9) Sometimes the 
honeybees in V ṛndāvana became so mad with 
ecstasy that they closed their eyes and began to 
sing. Lord K ṛṣṇa, moving along the forest path 
with His cowherd boyfriends and Baladeva, 
would then respond to the bees by imitating 
their singing while His friends sang about His 
pastimes. Sometimes Lord K ṛṣṇa would imitate 
the chattering of a parrot, sometimes, with a 
sweet voice, the call of a cuckoo, and some-
times the cooing of swans. Sometimes He vig-
orously imitated the dancing of a peacock, 
making His cowherd boyfriends laugh. Some-
times, with a voice as deep as the rumbling of 
clouds, He would call out with great affection 
the names of the animals who had wandered far 
from the herd, thus enchanting the cows and the 
cowherd boys. (10 -12) 

Sometim es He would cry out in imitation of 
birds such as the cakoras, krauñcas, cakrāhvas, 
bhāradvājas and peacocks, and sometimes He 
would run away with the smaller animals in 
mock fear of lions and tigers. (13) When His 
elder brother, fatigued from playing, wou ld lie 
down with His head upon the lap of a cowherd 
boy, Lord K ṛṣṇa would help Him relax by per-
sonally massaging His feet and offering other 
services. (14) Sometimes, as the cowherd boys 
danced, sang, moved about and playfully 
fought with each other, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, 
standing nearby hand in hand, would glorify 
Their friends’ activities and laugh. (15) Some-
times Lord K ṛṣṇa grew tired from fighting and 
lay down at the base of a tree, resting upon a 
bed made of soft twigs and buds and using the 
lap of a cow herd friend as His pillow. (16) 
Some of the cowherd boys, who were all great 
souls, would then massage His lotus feet, and 
others, qualified by being free of all sin, would 
expertly fan the Supreme Lord. (17) My dear 
King, other boys would sing enchanting songs 
appropriate to the occasion, and their hearts 
would melt out of love for the Lord. (18) In this 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

629 
 way the Supreme Lord, whose soft lotus feet 
are personally attended by the goddess of for-
tune, concealed His transcendental opulences 
by His internal pote ncy and acted like the son 
of a cowherd. Yet even while enjoying like a 
village boy in the company of other village res-
idents, He often exhibited feats only God could 
perform. (19)  

Once, some of the cowherd boysŚrīdāmā, 
the very close friend of Rāma and K ṛṣṇa, along 
with Subala, Stokak ṛṣṇa and otherslovingly 
spoke the following words. (20) [The cowherd 
boys said:] O Rāma, Rāma, mighty -armed one! 
O Kṛṣṇa, destroyer of the miscreants! Not far 
from here is a very great forest filled with rows 
of palm trees. ( 21) In that Tālavana forest many 
fruits are falling from the trees, and many are 
already lying on the ground. But all the fruits 
are being guarded by the evil Dhenuka. (22) O 
Rāma, O K ṛṣṇa! Dhenuka is a most powerful 
demon and has assumed the form of an as s. He 
is surrounded by many friends who have as-
sumed a similar shape and who are just as pow-
erful as he. (23) The demon Dhenuka has eaten 
men alive, and therefore all people and animals 
are terrified of going to the Tāla forest. O killer 
of the enemy, even  the birds are afraid to fly 
there. (24) In the Tāla forest are sweet -smelling 
fruits no one has ever tasted. Indeed, even now 
we can smell the fragrance of the tāla fruits 
spreading all about. (25) O K ṛṣṇa! Please get 
those fruits for us. Our minds are so  attracted 
by their aroma! Dear Balarāma, our desire to 
have those fruits is very great. If You think it’s 
a good idea, let’s go to that Tāla forest. (26)  

Hearing the words of Their dear compan-
ions, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma laughed and, desir-
ing to please them,  set off for the Tālavana sur-
rounded by Their cowherd boyfriends. (27) 
Lord Balarāma entered the Tāla forest first. 
Then with His two arms He began forcefully 
shaking the trees with the power of a maddened 
elephant, causing the tāla fruits to fall to the 
ground. (28)  
 Hearing the sound of the falling fruits, the 
ass demon Dhenuka ran forward to attack, mak-
ing the earth and trees tremble. (29) The pow-
erful demon rushed up to Lord Baladeva and 
sharply struck the Lord’s chest with the hooves 
of his hind legs. Then Dhenuka began to run 
about, braying loudly. (30) Moving again to-
ward Lord Balarāma, O King, the furious ass 
situated himself with his back toward the Lord. 
Then, screaming in rage, the demon hurled his 
two hind legs at Him. (31) Lord Balarāma 
seized D henuka by his hooves, whirled him 
about with one hand and threw him into the top 
of a palm tree. The violent wheeling motion 
killed the demon. (32) Lord Balarāma threw the 
dead body of Dhenukāsura into the tallest palm 
tree in the forest, and when the dead  demon 
landed in the treetop, the tree began shaking. 
The great palm tree, causing a tree by its side 
also to shake, broke under the weight of the de-
mon. The neighboring tree caused yet another 
tree to shake, and this one struck yet another 
tree, which als o began shaking. In this way 
many trees in the forest shook and broke. (33) 
Because of Lord Balarāma’s pastime of throw-
ing the body of the ass demon into the top of 
the tallest palm tree, all the trees began shaking 
and striking against one another as if b lown 
about by powerful winds. (34) My dear 
Parīk ṣit, that Lord Balarāma killed Dhe-
nukāsura is not such a wonderful thing, consid-
ering that He is the unlimited Personality of 
Godhead, the controller of the entire universe. 
Indeed, the entire cosmos rests up on Him just 
as a woven cloth rests upon its own horizontal 
and vertical threads. (35) The other ass demons, 
close friends of Dhenukāsura, were enraged 
upon seeing his death, and thus they all imme-
diately ran to attack K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma. (36) 
O King, as th e demons attacked, K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma easily seized them one after another 
by their hind legs and threw them all into the 
tops of the palm trees. (37) The earth then ap-
peared beautifully covered with heaps of fruits 
and with the dead bodies of the demons, which 
were entangled in the broken tops of the palm 
trees. Indeed, the earth shone like the sky dec-
orated with clouds. (38) Hearing of this mag-
nificent feat of the two brothers, the demigods 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

630 
 and other elevated living beings rained down 
flowers and offered music and prayers in glori-
fication. (39) People now felt free to return to 
the forest where Dhenuka had been killed, and 
without fear they ate the fruits of the palm trees. 
Also, the cows could now graze freely upon the 
grass there. (40)  

Then lotus -eyed L ord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, whose glo-
ries are most pious to hear and chant, returned 
home to Vraja with His elder brother, 
Balarāma. Along the way, the cowherd boys, 
His faithful followers, chanted His glories. (41) 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s hair, powdered with the dust 
raised by t he cows, was decorated with a pea-
cock feather and forest flowers. The Lord 
glanced charmingly and smiled beautifully, 
playing upon His flute while His companions 
chanted His glories. The gopīs, all together, 
came forward to meet Him, their eyes very ea-
ger to see Him. (42)  

With their beelike eyes, the women of 
Vṛndāvana drank the honey of the beautiful 
face of Lord Mukunda, and thus they gave up 
the distress they had felt during the day because 
of separation from Him. The young V ṛndāvana 
ladies cast sidelon g glances at the Lordglances 
filled with bashfulness, laughter and submis-
sionand Śrī K ṛṣṇa, completely accepting these 
glances as a proper offering of respect, entered 
the cowherd village. (43) Mother Yaśodā and 
mother Rohi ṇī, acting most affectionately to-
ward their two sons, offered all the best things 
to Them in response to Their every desire and 
at the various appropriate times. (44) By being 
bathed and massaged, the two young Lords 
were relieved of the weariness caused by walk-
ing on the country roads. T hen They were 
dressed in attractive robes and decorated with 
transcendental garlands and fragrances. (45) 
After dining sumptuously on the delicious food 
given Them by Their mothers and being pam-
pered in various ways, the two brothers lay 
down upon Their ex cellent beds and happily 
went to sleep in the village of Vraja. (46)  

O King, the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa thus wan-
dered about the V ṛndāvana area, performing His pastimes. Once, surrounded by His boy-
friends, He went without Balarāma to the Ya-
munā River. (47) At that time the cows and 
cowherd boys were feeling acute distress from 
the glaring summer sun. Afflicted by thirst, 
they drank the water of the Yamunā River. But 
it had been contaminated with poison. (48) As 
soon as they touched the poisoned water, all the 
cows and boys lost their consciousness by the 
divine power of the Lord and fell lifeless at the 
water’s edge. O hero of the Kurus, seeing them 
in such a condition, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the master of 
all masters of mystic potency, felt compassion 
for these devotees, who had no Lord other than 
Him. Thus He immediately brought them back 
to life by showering His nectarean glance upon 
them. (49 -50) Regaining their full conscious-
ness, the cows and boys stood up out of the wa-
ter and began to look at one another in great 
astonishment. (51)  
O King, the cowherd boys then considered 
that although they had drunk poison and in fact 
had died, simply by the merciful glance of Go-
vinda they had regained their lives and stood up 
by their own strength. (52)  

SB 10.16: K ṛṣṇa Chastises th e Serpent 
Kāliya  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, seeing 
that the Yamunā River had been contaminated 
by the black snake Kāliya, desired to purify the 
river, and thus the Lord banished him from it. 
(1) 

King Parīk ṣit inquired:  O learned sage, 
please explain how the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead chastised the serpent Kāliya within 
the unfathomable waters of the Yamunā, and 
how it was that Kāliya had been living there for 
so many ages. (2) O brāhma ṇa, the unlimited 
Supreme Personality of Godhead freely acts ac-
cording to His own desires. Who could be sati-
ated when hearing the nectar of the magnani-
mous pastimes He performed as a cowherd boy 
in Vṛndāvana? (3)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

631 
 ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Within the 
river Kālindī [Yamunā] w as a lake inhabited by 
the serpent Kāliya, whose fiery poison con-
stantly heated and boiled its waters. Indeed, the 
vapors thus created were so poisonous that 
birds flying over the contaminated lake would 
fall down into it. (4) The wind blowing over 
that de adly lake carried droplets of water to the 
shore. Simply by coming in contact with that 
poisonous breeze, all vegetation and creatures 
on the shore died. (5) Lord K ṛṣṇa saw how the 
Kāliya serpent had polluted the Yamunā River 
with his terribly powerful poi son. Since K ṛṣṇa 
had descended from the spiritual world specif-
ically to subdue envious demons, the Lord im-
mediately climbed to the top of a very high ka-
damba tree and prepared Himself for battle. He 
tightened His belt, slapped His arms and then 
jumped into  the poisonous water. (6) When the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead landed in the 
serpent’s lake, the snakes there became ex-
tremely agitated and began breathing heavily, 
further polluting it with volumes of poison. The 
force of the Lord’s entrance into the l ake 
caused it to overflow on all sides, and poison-
ous, fearsome waves flooded the surrounding 
lands up to a distance of one hundred bow -
lengths. This is not at all amazing, however, for 
the Supreme Lord possesses infinite strength. 
(7) 

Kṛṣṇa began sportin g in Kāliya’s lake like a 
lordly elephantswirling His mighty arms and 
making the water resound in various ways. 
When Kāliya heard these sounds, he under-
stood that someone was trespassing in his lake. 
The serpent could not tolerate this and immedi-
ately came  forward. (8) Kāliya saw that Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, who wore yellow silken garments, was 
very delicate, His attractive body shining like a 
glowing white cloud, His chest bearing the 
mark of Śrīvatsa, His face smiling beautifully 
and His feet resembling the whorl of a  lotus 
flower. The Lord was playing fearlessly in the 
water. Despite His wonderful appearance, the 
envious Kāliya furiously bit Him on the chest 
and then completely enwrapped Him in his 
coils. (9) When the members of the cowherd 
community, who had accepted  Kṛṣṇa as their dearmost friend, saw Him enveloped in the 
snake’s coils, motionless, they were greatly 
disturbed. They had offered K ṛṣṇa every-
thingtheir very selves, their families, their 
wealth, wives and all pleasures. At the sight of 
the Lord in the clu tches of the Kāliya snake, 
their intelligence became deranged by grief, 
lamentation and fear, and thus they fell to the 
ground. (10) The cows, bulls and female calves, 
in great distress, called out piteously to K ṛṣṇa. 
Fixing their eyes on Him, they stood s till in 
fear, as if ready to cry but too shocked to shed 
tears. (11)  

In the V ṛndāvana area there then arose all 
three types of fearful omensthose on the earth, 
those in the sky and those in the bodies of living 
creatureswhich announced imminent danger. 
(12) Seeing the inauspicious omens, Nanda 
Mahārāja and the other cowherd men were 
fearful, for they knew that K ṛṣṇa had gone to 
herd the cows that day without His elder 
brother, Balarāma. Because they had dedicated 
their minds to K ṛṣṇa, accepting Him as thei r 
very life, they were unaware of His great power 
and opulence. Thus they concluded that the in-
auspicious omens indicated He had met with 
death, and they were overwhelmed with grief, 
lamentation and fear. All the inhabitants of 
Vṛndāvana, including the chi ldren, women and 
elderly persons, thought of K ṛṣṇa just as a cow 
thinks of her helpless young calf, and thus these 
poor, suffering people rushed out of the village, 
intent upon finding Him. (13 -15) The Supreme 
Lord Balarāma, the master of all transcendenta l 
knowledge, smiled and said nothing when He 
saw the residents of V ṛndāvana in such distress, 
since He understood the extraordinary power of 
His younger brother. (16) The residents hurried 
toward the banks of the Yamunā in search of 
their dearmost K ṛṣṇa, following the path 
marked by His footprints, which bore the 
unique signs of the Personality of Godhead. 
(17) 

The footprints of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the master of 
the entire cowherd community, were marked 
with the lotus flower, barleycorn, elephant 
goad, thunderbolt  and flag. My dear King 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

632 
 Parīk ṣit, seeing His footprints on the path 
among the cows’ hoofprints, the residents of 
Vṛndāvana rushed along in great haste. (18) As 
they hurried along the path to the bank of the 
Yamunā River, they saw from a distance that 
Kṛṣṇa was in the lake, motionless within the 
coils of the black serpent. They further saw that 
the cowherd boys had fallen unconscious and 
that the animals were standing on all sides, cry-
ing out for K ṛṣṇa. Seeing all this, the residents 
of Vṛndāvana were overwh elmed with anguish 
and confusion. (19) When the young gopīs, 
whose minds were constantly attached to 
Kṛṣṇa, the unlimited Supreme Lord, saw that 
He was now within the grips of the serpent, 
they remembered His loving friendship, His 
smiling glances and His talks with them. Burn-
ing with great sorrow, they saw the entire uni-
verse as void. (20) Although the elder gopīs 
were feeling just as much distress as she and 
were pouring forth a flood of sorrowful tears, 
they had to forcibly hold back K ṛṣṇa’s mother, 
whos e consciousness was totally absorbed in 
her son. Standing like corpses, with their eyes 
fixed upon His face, these gopīs each took turns 
recounting the pastimes of the darling of Vraja. 
(21) Lord Balarāma then saw that Nanda 
Mahārāja and the other cowherd men, who had 
dedicated their very lives to K ṛṣṇa, were begin-
ning to enter the serpent’s lake. As the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Lord Balarāma fully 
knew Lord K ṛṣṇa’s actual power, and therefore 
He restrained them. (22)  

The Lord remained for some time  within the 
coils of the serpent, imitating the behavior of an 
ordinary mortal. But when He understood that 
the women, children and other residents of His 
village of Gokula were in acute distress be-
cause of their love for Him, their only shelter 
and goal i n life, He immediately rose up from 
the bonds of the Kāliya serpent. (23) His coils 
tormented by the expanding body of the Lord, 
Kāliya released Him. In great anger the serpent 
then raised his hoods high and stood still, 
breathing heavily. His nostrils app eared like 
vessels for cooking poison, and the staring eyes 
in his face like firebrands. Thus the serpent 
looked at the Lord. (24) Again and again Kāliya licked his lips with his bifurcated tongues as He 
stared at K ṛṣṇa with a glance full of terrible, 
poisonous fire. But K ṛṣṇa playfully circled 
around him, just as Garu ḍa would play with a 
snake. In response, Kāliya also moved about, 
looking for an opportunity to bite the Lord. (25) 
Having severely depleted the serpent’s strength 
with His relentless circling , Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the 
origin of everything, pushed down Kāliya’s 
raised shoulders and mounted his broad serpen-
tine heads. Thus Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the original 
master of all fine arts, began to dance, His lotus 
feet deeply reddened by the touch of the numer-
ous jewe ls upon the serpent’s heads. (26) See-
ing the Lord dancing, His servants in the heav-
enly planetsthe Gandharvas, Siddhas, sages, 
Cāra ṇas and wives of the demigodsimmedi-
ately arrived there. With great pleasure they be-
gan accompanying the Lord’s dancing by pla y-
ing drums such as m ṛdaṅgas, pa ṇavas and 
ānakas. They also made offerings of songs, 
flowers and prayers. (27) My dear King, Kāliya 
had 101 prominent heads, and when one of 
them would not bow down, Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, 
who inflicts punishment on cruel wrong -doers, 
would smash that stubborn head by striking it 
with His feet. Then, as Kāliya entered his death 
throes, he began wheeling his heads around and 
vomiting ghastly blood from his mouths and 
nostrils. The serpent thus experienced extreme 
pain and misery. (28)  Exuding poisonous waste 
from his eyes, Kāliya, would occasionally dare 
to raise up one of his heads, which would 
breathe heavily with anger. Then the Lord 
would dance on it and subdue it, forcing it to 
bow down with His foot. The demigods took 
each of the se exhibitions as an opportunity to 
worship Him, the primeval Personality of God-
head, with showers of flowers. (29) My dear 
King Parīk ṣit, Lord K ṛṣṇa’s wonderful, power-
ful dancing trampled and broke all of Kāliya’s 
one thousand hoods. Then the serpent, pro-
fusely vomiting blood from his mouths, finally 
recognized Śrī K ṛṣṇa to be the eternal Person-
ality of Godhead, the supreme master of all 
moving and nonmoving beings, Śrī Nārāya ṇa. 
Thus within his mind Kāliya took shelter of the 
Lord. (30) When Kāliya’s wive s saw how the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

633 
 serpent had become so fatigued from the exces-
sive weight of Lord K ṛṣṇa, who carries the en-
tire universe in His abdomen, and how Kāliya’s 
umbrellalike hoods had been shattered by the 
striking of K ṛṣṇa’s heels, they felt great dis-
tress. With th eir clothing, ornaments and hair 
scattered in disarray, they then approached the 
eternal Personality of Godhead. (31) Their 
minds very much disturbed, those saintly ladies 
placed their children before them and then 
bowed down to the Lord of all creatures, laying 
their bodies flat upon the ground. They desired 
the liberation of their sinful husband and the 
shelter of the Supreme Lord, the giver of ulti-
mate shelter, and thus they folded their hands 
in supplication and approached Him. (32)  

The wives of the Kā liya serpent said:  The 
punishment this offender has been subjected to 
is certainly just. After all, You have incarnated 
within this world to curb down envious and 
cruel persons. You are so impartial that You 
look equally upon Your enemies and Your own 
sons, for when You impose a punishment on a 
living being You know it to be for his ultimate 
benefit. (33) What You have done here is actu-
ally mercy for us, since the punishment You 
give to the wicked certainly drives away all 
their contamination. Indeed, becau se this con-
ditioned soul, our husband, is so sinful that he 
has assumed the body of a serpent, Your anger 
toward him is obviously to be understood as 
Your mercy. (34) Did our husband carefully 
perform austerities in a previous life, with his 
mind free of p ride and full of respect for others? 
Is that why You are pleased with him? Or did 
he in some previous existence carefully execute 
religious duties with compassion for all living 
beings, and is that why You, the life of all living 
beings, are now satisfied with him? (35) O 
Lord, we do not know how the serpent Kāliya 
has attained this great opportunity of being 
touched by the dust of Your lotus feet. For this 
end, the goddess of fortune performed austeri-
ties for centuries, giving up all other desires and 
observing austere vows. (36) Those who have 
attained the dust of Your lotus feet never 
hanker for the kingship of heaven, limitless sovereignty, the position of Brahmā or rul-
ership over the earth. They are not interested 
even in the perfections of yoga or in l iberation 
itself. (37) O Lord, although this Kāliya, the 
king of the serpents, has taken birth in the mode 
of ignorance and is controlled by anger, he has 
achieved that which is difficult for others to 
achieve. Embodied souls, who are full of de-
sires and a re thus wandering in the cycle of 
birth and death, can have all benedictions man-
ifested before their eyes simply by receiving 
the dust of Your lotus feet. (38)  

We offer our obeisances unto You, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. Although pre-
sent in the h earts of all living beings as the Su-
persoul, You are all -pervasive. Although the 
original shelter of all created material elements, 
You exist prior to their creation. And although 
the cause of everything, You are transcendental 
to all material cause and ef fect, being the Su-
preme Soul. (39) Obeisances unto You, the Ab-
solute Truth, who are the reservoir of all tran-
scendental consciousness and potency and the 
possessor of unlimited energies. Although 
completely free of material qualities and trans-
formations, Y ou are the prime mover of mate-
rial nature. (40) Obeisances unto You, who are 
time itself, the shelter of time and the witness 
of time in all its phases. You are the universe, 
and also its separate observer. You are its crea-
tor, and also the totality of all  its causes. (41) 
Obeisances unto You, who are the ultimate soul 
of the physical elements, of the subtle basis of 
perception, of the senses, of the vital air of life, 
and of the mind, intelligence and conscious-
ness. By Your arrangement the infinitesimal 
spirit souls falsely identify with the three 
modes of material nature, and their perception 
of their own true self thus becomes clouded. 
We offer our obeisances unto You, the unlim-
ited Supreme Lord, the supremely subtle one, 
the omniscient Personality of God head, who 
are always fixed in unchanging transcendence, 
who sanction the opposing views of different 
philosophies, and who are the power upholding 
expressed ideas and the words that express 
them. (42 -43) We offer our obeisances again 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

634 
 and again to You, who are the basis of all au-
thoritative evidence, who are the author and ul-
timate source of the revealed scriptures, and 
who have manifested Yourself in those Vedic 
literatures encouraging sense gratification as 
well as in those encouraging renunciation of the 
material world. (44) We offer our obeisances to 
Lord K ṛṣṇa and Lord Rāma, the sons of 
Vasudeva, and to Lord Pradyumna and Lord 
Aniruddha. We offer our respectful obeisances 
unto the master of all the saintly devotees of 
Viṣṇu. (45) Obeisances to You, O Lor d, who 
manifest varieties of material and spiritual 
qualities. You disguise Yourself with the mate-
rial qualities, and yet the functioning of those 
same material qualities ultimately reveals Your 
existence. You stand apart from the material 
qualities as a w itness and can be fully known 
only by Your devotees. (46) O Lord H ṛṣīkeśa, 
master of the senses, please let us offer our 
obeisances unto You, whose pastimes are in-
conceivably glorious. Your existence can be in-
ferred from the necessity for a creator and re-
vealer of all cosmic manifestations. But alt-
hough Your devotees can understand You in 
this way, to the nondevotees You remain silent, 
absorbed in self -satisfaction. (47) Obeisances 
unto You, who know the destination of all 
things, superior and inferior, and  who are the 
presiding regulator of all that be. You are dis-
tinct from the universal creation, and yet You 
are the basis upon which the illusion of material 
creation evolves, and also the witness of this il-
lusion. Indeed, You are the root cause of the en-
tire world. (48)  

O almighty Lord, although You have no rea-
son to become involved in material activity, 
still You act through Your eternal potency of 
time to arrange for the creation, maintenance 
and destruction of this universe. You do this by 
awakening the  distinct functions of each of the 
modes of nature, which before the creation lie 
dormant. Simply by Your glance You perfectly 
execute all these activities of cosmic control in 
a sporting mood. (49) Therefore, all material 
bodies throughout the three world sthose that 
are peaceful, in the mode of goodness; those 
that are agitated, in the mode of passion; and those that are foolish, in the mode of igno-
ranceall are Your creations. Still, those living 
entities whose bodies are in the mode of good-
ness are especi ally dear to You, and it is to 
maintain them and protect their religious prin-
ciples that You are now present on the earth. 
(50) At least once, a master should tolerate an 
offense committed by his child or subject. O su-
preme peaceful Soul, You should theref ore for-
give our foolish husband, who did not under-
stand who You are. (51) O Supreme Lord, 
please be merciful. It is proper for the saintly to 
feel compassion for women like us. This ser-
pent is about to give up his life. Please give us 
back our husband, who  is our life and soul. (52) 
Now please tell us, Your maidservants, what 
we should do. Certainly anyone who faithfully 
executes Your order is automatically freed 
from all fear. (53)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus praised by 
the Nāgapatnīs, the Supreme Persona lity of 
Godhead released the serpent Kāliya, who had 
fallen unconscious, his heads battered by the 
striking of the Lord’s lotus feet. (54) Kāliya 
slowly regained his vital force and sensory 
functions. Then, breathing loudly and pain-
fully, the poor serpent addressed Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in hum-
ble submission. (55)  

The serpent Kāliya said:  Our very birth as 
a snake has made us envious, ignorant and con-
stantly angry. O my Lord, it is so difficult for 
people to give up their condition ed nature, by 
which they identify with that which is unreal. 
(56) O supreme creator, it is You who generate 
this universe, composed of the variegated ar-
rangement of the material modes, and in the 
process You manifest various kinds of person-
alities and spec ies, varieties of sensory and 
physical strength, and varieties of mothers and 
fathers with variegated mentalities and forms. 
(57) O Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
among all the species within Your material cre-
ation, we serpents are by nature always en-
raged. Being thus deluded by Your illusory en-
ergy, which is very difficult to give up, how can 
we possibly give it up on our own? (58) O Lord, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

635 
 since You are the omniscient Lord of the uni-
verse, You are the actual cause of freedom from 
illusion. Please arrange for us whatever You 
consider proper, whether it be mercy or punish-
ment. (59)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After hearing 
Kāliya’s words, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who was acting the role of a human 
being, replied: O serpent, you may not remain 
here any  longer. Go back to the ocean immedi-
ately, accompanied by your retinue of children, 
wives, other relatives and friends. Let this river 
be enjoyed by the cows and humans. (60) If a 
mortal being attentively remembers My com-
mand to youto leave V ṛndāvana and g o to the 
oceanand narrates this account at sunrise and 
sunset, he will never be afraid of you. (61) If 
one bathes in this place of My pastimes and of-
fers the water of this lake to the demigods and 
other worshipable personalities, or if one ob-
serves a fast and duly worships and remembers 
Me, he is sure to become free from all sinful 
reactions. (62) Out of fear of Garu ḍa, you left 
Rama ṇaka Island and came to take shelter of 
this lake. But because you are now marked with 
My footprints, Garu ḍa will no longer tr y to eat 
you. (63)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  My dear 
King, having been released by Lord K ṛṣṇa, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose activ-
ities are wonderful, Kāliya joined his wives in 
worshiping Him with great joy and reverence. 
(64) 

Kāliya worsh iped the Lord of the universe 
by offering Him fine garments, along with 
necklaces, jewels and other valuable orna-
ments, wonderful scents and ointments, and a 
large garland of lotus flowers. Having thus 
pleased the Lord, whose flag is marked with the 
emblem  of Garu ḍa, Kāliya felt satisfied. Re-
ceiving the Lord’s permission to leave, Kāliya 
circumambulated Him and offered Him obei-
sances. Then, taking his wives, friends and chil-
dren, he went to his island in the sea. The very 
moment Kāliya left, the Yamunā was immedi-
ately restored to her original condition, free from poison and full of nectarean water. This 
happened by the mercy of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, who was manifesting a hu-
manlike form to enjoy His pastimes. (65 -67) 

SB 10.17: The History of Kā liya 

[Having thus heard how Lord K ṛṣṇa chas-
tised Kāliya,] King Parīk ṣit inquired: Why did 
Kāliya leave Rama ṇaka Island, the abode of the 
serpents, and why did Garu ḍa become so antag-
onistic toward him alone? (1)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  To avoid being 
eaten  by Garu ḍa, the serpents had previously 
made an arrangement with him whereby they 
would each make a monthly offering of tribute 
at the base of a tree. Thus every month on 
schedule, O mighty -armed King Parīk ṣit, each 
serpent would duly make his offering to that 
powerful carrier of Vi ṣṇu as a purchase of pro-
tection. (2 -3) 

Although all the other serpents were duti-
fully making offerings to Garu ḍa, one ser-
pentthe arrogant Kāliya, son of Kadruwould eat 
all these offerings before Garu ḍa could claim 
them. Thus Kāl iya directly defied the carrier of 
Lord Vi ṣṇu. (4) O King, the greatly powerful 
Garu ḍa, who is very dear to the Supreme Lord, 
became angry when he heard of this. Desiring 
to kill Kāliya, he rushed toward the serpent 
with tremendous speed. (5) As Garu ḍa swi ftly 
fell upon him, Kāliya, who had the weapon of 
poison, raised his numerous heads to counterat-
tack. Showing his ferocious tongues and ex-
panding his horrible eyes, Kāliya then bit 
Garu ḍa with the weapons of his fangs. (6) The 
angry son of Tārk ṣya moved wi th overwhelm-
ing speed in repelling Kāliya’s attack. That ter-
ribly powerful carrier of Lord Madhusūdana 
struck the son of Kadru with his left wing, 
which shone like gold. (7) Beaten by Garu ḍa’s 
wing, Kāliya was extremely distraught, and 
thus he took shelter  of a lake adjoining the river 
Yamunā. Garu ḍa could not enter this lake. In-
deed, he could not even approach it. (8) In that 
very lake Garu ḍa had once desired to eat a fish-
fish being, after all, his normal food. Although 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

636 
 forbidden by the sage Saubhari, who was med-
itating there within the water, Garu ḍa took 
courage and, feeling hungry, seized the fish. (9) 
Seeing how the unfortunate fish in that lake had 
become most unhappy at the death of their 
leader, Saubhari uttered the following curse un-
der the impressio n that he was mercifully act-
ing for the benefit of the lake’s residents. (10) 
If Garu ḍa ever again enters this lake and eats 
the fish here, he will immediately lose his life. 
What I am saying is the truth. (11)  

Of all the serpents, only Kāliya came to 
know of this affair, and in fear of Garu ḍa he 
took up residence in that Yamunā lake. Later 
Lord K ṛṣṇa drove him out. (12)  

[Resuming his description of K ṛṣṇa’s 
chastisement of Kāliya, Śukadeva Gosvāmī 
continued:]  Kṛṣṇa rose up out of the lake wear-
ing divine g arlands, fragrances and garments, 
covered with many fine jewels, and decorated 
with gold. When the cowherds saw Him they 
all stood up immediately, just like an uncon-
scious person’s senses coming back to life. 
Filled with great joy, they affectionately em-
braced Him. (13 -14) Having regained their vi-
tal functions, Yaśodā, Rohi ṇī, Nanda and all the 
other cowherd women and men went up to 
Kṛṣṇa. O descendant of Kuru, even the dried -
up trees came back to life. (15) Lord Balarāma 
embraced His infallible brother and  laughed, 
knowing well the extent of K ṛṣṇa’s potency. 
Out of great feelings of love, Balarāma lifted 
Kṛṣṇa up on His lap and repeatedly looked at 
Him. The cows, bulls and young female calves 
also achieved the highest pleasure. (16) All the 
respectable brāh maṇas, together with their 
wives, came forward to greet Nanda Mahārāja. 
They said to him, “Your son was in the grips of 
Kāliya, but by the grace of Providence He is 
now free.” (17) The brāhma ṇas then advised 
Nanda Mahārāja, “To assure that your son 
Kṛṣṇa will always be free from danger, you 
should give charity to the brāhma ṇas.” With a 
satisfied mind, O King, Nanda Mahārāja then 
very gladly gave them gifts of cows and gold. 
(18) The greatly fortunate mother Yaśodā, hav-
ing lost her son and then regained Him,  placed Him on her lap. That chaste lady cried constant 
torrents of tears as she repeatedly embraced 
Him. (19)  

O best of kings [Parīk ṣit], because the resi-
dents of V ṛndāvana were feeling very weak 
from hunger, thirst and fatigue, they and the 
cows spent t he night where they were, lying 
down near the bank of the Kālindī. (20) During 
the night, while all the people of V ṛndāvana 
were asleep, a great fire blazed up within the 
dry summer forest. The fire surrounded the in-
habitants of Vraja on all sides and bega n to 
scorch them. (21) Then the residents of 
Vṛndāvana woke up, extremely disturbed by 
the great fire threatening to burn them. Thus 
they took shelter of K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, 
who by His spiritual potency appeared like an 
ordinary human being. (22) [V ṛndāvana’s resi-
dents said:] K ṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, O Lord of all opu-
lence! O Rāma, possessor of unlimited power! 
This most terrible fire is about to devour us, 
Your devotees! (23) O Lord, we are Your true 
friends and devotees. Please protect us from 
this insurmountab le fire of death. We can never 
give up Your lotus feet, which drive away all 
fear. (24) Seeing His devotees so disturbed, Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, the infinite Lord of the universe and 
possessor of infinite power, then swallowed the 
terrible forest fire. (25)  

SB 10.18:  Lord Balarāma Slays the De-
mon Pralamba  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Surrounded by 
His blissful companions, who constantly 
chanted His glories, Śrī K ṛṣṇa then entered the 
village of Vraja, which was decorated with 
herds of cows. (1) While K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
were thus enjoying life in V ṛndāvana in the 
guise of ordinary cowherd boys, the summer 
season gradually appeared. This season is not 
very pleasing to embodied souls. (2) Neverthe-
less, because the Supreme Personality of God-
head was personally staying in V ṛndāv ana 
along with Balarāma, summer manifested the 
qualities of spring. Such are the features of the 
land of V ṛndāvana. (3) In V ṛndāvana, the loud 
sound of waterfalls covered the crickets’ noise, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

637 
 and clusters of trees constantly moistened by 
spray from those w aterfalls beautified the entire 
area. (4)  

The wind wafting over the waves of the 
lakes and flowing rivers carried away the pol-
len of many varieties of lotuses and water lilies 
and then cooled the entire V ṛndāvana area. 
Thus the residents there did not suf fer from the 
heat generated by the blazing summer sun and 
seasonal forest fires. Indeed, V ṛndāvana was 
abundant with fresh green grass. (5) With their 
flowing waves the deep rivers drenched their 
banks, making them damp and muddy. Thus 
the rays of the sun,  which were as fierce as poi-
son, could not evaporate the earth’s sap or 
parch its green grass. (6) Flowers beautifully 
decorated the forest of V ṛndāvana, and many 
varieties of animals and birds filled it with 
sound. The peacocks and bees sang, and the 
cuck oos and cranes cooed. (7) Intending to en-
gage in pastimes, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, accompanied by Lord 
Balarāma and surrounded by the cowherd boys 
and the cows, entered the forest of V ṛndāvana 
as He played His flute. (8)  

Decorating  themselves with newly grown 
leaves, along with peacock feathers, garlands, 
clusters of flower buds, and colored minerals, 
Balarāma, K ṛṣṇa and Their cowherd friends 
danced, wrestled and sang. (9) As K ṛṣṇa 
danced, some of the boys accompanied Him by 
singing , and others by playing flutes, hand 
cymbals and buffalo horns, while still others 
praised His dancing. (10) O King, demigods 
disguised themselves as members of the cow-
herd community and, just as dramatic dancers 
praise another dancer, worshiped K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma, who were also appearing as cowherd 
boys. (11) K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma played with 
their cowherd boyfriends by whirling about, 
leaping, hurling, slapping and fighting. Some-
times K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma would pull the hair 
on the boys’ heads. (12) While the other boys 
were dancing, O King, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
would sometimes accompany them with song 
and instrumental music, and sometimes the two 
Lords would praise the boys, saying, “Very good! Very good!” (13) Sometimes the cow-
herd boys would play with bilva or  kumbha 
fruits, and sometimes with handfuls of āmalaka 
fruits. At other times they would play the 
games of trying to touch one another or of try-
ing to identify somebody while one is blind-
folded, and sometimes they would imitate ani-
mals and birds. (14) They  would sometimes 
jump around like frogs, sometimes play various 
jokes, sometimes ride in swings and sometimes 
imitate monarchs. (15) In this way K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma played all sorts of well -known games 
as They wandered among the rivers, hills, val-
leys, bush es, trees and lakes of V ṛndāvana. (16)  

While Rāma, K ṛṣṇa and Their cowherd 
friends were thus tending the cows in that 
Vṛndāvana forest, the demon Pralamba entered 
their midst. He had assumed the form of a cow-
herd boy with the intention of kidnapping 
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. (17) Since the Supreme 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, who had appeared in the Daśārha 
dynasty, sees everything, He understood who 
the demon was. Still, the Lord pretended to ac-
cept the demon as a friend, while at the same 
time seriously considering how to kill  him. (18) 
Kṛṣṇa, who knows all sports and games, then 
called together the cowherd boys and spoke as 
follows: “Hey cowherd boys! Let’s play now! 
We’ll divide ourselves into two even teams.” 
(19) The cowherd boys chose K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma as the leaders of t he two parties. 
Some of the boys were on K ṛṣṇa’s side, and 
others joined Balarāma. (20) The boys played 
various games involving carriers and passen-
gers. In these games the winners would climb 
up on the backs of the losers, who would have 
to carry them. (21 ) Thus carrying and being 
carried by one another, and at the same time 
tending the cows, the boys followed K ṛṣṇa to a 
banyan tree known as Bhā ṇḍīraka. (22)  

My dear King Parīk ṣit, when Śrīdāmā, 
Vṛṣabha and the other members of Lord 
Balarāma’s party were vi ctorious in these 
games, K ṛṣṇa and His followers had to carry 
them. (23) Defeated, the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa 
carried Śrīdāmā. Bhadrasena carried V ṛṣabha, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

638 
 and Pralamba carried Balarāma, the son of Ro-
hiṇī. (24) Considering Lord K ṛṣṇa invincible, 
that foremost d emon [Pralamba] quickly car-
ried Balarāma far beyond the spot where he was 
supposed to put his passenger down. (25) As 
the great demon carried Balarāma, the Lord be-
came as heavy as massive Mount Sumeru, and 
Pralamba had to slow down. He then resumed 
his act ual forman effulgent body that was cov-
ered with golden ornaments and that resembled 
a cloud flashing with lightning and carrying the 
moon. (26) When Lord Balarāma, who carries 
the plow weapon, saw the gigantic body of the 
demon as he moved swiftly in the s kywith his 
blazing eyes, fiery hair, terrible teeth reaching 
toward his scowling brows, and an amazing ef-
fulgence generated by his armlets, crown and 
earringsthe Lord seemed to become a little 
frightened. (27) Remembering the actual situa-
tion, the fearless  Balarāma understood that the 
demon was t ṛying to kidnap Him and take Him 
away from His companions. The Lord then be-
came furious and struck the demon’s head with 
His hard fist, just as Indra, the king of the dem-
igods, strikes a mountain with his thunderbol t 
weapon. (28) Thus smashed by Balarāma’s fist, 
Pralamba’s head immediately cracked open. 
The demon vomited blood from his mouth and 
lost all consciousness, and then with a great 
noise he fell lifeless on the ground, like a moun-
tain devastated by Indra. (2 9) 

The cowherd boys were most astonished to 
see how the powerful Balarāma had killed the 
demon Pralamba, and they exclaimed, “Excel-
lent! Excellent!” (30) They offered Balarāma 
profuse benedictions and then glorified Him, 
who deserves all glorification. Th eir minds 
overwhelmed with ecstatic love, they embraced 
Him as if He had come back from the dead. (31)  

The sinful Pralamba having been killed, the 
demigods felt extremely happy, and they show-
ered flower garlands upon Lord Balarāma and 
praised the excellen ce of His deed. (32)  

SB 10.19: Swallowing the Forest Fire  
 Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  While the cow-
herd boys were completely absorbed in play-
ing, their cows wandered far away. They hun-
gered for more grass, and with no one to watch 
them they entered a dense fo rest. (1) Passing 
from one part of the great forest to another, the 
goats, cows and buffalo eventually entered an 
area overgrown with sharp canes. The heat of a 
nearby forest fire made them thirsty, and they 
cried out in distress. (2) Not seeing the cows 
before them, K ṛṣṇa, Rāma and Their cowherd 
friends suddenly felt repentant for having ne-
glected them. The boys searched all around, but 
could not discover where they had gone. (3) 
Then the boys began tracing out the cows’ path 
by noting their hoofprints and  the blades of 
grass the cows had broken with their hooves 
and teeth. All the cowherd boys were in great 
anxiety because they had lost their source of 
livelihood. (4) Within the Muñjāforest the cow-
herd boys finally found their valuable cows, 
who had lost t heir way and were crying. Then 
the boys, thirsty and tired, herded the cows onto 
the path back home. (5) The Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead called out to the animals in a 
voice that resounded like a rumbling cloud. 
Hearing the sound of their own names, the  
cows were overjoyed and called out to the Lord 
in reply. (6)  

Suddenly a great forest fire appeared on all 
sides, threatening to destroy all the forest crea-
tures. Like a chariot driver, the wind swept the 
fire onward, and terrible sparks shot in all di-
rections. Indeed, the great fire extended its 
tongues of flame toward all moving and non-
moving creatures. (7) As the cows and cowherd 
boys stared at the forest fire attacking them on 
all sides, they became fearful. The boys then 
approached K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma for shelter, 
just as those who are disturbed by fear of death 
approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
The boys addressed Them as follows. (8) [The 
cowherd boys said:] O K ṛṣṇa! K ṛṣṇa! Most 
powerful one! O Rāma! You whose prowess 
never fails! Please sav e Your devotees, who are 
about to be burned by this forest fire and have 
come to take shelter of You! (9) K ṛṣṇa! Cer-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

639 
 tainly Your own friends shouldn’t be de-
stroyed. O knower of the nature of all things, 
we have accepted You as our Lord, and we are 
souls sur rendered unto You! (10)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Hearing these 
pitiful words from His friends, the Supreme 
Lord K ṛṣṇa told them, “Just close your eyes and 
do not be afraid.” (11) “All right,” the boys re-
plied, and immediately closed their eyes. Then 
the Sup reme Lord, the master of all mystic 
power, opened His mouth and swallowed the 
terrible fire, saving His friends from danger. 
(12) The cowherd boys opened their eyes and 
were amazed to find not only that they and the 
cows had been saved from the terrible fi re but 
that they had all been brought back to the 
Bhāṇḍīra tree. (13) When the cowherd boys 
saw that they had been saved from the forest 
fire by the Lord’s mystic power, which is man-
ifested by His internal potency, they began to 
think that K ṛṣṇa must be a demigod. (14)  

It was now late in the afternoon, and Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, accompanied by Balarāma, turned the 
cows back toward home. Playing His flute in a 
special way, K ṛṣṇa returned to the cowherd vil-
lage in the company of His cowherd friends, 
who chanted His glo ries. (15) The young gopīs 
took the greatest pleasure in seeing Govinda 
come home, since for them even a moment 
without His association seemed like a hundred 
ages. (16)  

SB 10.20: The Rainy Season and Autumn 
in Vṛndāvana  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  To the ladi es of 
Vṛndāvana, the cowherd boys then related in 
full detail K ṛṣṇa’s and Balarāma’s wonderful 
activities of delivering them from the forest fire 
and killing the demon Pralamba. (1) The elder 
cowherd men and ladies were amazed to hear 
this account, and the y concluded that K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma must be exalted demigods who had 
appeared in V ṛndāvana. (2)  

Then the rainy season began, giving life and 
sustenance to all living beings. The sky began to rumble with thunder, and lightning flashed 
on the horizon. (3) T he sky was then covered 
by dense blue clouds accompanied by lightning 
and thunder. Thus the sky and its natural illu-
mination were covered in the same way that the 
spirit soul is covered by the three modes of ma-
terial nature. (4) With its rays, the sun had for 
eight months drunk up the earth’s wealth in the 
form of water. Now that the proper time had ar-
rived, the sun began releasing this accumulated 
wealth. (5) Flashing with lightning, great 
clouds were shaken and swept about by fierce 
winds. Just like merci ful persons, the clouds 
gave their lives for the pleasure of this world. 
(6) 

The earth had been emaciated by the sum-
mer heat, but she became fully nourished again 
when moistened by the god of rain. Thus the 
earth was like a person whose body has been 
emac iated by austerities undergone for a mate-
rial purpose, but who again becomes fully nour-
ished when he achieves the fruit of those aus-
terities. (7) In the evening twilight during the 
rainy season, the darkness allowed the glow-
worms but not the stars to shine  forth, just as in 
the Age of Kali the predominance of sinful ac-
tivities allows atheistic doctrines to over-
shadow the true knowledge of the Vedas. (8) 
The frogs, who had all along been lying silent, 
suddenly began croaking when they heard the 
rumbling of t he rain clouds, in the same way 
that brāhma ṇa students, who perform their 
morning duties in silence begin reciting their 
lessons when called by their teacher. (9) With 
the advent of the rainy season, the insignificant 
streams, which had become dry, began t o swell 
and then strayed from their proper courses, like 
the body, property and money of a man con-
trolled by the urges of his senses. (10) The 
newly grown grass made the earth emerald 
green, the indragopa insects added a reddish 
hue, and white mushrooms ad ded further color 
and circles of shade. Thus the earth appeared 
like a person who has suddenly become rich. 
(11) With their wealth of grains, the fields gave 
joy to the farmers. But those fields created re-
morse in the hearts of those who were too proud 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

640 
 to engage in farming and who failed to under-
stand how everything is under the control of the 
Supreme. (12) As all creatures of the land and 
water took advantage of the newly fallen rain-
water, their forms became attractive and pleas-
ing, just as a devotee becom es beautiful by en-
gaging in the service of the Supreme Lord. (13) 
Where the rivers joined the ocean it became ag-
itated, its waves blown about by the wind, just 
as the mind of an immature yogī becomes agi-
tated because he is still tainted by lust and at-
tache d to the objects of sense gratification. (14) 
Just as devotees whose minds are absorbed in 
the Personality of Godhead remain peaceful 
even when attacked by all sorts of dangers, the 
mountains in the rainy season were not at all 
disturbed by the repeated st riking of the rain -
bearing clouds. (15) During the rainy season 
the roads, not being cleansed, became covered 
with grass and debris and were thus difficult to 
make out. These roads were like religious scrip-
tures that brāhma ṇas no longer study and that 
thus become corrupted and covered over with 
the passage of time. (16) Though the clouds are 
the well -wishing friends of all living beings, the 
lightning, fickle in its affinities, moved from 
one group of clouds to another, like lusty 
women unfaithful even to v irtuous men. (17) 
When the curved bow of Indra [the rainbow] 
appeared in the sky, which had the quality of 
thundering sound, it was unlike ordinary bows 
because it did not rest upon a string. Similarly, 
when the Supreme Lord appears in this world, 
which is  the interaction of the material quali-
ties, He is unlike ordinary persons because He 
remains free from all material qualities and in-
dependent of all material conditions. (18) Dur-
ing the rainy season the moon was prevented 
from appearing directly by the cov ering of the 
clouds, which were themselves illumined by 
the moon’s rays. Similarly, the living being in 
material existence is prevented from appearing 
directly by the covering of the false ego, which 
is itself illumined by the consciousness of the 
pure sou l. (19) The peacocks became festive 
and cried out a joyful greeting when they saw 
the clouds arrive, just as people distressed in 
household life feel pleasure when the pure dev-
otees of the infallible Supreme Lord visit them. (20) The trees had grown thin a nd dry, but after 
they drank the newly fallen rainwater through 
their feet, their various bodily features blos-
somed. Similarly, one whose body has grown 
thin and weak from austerity again exhibits his 
healthy bodily features upon enjoying the ma-
terial obje cts gained through that austerity. (21) 
The cranes continued dwelling on the shores of 
the lakes, although the shores were agitated 
during the rainy season, just as materialistic 
persons with contaminated minds always re-
main at home, despite the many distu rbances 
there. (22) When Indra sent forth his rains, the 
floodwaters broke through the irrigation dikes 
in the agricultural fields, just as in the Kali -
yuga the atheists’ false theories break down the 
boundaries of Vedic injunctions. (23) The 
clouds, impel led by the winds, released their 
nectarean water for the benefit of all living be-
ings, just as kings, instructed by their brāhma ṇa 
priests, dispense charity to the citizens. (24)  

When the V ṛndāvana forest had thus be-
come resplendent, filled with ripe date s and 
jambu fruits, Lord K ṛṣṇa, surrounded by His 
cows and cowherd boyfriends and accompa-
nied by Śrī Balarāma, entered that forest to en-
joy. (25) The cows had to move slowly because 
of their weighty milk bags, but they quickly ran 
to the Supreme Personalit y of Godhead as soon 
as He called them, their affection for Him caus-
ing their udders to become wet. (26) The Lord 
saw the joyful aborigine girls of the forest, the 
trees dripping sweet sap, and the mountain wa-
terfalls, whose resounding indicated that there  
were caves nearby. (27) When it rained, the 
Lord would sometimes enter a cave or the hol-
low of a tree to play and to eat roots and fruits. 
(28) Lord K ṛṣṇa would take His meal of boiled 
rice and yogurt, sent from home, in the com-
pany of Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa and  the cowherd boys 
who regularly ate with Him. They would all sit 
down to eat on a large stone near the water. (29) 
Lord K ṛṣṇa watched the contented bulls, calves 
and cows sitting on the green grass and grazing 
with closed eyes, and He saw that the cows 
were tired from the burden of their heavy milk 
bags. Thus observing the beauty and opulence 
of V ṛndāvana’s rainy season, a perennial 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

641 
 source of great happiness, the Lord offered all 
respect to that season, which was expanded 
from His own internal potency. (30 -31) 

While Lord Rāma and Lord Keśava were 
thus dwelling in V ṛndāvana, the fall season ar-
rived, when the sky is cloudless, the water clear 
and the wind gentle. (32) The autumn season, 
which regenerated the lotus flowers, also re-
stored the various bodies of water to their orig-
inal purity, just as the process of devotional ser-
vice purifies the minds of the fallen yogīs when 
they return to it. (33) Autumn cleared the sky 
of clouds, let the animals get out of their 
crowded living conditions, cleaned the earth of  
its covering of mud, and purified the water of 
contamination, in the same way that loving ser-
vice rendered to Lord K ṛṣṇa frees the members 
of the four spiritual orders from their respective 
troubles. (34) The clouds, having given up all 
they possessed, sh one forth with purified efful-
gence, just like peaceful sages who have given 
up all material desires and are thus free of all 
sinful propensities. (35) During this season the 
mountains sometimes released their pure water 
and sometimes did not, just as exper ts in tran-
scendental science sometimes give the nectar of 
transcendental knowledge and sometimes do 
not. (36) The fish swimming in the increasingly 
shallow water did not at all understand that the 
water was diminishing, just as foolish family 
men cannot se e how the time they have left to 
live is diminishing with every passing day. (37) 
Just as a miserly, poverty -stricken person 
overly absorbed in family life suffers because 
he cannot control his senses, the fish swimming 
in the shallow water had to suffer t he heat of 
the autumn sun. (38) Gradually the different ar-
eas of land gave up their muddy condition and 
the plants grew past their unripe stage, in the 
same way that sober sages give up egotism and 
possessiveness. These are based on things dif-
ferent from t he real self, namely, the material 
body and its by -products. (39) With the arrival 
of autumn, the ocean and the lakes became si-
lent, their water still, just like a sage who has 
desisted from all material activities and given 
up his recitation of Vedic mant ras. (40) In the 
same way that the practitioners of yoga bring their senses under strict control to check their 
consciousness from flowing out through the ag-
itated senses, the farmers erected strong mud 
banks to keep the water within their rice fields 
from  draining out. (41) The autumn moon re-
lieved all creatures of the suffering caused by 
the sun’s rays, just as wisdom relieves a person 
of the misery caused by his identifying with his 
material body and as Lord Mukunda relieves 
Vṛndāvana’s ladies of the dis tress caused by 
their separation from Him. (42) Free of clouds 
and filled with clearly visible stars, the autumn 
sky shone brilliantly, just like the spiritual con-
sciousness of one who has directly experienced 
the purport of the Vedic scriptures. (43) The 
full moon shone in the sky, surrounded by stars, 
just as Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Yadu dynasty, 
shone brilliantly on the earth, surrounded by all 
the V ṛṣṇis. (44) Except for the gopīs, whose 
hearts had been stolen by K ṛṣṇa, the people 
could forget their suffering by embracing the 
wind coming from the flower -filled forest. This 
wind was neither hot nor cold. (45) By the in-
fluence of the autumn season, all the cows, doe, 
women and female birds became fertile and 
were followed by their respective mates in 
search of sexual enjoyment, just as activities 
performed for the service of the Supreme Lord 
are automatically followed by all beneficial re-
sults. (46) O King Parīk ṣit, when the autumn 
sun rose, all the lotus flowers blossomed hap-
pily, except the night -bloom ing kumut, just as 
in the presence of a strong ruler everyone be-
comes fearless, except the thieves. (47) In all 
the towns and villages people held great festi-
vals, performing the Vedic fire sacrifice for 
honoring and tasting the first grains of the new 
harvest, along with similar celebrations that 
followed local custom and tradition. Thus the 
earth, rich with newly grown grain and espe-
cially beautified by the presence of K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma, shone beautifully as an expansion of 
the Supreme Lord. (48) The mer chants, sages, 
kings and brahmacārī students, kept in by the 
rain, were at last free to go out and attain their 
desired objects, just as those who achieve per-
fection in this life can, when the proper time 
comes, leave the material body and attain their 
respective forms. (49)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

642 

SB 10.21: The Gopīs Glorify the Song of 
Kṛṣṇa’s Flute  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus the 
Vṛndāvana forest was filled with transparent 
autumnal waters and cooled by breezes per-
fumed with the fragrance of lotus flowers 
growing in the clear  lakes. The infallible Lord, 
accompanied by His cows and cowherd boy-
friends, entered that V ṛndāvana forest. (1) The 
lakes, rivers and hills of V ṛndāvana resounded 
with the sounds of maddened bees and flocks 
of birds moving about the flowering trees. In 
the company of the cowherd boys and 
Balarāma, Madhupati [Śrī K ṛṣṇa] entered that 
forest, and while herding the cows He began to 
vibrate His flute. (2) When the young ladies in 
the cowherd village of Vraja heard the song of 
Kṛṣṇa’s flute, which arouses the inf luence of 
Cupid, some of them privately began describ-
ing K ṛṣṇa’s qualities to their intimate friends. 
(3) The cowherd girls began to speak about 
Kṛṣṇa, but when they remembered His activi-
ties, O King, the power of Cupid disturbed their 
minds, and thus they  could not speak. (4) Wear-
ing a peacock -feather ornament upon His head, 
blue kar ṇikāra flowers on His ears, a yellow 
garment as brilliant as gold, and the Vaijayantī 
garland, Lord K ṛṣṇa exhibited His transcenden-
tal form as the greatest of dancers as He ent ered 
the forest of V ṛndāvana, beautifying it with the 
marks of His footprints. He filled the holes of 
His flute with the nectar of His lips, and the 
cowherd boys sang His glories. (5) O King, 
when the young ladies in Vraja heard the sound 
of Kṛṣṇa’s flute,  which captivates the minds of 
all living beings, they all embraced one another 
and began describing it. (6)  

The cowherd girls said:  O friends, those 
eyes that see the beautiful faces of the sons of 
Mahārāja Nanda are certainly fortunate. As 
these two son s enter the forest, surrounded by 
Their friends, driving the cows before Them, 
They hold Their flutes to Their mouths and 
glance lovingly upon the residents of 
Vṛndāvana. For those who have eyes, we think 
there is no greater object of vision. (7) Dressed in a charming variety of garments, upon which 
Their garlands rest, and decorating Themselves 
with peacock feathers, lotuses, lilies, newly 
grown mango sprouts and clusters of flower 
buds, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma shine forth magnifi-
cently among the assembly of co wherd boys. 
They look just like the best of dancers appear-
ing on a dramatic stage, and sometimes They 
sing. (8) My dear gopīs, what auspicious activ-
ities must the flute have performed to enjoy the 
nectar of K ṛṣṇa’s lips independently and leave 
only a taste  for us gopīs, for whom that nectar 
is actually meant! The forefathers of the flute, 
the bamboo trees, shed tears of pleasure. His 
mother, the river on whose bank the bamboo 
was born, feels jubilation, and therefore her 
blooming lotus flowers are standing like hair on 
her body. (9)  

O friend, V ṛndāvana is spreading the glory 
of the earth, having obtained the treasure of the 
lotus feet of K ṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī. The pea-
cocks dance madly when they hear Govinda’s 
flute, and when other creatures see them from  
the hilltops, they all become stunned. (10) 
Blessed are all these foolish deer because they 
have approached Mahārāja Nanda’s son, who 
is gorgeously dressed and is playing on His 
flute. Indeed, both the doe and the bucks wor-
ship the Lord with looks of love  and affection. 
(11) 

Kṛṣṇa’s beauty and character create a festi-
val for all women. Indeed, when the demigods’ 
wives flying in airplanes with their husbands 
catch sight of Him and hear His resonant flute -
song, their hearts are shaken by Cupid, and they 
become so bewildered that the flowers fall out 
of their hair and their belts loosen. (12) Using 
their upraised ears as vessels, the cows are 
drinking the nectar of the flute -song flowing 
out of K ṛṣṇa’s mouth. The calves, their mouths 
full of milk from their m others’ moist nipples, 
stand still as they take Govinda within them-
selves through their tear -filled eyes and em-
brace Him within their hearts. (13) O mother, 
in this forest all the birds have risen onto the 
beautiful branches of the trees to see K ṛṣṇa. 
With  closed eyes they are simply listening in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

643 
 silence to the sweet vibrations of His flute, and 
they are not attracted by any other sound. 
Surely these birds are on the same level as great 
sages. (14)  

When the rivers hear the flute -song of 
Kṛṣṇa, their minds begin to desire Him, and 
thus the flow of their currents is broken and 
their waters are agitated, moving around in 
whirlpools. Then with the arms of their waves 
the rivers embrace Murāri’s lotus feet and, 
holding on to them, present offerings of lotus 
flowers. (15) In the company of Balarāma and 
the cowherd boys, Lord K ṛṣṇa is continually vi-
brating His flute as He herds all the animals of 
Vraja, even under the full heat of the summer 
sun. Seeing this, the cloud in the sky has ex-
panded himself out of love. H e is rising high 
and constructing out of his own body, with its 
multitude of flower -like droplets of water, an 
umbrella for the sake of his friend. (16)  

The aborigine women of the V ṛndāvana area 
become disturbed by lust when they see the 
grass marked with  reddish ku ṅkuma powder. 
Endowed with the color of K ṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, 
this powder originally decorated the breasts of 
His beloveds, and when the aborigine women 
smear it on their faces and breasts, they feel 
fully satisfied and give up all their anxiety. (17) 
Of all the devotees, this Govardhana Hill is the 
best! O my friends, this hill supplies K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma, along with Their calves, cows and 
cowherd friends, with all kinds of necessities-
water for drinking, very soft grass, caves, fruits, 
flowers and  vegetables. In this way the hill of-
fers respects to the Lord. Being touched by the 
lotus feet of K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, Govardhana 
Hill appears very jubilant. (18) My dear 
friends, as K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma pass through 
the forest with Their cowherd friends, lea ding 
Their cows, They carry ropes to bind the cows’ 
rear legs at the time of milking. When Lord 
Kṛṣṇa plays on His flute, the sweet music 
causes the moving living entities to become 
stunned and the nonmoving trees to tremble 
with ecstasy. These things are certainly very 
wonderful. (19)  
 Thus narrating to one another the playful 
pastimes of the Supreme Personality of God-
head as He wandered about in the V ṛndāvana 
forest, the gopīs became fully absorbed in 
thoughts of Him. (20)  

SB 10.22: K ṛṣṇa Steals the Garm ents of 
the Unmarried Gopīs  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  During the first 
month of the winter season, the young unmar-
ried girls of Gokula observed the vow of wor-
shiping goddess Kātyāyanī. For the entire 
month they ate only unspiced khichrī. (1) My 
dear King, af ter they had bathed in the water of 
the Yamunā just as the sun was rising, the gopīs 
made an earthen deity of goddess Durgā on the 
riverbank. Then they worshiped her with such 
aromatic substances as sandalwood pulp, along 
with other items both opulent and simple, in-
cluding lamps, fruits, betel nuts, newly grown 
leaves, and fragrant garlands and incense. (2 -3) 
Each of the young unmarried girls performed 
her worship while chanting the following man-
tra. “O goddess Kātyāyanī, O great potency of 
the Lord, O poss essor of great mystic power 
and mighty controller of all, please make the 
son of Nanda Mahārāja my husband. I offer my 
obeisances unto you.” (4) Thus for an entire 
month the girls carried out their vow and 
properly worshiped the goddess Bhadrakālī, 
fully a bsorbing their minds in K ṛṣṇa and medi-
tating upon the following thought: “May the 
son of King Nanda become my husband.” (5) 
Each day they rose at dawn. Calling out to one 
another by name, they all held hands and loudly 
sang the glories of K ṛṣṇa while going  to the 
Kālindī to take their bath. (6)  

One day they came to the riverbank and, put-
ting aside their clothing as they had done be-
fore, happily played in the water while singing 
the glories of K ṛṣṇa. (7) Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead and ma ster of all 
masters of mystic yoga, was aware of what the 
gopīs were doing, and thus He went there sur-
rounded by His young companions to award the 
gopīs the perfection of their endeavor. (8) Tak-
ing the girls’ garments, He quickly climbed to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

644 
 the top of a ka damba tree. Then, as He laughed 
loudly and His companions also laughed, He 
addressed the girls jokingly. (9) [Lord K ṛṣṇa 
said:] My dear girls, you may each come here 
as you wish and take back your garments. I’m 
telling you the truth and am not joking with 
you, since I see you’re fatigued from executing 
austere vows. (10) I have never before spoken 
a lie, and these boys know it. Therefore, O slen-
der-waisted girls, please come forward, either 
one by one or all together, and pick out your 
clothes. (11)  

Seeing  how K ṛṣṇa was joking with them, the 
gopīs became fully immersed in love for Him, 
and as they glanced at each other they began to 
laugh and joke among themselves, even in their 
embarrassment. But still they did not come out 
of the water. (12) As Śrī Govind a spoke to the 
gopīs in this way, His joking words completely 
captivated their minds. Submerged up to their 
necks in the cold water, they began to shiver. 
Thus they addressed Him as follows. (13) [The 
gopīs said:] Dear K ṛṣṇa, don’t be unfair! We 
know that You are the respectable son of Nanda 
and that You are honored by everyone in Vraja. 
You are also very dear to us. Please give us 
back our clothes. We are shivering in the cold 
water. (14) O Śyāmasundara, we are Your 
maidservants and must do whatever You sa y. 
But give us back our clothing. You know what 
the religious principles are, and if You don’t 
give us our clothes we will have to tell the king. 
Please! (15)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  If you girls are actually My maidservants, 
and if you w ill really do what I say, then come 
here with your innocent smiles and let each girl 
pick out her clothes. If you don’t do what I say, 
I won’t give them back to you. And even if the 
king becomes angry, what can he do? (16) 
Then, shivering from the painful cold, all the 
young girls rose up out of the water, covering 
their pubic area with their hands. (17)  

When the Supreme Lord saw how the gopīs 
were struck with embarrassment, He was satis-
fied by their pure loving affection. Putting their clothes on His shou lder, the Lord smiled and 
spoke to them with affection. (18) [Lord K ṛṣṇa 
said:] You girls bathed naked while executing 
your vow, and that is certainly an offense 
against the demigods. To counteract your sin 
you should offer obeisances while placing your 
joined palms above your heads. Then you 
should take back your lower garments. (19) 
Thus the young girls of V ṛndāvana, considering 
what Lord Acyuta had told them, accepted that 
they had suffered a falldown from their vow by 
bathing naked in the river. But the y still desired 
to successfully complete their vow, and since 
Lord K ṛṣṇa is Himself the ultimate result of all 
pious activities, they offered their obeisances to 
Him to cleanse away all their sins. (20) Seeing 
them bow down like that, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, the son of Devakī, gave them 
back their garments, feeling compassionate to-
ward them and satisfied by their act. (21) Alt-
hough the gopīs had been thoroughly cheated, 
deprived of their modesty, ridiculed and made 
to act just like toy dolls, an d although their 
clothing had been stolen, they did not feel at all 
inimical toward Śrī K ṛṣṇa. Rather, they were 
simply joyful to have this opportunity to asso-
ciate with their beloved. (22) The gopīs were 
addicted to associating with their beloved 
Kṛṣṇa, and thus they became captivated by 
Him. Thus, even after putting their clothes on 
they did not move. They simply remained 
where they were, shyly glancing at Him. (23)  

The Supreme Lord understood the determi-
nation of the gopīs in executing their strict vow.  
The Lord also knew that the girls desired to 
touch His lotus feet, and thus Lord Dāmodara, 
Kṛṣṇa, spoke to them as follows. (24) [Lord 
Kṛṣṇa said:] O saintly girls, I understand that 
your real motive in this austerity has been to 
worship Me. That intent o f yours is approved 
of by Me, and indeed it must come to pass. (25) 
The desire of those who fix their minds on Me 
does not lead to material desire for sense grati-
fication, just as barleycorns burned by the sun 
and then cooked can no longer grow into new 
sprouts. (26)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

645 
 Go now, girls, and return to Vraja. Your de-
sire is fulfilled, for in My company you will en-
joy the coming nights. After all, this was the 
purpose of your vow to worship goddess 
Kātyāyanī, O pure -hearted ones. (27)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus instructed 
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
young girls, their desire now fulfilled, could 
bring themselves only with great difficulty to 
return to the village of Vraja, meditating all the 
while upon His lotus feet. (28)  

Some time later Lord K ṛṣṇa, the son of 
Devakī, surrounded by His cowherd friends 
and accompanied by His elder brother, 
Balarāma, went a good distance away from 
Vṛndāvana, herding the cows. (29) When the 
sun’s heat became intense, Lord K ṛṣṇa saw that 
the trees were acting as umbre llas by shading 
Him, and thus He spoke as follows to His boy-
friends. (30) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] O Stoka K ṛṣṇa 
and A ṁśu, O Śrīdāma, Subala and Arjuna, O 
Viśāla, V ṛṣabha, Ojasvī, Devaprastha and 
Varūthapa, just see these greatly fortunate 
trees, whose lives are  completely dedicated to 
the benefit of others. Even while tolerating the 
wind, rain, heat and snow, they protect us from 
these elements. (31 -32) 

Just see how these trees are maintaining 
every living entity! Their birth is successful. 
Their behavior is ju st like that of great person-
alities, for anyone who asks anything from a 
tree never goes away disappointed. (33) These 
trees fulfill one’s desires with their leaves, 
flowers and fruits, their shade, roots, bark and 
wood, and also with their fragrance, sap,  ashes, 
pulp and shoots. (34) It is the duty of every liv-
ing being to perform welfare activities for the 
benefit of others with his life, wealth, intelli-
gence and words. (35) Thus moving among the 
trees, whose branches were bent low by their 
abundance of t wigs, fruits, flowers and leaves, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa came to the Yamunā River. (36) 
The cowherd boys let the cows drink the clear, 
cool and wholesome water of the Yamunā. O 
King Parīk ṣit, the cowherd boys themselves also drank that sweet water to their full satis-
faction. (37) Then, O King, the cowherd boys 
began herding the animals in a leisurely way 
within a small forest along the Yamunā. But 
soon they became afflicted by hunger and, ap-
proaching K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, spoke as fol-
lows. (38)  

SB 10.23: The Brāhma ṇas’ Wives Blessed  

The cowherd boys said:  O Rāma, Rāma, 
mighty -armed one! O K ṛṣṇa, chastiser of the 
wicked! We are being harassed by hunger, and 
You should do something about it. (1)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus entreated 
by the cowherd boys, the Supreme Perso nality 
of Godhead, the son of Devakī, replied as fol-
lows, desiring to please certain of His devotees 
who were brāhma ṇas’ wives. (2)  

[Lord K ṛṣṇa said:]  Please go to the sacrifi-
cial arena where a group of brāhma ṇas, learned 
in the Vedic injunctions, are now  performing 
the Ā ṅgirasa sacrifice to gain promotion to 
heaven. (3) When you go there, My dear cow-
herd boys, simply request some food. Declare 
to them the name of My elder brother, the Su-
preme Lord Balarāma, and also My name, and 
explain that you have been  sent by Us. (4) Thus 
instructed by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the cowherd boys went there and submit-
ted their request. They stood before the 
brāhma ṇas with palms joined in supplication 
and then fell flat on the ground to offer respect. 
(5) [The c owherd boys said:] O earthly gods, 
please hear us. We cowherd boys are executing 
the orders of K ṛṣṇa, and we have been sent here 
by Balarāma. We wish all good for you. Please 
acknowledge our arrival. (6) Lord Rāma and 
Lord Acyuta are tending Their cows not  far 
from here. They are hungry and want you to 
give Them some of your food. Therefore, O 
brāhma ṇas, O best of the knowers of religion, 
if you have faith please give some food to 
Them. (7) Except during the interval between 
the initiation of the performer of a sacrifice and 
the actual sacrifice of the animal, O most pure 
brāhma ṇas, it is not contaminating for even the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

646 
 initiated to partake of food, at least in sacrifices 
other than the Sautrāma ṇi. (8) The brāhma ṇas 
heard this supplication from the Supreme Pe r-
sonality of Godhead, yet they refused to pay 
heed. Indeed, they were full of petty desires and 
entangled in elaborate rituals. Though presum-
ing themselves advanced in Vedic learning, 
they were actually inexperienced fools. (9) Alt-
hough the ingredients of sacrificial performan-
cethe place, time, particular paraphernalia, 
mantras, rituals, priests, fires, demigods, per-
former, offering and the as yet unseen benefi-
cial resultsare all simply aspects of His opu-
lences, the brāhma ṇas saw Lord K ṛṣṇa as an or-
dinary h uman because of their perverted intel-
ligence. They failed to recognize that He is the 
Supreme Absolute Truth, the directly manifest 
Personality of Godhead, whom the material 
senses cannot ordinarily perceive. Thus bewil-
dered by their false identification w ith the mor-
tal body, they did not show Him proper respect. 
(10-11) When the brāhma ṇas failed to reply 
even with a simple yes or no, O chastiser of the 
enemy [Parīk ṣit], the cowherd boys returned 
disappointed to K ṛṣṇa and Rāma and reported 
this to Them. (12 ) Hearing what had happened, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord 
of the universe, simply laughed. Then He again 
addressed the cowherd boys, showing them the 
way men act in this world. (13) [Lord K ṛṣṇa 
said:] Tell the wives of the brāhma ṇas that I 
have come here with Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa. They 
will certainly give you all the food you want, 
for they are most affectionate toward Me and, 
indeed, with their intelligence reside in Me 
alone. (14)  

The cowherd boys then went to the house 
where the brāhma ṇas’ wi ves were staying. 
There the boys saw those chaste ladies sitting, 
nicely decorated with fine ornaments. Bowing 
down to the brāhma ṇa ladies, the boys ad-
dressed them in all humility. (15) [The cowherd 
boys said:] Obeisances unto you, O wives of 
the learned b rāhma ṇas. Kindly hear our words. 
We have been sent here by Lord K ṛṣṇa, who is 
passing by not far from here. (16) He has come 
a long way with the cowherd boys and Lord 
Balarāma, tending the cows. Now He is hungry, so some food should be given for Him and Hi s 
companions. (17) The wives of the brāhma ṇas 
were always eager to see K ṛṣṇa, for their minds 
had been enchanted by descriptions of Him. 
Thus as soon as they heard that He had come, 
they became very excited. (18) Taking along in 
large vessels the four kind s of foods, full of fine 
tastes and aromas, all the ladies went forth to 
meet their beloved, just as rivers flow toward 
the sea. (19) Although their husbands, brothers, 
sons and other relatives tried to forbid them 
from going, their hope of seeing K ṛṣṇa, culti-
vated by extensive hearing of His transcenden-
tal qualities, won out. Along the river Yamunā, 
within a garden decorated with buds of aśoka 
trees, they caught sight of Him strolling along 
in the company of the cowherd boys and His 
elder brother, Balarāma . (20-21) His complex-
ion was dark blue and His garment golden. 
Wearing a peacock feather, colored minerals, 
sprigs of flower buds, and a garland of forest 
flowers and leaves, He was dressed just like a 
dramatic dancer. He rested one hand upon the 
shoulder of a friend and with the other twirled 
a lotus. Lilies graced His ears, His hair hung 
down over His cheeks, and His lotuslike face 
was smiling. (22) O ruler of men, for a long 
time those brāhma ṇa ladies had heard about 
Kṛṣṇa, their beloved, and His glories  had be-
come the constant ornaments of their ears. In-
deed, their minds were always absorbed in 
Him. Through the apertures of their eyes they 
now forced Him to enter within their hearts, 
and then they embraced Him within for a long 
time. In this way they fin ally gave up the pain 
of separation from Him, just as sages give up 
the anxiety of false ego by embracing their in-
nermost consciousness. (23)  

Lord K ṛṣṇa, who witnesses the thoughts of 
all creatures, understood how those ladies had 
abandoned all worldly ho pes and come there 
simply to see Him. Thus He addressed them as 
follows with a smile upon His face. (24) [Lord 
Kṛṣṇa said:] Welcome, O most fortunate ladies. 
Please sit down and make yourselves comfort-
able. What can I do for you? That you have 
come here to  see Me is most appropriate. (25) 
Certainly expert personalities, who can see 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

647 
 their own true interest, render unmotivated and 
uninterrupted devotional service directly unto 
Me, for I am most dear to the soul. (26) It is 
only by contact with the self that o ne’s vital 
breath, intelligence, mind, friends, body, wife, 
children, wealth and so on are dear. Therefore, 
what object can possibly be more dear than 
one’s own self? (27) You should thus return to 
the sacrificial arena, because your husbands, 
the learned brāhma ṇas, are householders and 
need your assistance to finish their respective 
sacrifices. (28)  

The wives of the brāhma ṇas replied:  O al-
mighty one, please do not speak such cruel 
words. Rather, You should fulfill Your promise 
that You always reciprocate with Your devo-
tees in kind. Now that we have attained Your 
lotus feet, we simply wish to remain here in the 
forest so we may carry upon our heads the gar-
lands of tulasī leaves that fall from Your lotus 
feet. We are ready to give up all material rela-
tionshi ps. (29) Our husbands, fathers, sons, 
brothers, other relatives and friends will no 
longer take us back, and how could anyone else 
be willing to give us shelter? Therefore, since 
we have thrown ourselves at Your lotus feet 
and have no other destination, pl ease, O chas-
tiser of enemies, grant our desire. (30)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead re-
plied:  Rest assured that your husbands will not 
be inimical toward you, nor will your fathers, 
brothers, sons, other relatives or the general 
populace. I will person ally advise them of the 
situation. Indeed, even the demigods will ex-
press their approval. (31) For you to remain in 
My bodily association would certainly not 
please people in this world, nor would it be the 
best way for you to increase your love for Me. 
Rather, you should fix your minds on Me, and 
very soon you will achieve Me. (32)  

It is by hearing about Me, seeing My Deity 
form, meditating upon Me and chanting My 
names and glories that love for Me develops, 
not by physical proximity. Therefore, please go  
back to your homes. (33) Śrīla Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī said: Thus instructed, the wives of the brāhma ṇas returned to the place of sacrifice. 
The brāhma ṇas did not find any fault with their 
wives, and together with them they finished the 
sacrifice. (34) One of th e ladies had been forci-
bly kept back by her husband. When she heard 
the others describe the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
she embraced Him within her heart and gave up 
her material body, the basis of bondage to ma-
terial activity. (35) Govinda, the Supreme Per-
sonalit y of Godhead, fed the cowherd boys with 
that food of four varieties. Then the all -power-
ful Lord Himself partook of the preparations. 
(36) 

Thus the Supreme Lord, appearing like a hu-
man being to perform His pastimes, imitated 
the ways of human society. He e njoyed pleas-
ing His cows, cowherd boyfriends and cowherd 
girlfriends with His beauty, words and actions. 
(37) The brāhma ṇas then came to their senses 
and began to feel great remorse. They thought, 
“We have sinned, for we have denied the re-
quest of the two Lords of the universe, who de-
ceptively appeared as ordinary human beings.” 
(38) Taking note of their wives’ pure, transcen-
dental devotion for Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, and seeing their own 
lack of devotion, the brāhma ṇas felt most sor-
rowful and began to condemn themselves. (39) 
[The brāhma ṇas said:] To hell with our three-
fold birth, our vow of celibacy and our exten-
sive learning! To hell with our aristocratic 
background and our expertise in the rituals of 
sacrifice! These are all conde mned because we 
were inimical to the transcendental Personality 
of Godhead. (40) The illusory potency of the 
Supreme Lord certainly bewilders even the 
great mystics, what to speak of us. As 
brāhma ṇas we are supposed to be the spiritual 
masters of all class es of men, yet we have been 
bewildered about our own real interest. (41) 
Just see the unlimited love these women have 
developed for Lord K ṛṣṇa, the spiritual master 
of the entire universe! This love has broken for 
them the very bonds of deaththeir attachme nt to 
family life. (42) These women have never un-
dergone the purificatory rites of the twice -born 
classes, nor have they lived as brahmacārīs in 
the āśrama of a spiritual master, nor have they 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

648 
 executed austerities, speculated on the nature of 
the self, fol lowed the formalities of cleanliness 
or engaged in pious rituals. Nevertheless, they 
have firm devotion for Lord K ṛṣṇa, whose glo-
ries are chanted by the exalted hymns of the 
Vedas and who is the supreme master of all 
masters of mystic power. We, on the oth er 
hand, have no such devotion for the Lord, alt-
hough we have executed all these processes. 
(43-44) Indeed, infatuated as we are with our 
household affairs, we have deviated completely 
from the real aim of our life. But now just see 
how the Lord, through t he words of these sim-
ple cowherd boys, has reminded us of the ulti-
mate destination of all true transcendentalists. 
(45) Otherwise, why would the supreme con-
trollerwhose every desire is already fulfilled 
and who is the master of liberation and all other 
transcendental benedictionsenact this pretense 
with us, who are always to be controlled by 
Him? (46) Hoping for the touch of His lotus 
feet, the goddess of fortune perpetually wor-
ships Him alone, leaving aside all others and 
renouncing her pride and ficklenes s. That He 
begs is certainly astonishing to everyone. (47) 
All the aspects of sacrificethe auspicious place 
and time, the various items of paraphernalia, 
the Vedic hymns, the prescribed rituals, the 
priests and sacrificial fires, the demigods, the 
patron o f the sacrifice, the sacrificial offering 
and the pious results obtainedall are simply 
manifestations of His opulences. Yet even 
though we had heard that the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, the Lord of all mystic 
controllers, had taken birth in the Yadu dyn-
asty, we were so foolish that we could not rec-
ognize Śrī K ṛṣṇa to be none other than Him. 
(48-49) Let us offer our obeisances unto Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
His intelligence is never bewildered, whereas 
we, confused by His pow er of illusion, are 
simply wandering about on the paths of fruitive 
work. (50) We were bewildered by Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s illusory potency and thus could not un-
derstand His influence as the original Personal-
ity of Godhead. Now we hope He will kindly 
forgive our of fense. (51)  
 Thus reflecting on the sin they had commit-
ted by neglecting Lord K ṛṣṇa, they became 
very eager to see Him. But being afraid of King 
Kaṁsa, they did not dare go to Vraja. (52)  

SB 10.24: Worshiping Govardhana Hill  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  While staying in 
that very place with His brother Baladeva, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa happened to see the cowherd men busily 
arranging for a sacrifice to Indra. (1) Being the 
omniscient Supersoul, the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa 
already understood the situation, yet He still 
humbly inq uired from the elders, headed by His 
father, Nanda Mahārāja. (2) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] 
My dear father, kindly explain to Me what this 
great endeavor of yours is all about. What is it 
meant to accomplish? If this is a ritual sacrifice, 
then for whose satisfact ion is it intended and by 
what means is it going to be executed? (3) 
Please tell Me about it, O father. I have a great 
desire to know and am ready to hear in good 
faith. Certainly, no secrets are to be kept by 
saintly personalities, who see all others as e qual 
to themselves, who have no conception of 
“mine” or “another’s” and who do not consider 
who is a friend, who is an enemy and who is 
neutral. (4) One who is neutral may be avoided 
like an enemy, but a friend should be consid-
ered like one’s own self. (5)  When people in 
this world perform activities, sometimes they 
understand what they are doing and sometimes 
they don’t. Those who know what they are do-
ing achieve success in their work, whereas ig-
norant people do not. (6) Such being the case, 
this ritualist ic endeavor of yours should be 
clearly explained to Me. Is it a ceremony based 
on scriptural injunction, or simply a custom of 
ordinary society? (7)  

Nanda Mahārāja replied:  The great Lord 
Indra is the controller of the rain. The clouds 
are his personal re presentatives, and they di-
rectly provide rainwater, which gives happi-
ness and sustenance to all creatures. (8) Not 
only we, my dear son, but also many other men 
worship him, the lord and master of the rain -
giving clouds. We offer him grain and other 
paraph ernalia of worship produced through his 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

649 
 own discharge in the form of rain. (9) By ac-
cepting the remnants of sacrifices performed to 
Indra, people sustain their lives and accomplish 
the threefold aims of religiosity, economic de-
velopment and sense gratifica tion. Thus Lord 
Indra is the agent responsible for the fruitive 
success of industrious people. (10) This reli-
gious principle is based on sound tradition. An-
yone who rejects it out of lust, enmity, fear or 
greed will certainly fail to achieve good for-
tune. (11) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  When Lord 
Keśava [K ṛṣṇa] heard the statements of His fa-
ther, Nanda, and other senior residents of Vraja, 
He addressed His father as follows, to arouse 
anger in Lord Indra. (12)  

Lord K ṛṣṇa said:  It is by the force of karma 
that a living entity takes birth, and it is by 
karma alone that he meets his destruction. His 
happiness, distress, fear and sense of security 
all arise as the effects of karma. (13)  

Even if there is some supreme controller 
who awards all others the results of  their activ-
ities, He must also depend upon a performer’s 
engaging in activity. After all, there is no ques-
tion of being the bestower of fruitive results un-
less fruitive activities have actually been per-
formed. (14) Living beings in this world are 
forced t o experience the consequences of their 
own particular previous work. Since Lord Indra 
cannot in any way change the destiny of human 
beings, which is born of their own nature, why 
should people worship him? (15) Every indi-
vidual is under the control of his own condi-
tioned nature, and thus he must follow that na-
ture. This entire universe, with all its demigods, 
demons and human beings, is based on the con-
ditioned nature of the living entities. (16) Be-
cause it is karma that causes the conditioned 
living entity  to accept and then give up different 
high- and low -grade material bodies, this 
karma is his enemy, friend and neutral witness, 
his spiritual master and controlling lord. (17) 
Therefore, one should seriously worship work 
itself. A person should remain in t he position 
corresponding to his nature and should perform his own duty. Indeed, that by which we may 
live nicely is really our worshipable deity. (18) 
If one thing is actually sustaining our life but 
we take shelter of something else, how can we 
achieve a ny real benefit? We would be like an 
unfaithful woman, who can never achieve any 
actual benefit by consorting with her paramour. 
(19) The brāhma ṇa maintains his life by study-
ing and teaching the Vedas, the member of the 
royal order by protecting the earth,  the vaiśya 
by trade, and the śūdra by serving the higher, 
twice -born classes. (20) The occupational du-
ties of the vaiśya are conceived in four divi-
sions: farming, commerce, cow protection and 
moneylending. Out of these, we as a commu-
nity are always engage d in cow protection. (21) 
The causes of creation, maintenance and de-
struction are the three modes of naturenamely 
goodness, passion and ignorance. In particular, 
the mode of passion creates this universe and 
through sexual combination causes it to be-
come f ull of variety. (22) Impelled by the ma-
terial mode of passion, the clouds pour down 
their rain everywhere, and by this rain all crea-
tures gain their sustenance. What has the great 
Indra to do with this arrangement? (23)  

My dear father, our home is not in the cities 
or towns or villages. Being forest dwellers, we 
always live in the forest and on the hills. (24) 
Therefore, may a sacrifice for the pleasure of 
the cows, the brāhma ṇas and Govardhana Hill 
begin! With all the paraphernalia collected for 
worshipin g Indra, let this sacrifice be per-
formed instead. (25) Let many different kinds 
of food be cooked, from sweet rice to vegetable 
soups! Many kinds of fancy cakes, both baked 
and fried, should be prepared. And all the avail-
able milk products should be taken for this sac-
rifice. (26) The brāhma ṇas who are learned in 
the Vedic mantras must properly invoke the 
sacrificial fires. Then you should feed the 
priests with nicely prepared food and reward 
them with cows and other gifts. (27) After giv-
ing the appropriate food to everyone else, in-
cluding such fallen souls as dogs and dog -eat-
ers, you should give grass to the cows and then 
present your respectful offerings to 
Govardhana Hill. (28) After everyone has eaten 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

650 
 to his satisfaction, you should all dress and dec-
orate  yourselves handsomely, smear your bod-
ies with sandalwood paste and then circumam-
bulate the cows, the brāhma ṇas, the sacrificial 
fires and Govardhana Hill. (29) This is My 
idea, O father, and you may carry it out if it ap-
peals to you. Such a sacrifice will  be very dear 
to the cows, the brāhma ṇas and Govardhana 
Hill, and also to Me. (30)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Lord K ṛṣṇa, who 
is Himself powerful time, desired to destroy the 
false pride of Lord Indra. When Nanda and the 
other senior men of V ṛndāvana heard Śr ī 
Kṛṣṇa’s statement, they accepted His words as 
proper. (31) The cowherd community then did 
all that Madhusūdana had suggested. They ar-
ranged for the brāhma ṇas to recite the auspi-
cious Vedic mantras, and using the parapherna-
lia that had been intended for I ndra’s sacrifice, 
they presented offerings to Govardhana Hill 
and the brāhma ṇas with reverential respect. 
They also gave grass to the cows. Then, placing 
the cows, bulls and calves in front of them, they 
circumambulated Govardhana. (32 -33) As the 
beautiful ly ornamented cowherd ladies fol-
lowed along, riding on wagons drawn by oxen, 
they sang the glories of Lord K ṛṣṇa, and their 
songs mingled with the brāhma ṇas’ chanting of 
benedictions. (34) K ṛṣṇa then assumed an un-
precedented, huge form to instill faith in the 
cowherd men. Declaring “I am Govardhana 
Mountain!” He ate the abundant offerings. (35) 
Together with the people of Vraja, the Lord 
bowed down to this form of Govardhana Hill, 
thus in effect offering obeisances to Himself. 
Then He said, “Just see how th is hill has ap-
peared in person and bestowed mercy upon us! 
(36) “This Govardhana Hill, assuming any 
form he wishes, will kill any residents of the 
forest who neglect him. Therefore, let us pay 
our obeisances to him for the safety of our-
selves and our cows. ” (37) The members of the 
cowherd community, having thus been inspired 
by Lord Vāsudeva to properly execute the sac-
rifice to Govardhana Hill, the cows and the 
brāhma ṇas, returned with Lord K ṛṣṇa to their 
village, Vraja. (38)  
 SB 10.25: Lord K ṛṣṇa Lifts Gov ardhana 
Hill 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  My dear King 
Parīk ṣit, when Indra understood that his sacri-
fice had been put aside, he became furious with 
Nanda Mahārāja and the other cowherd men, 
who were accepting K ṛṣṇa as their Lord. (1) 
Angry Indra sent forth the  clouds of universal 
destruction, known as Sā ṁvartaka. Imagining 
himself the supreme controller, he spoke as fol-
lows. (2) [Indra said:] Just see how these cow-
herd men living in the forest have become so 
greatly intoxicated by their prosperity! They 
have su rrendered to an ordinary human being, 
Kṛṣṇa, and thus they have offended the gods. 
(3) Their taking shelter of K ṛṣṇa is just like the 
foolish attempt of men who abandon transcen-
dental knowledge of the self and instead try to 
cross over the great ocean of m aterial existence 
in the false boats of fruitive, ritual sacrifices. 
(4) These cowherd men have acted inimically 
toward me by taking shelter of this ordinary hu-
man being, K ṛṣṇa, who thinks Himself very 
wise but who is simply a foolish, arrogant, 
overtalkat ive child. (5) [To the clouds of de-
struction King Indra said:] The prosperity of 
these people has made them mad with pride, 
and their arrogance is backed up by K ṛṣṇa. 
Now go and remove their pride and bring their 
animals to destruction. (6) I will follow y ou to 
Vraja, riding on my elephant Airāvata and tak-
ing with me the swift and powerful wind -gods 
to decimate the cowherd village of Nanda 
Mahārāja. (7)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  On Indra’s order 
the clouds of universal destruction, released un-
timely from thei r bonds, went to the cowherd 
pastures of Nanda Mahārāja. There they began 
to torment the inhabitants by powerfully pour-
ing down torrents of rain upon them. (8) Pro-
pelled by the fearsome wind -gods, the clouds 
blazed with lightning bolts and roared with 
thunder as they hurled down hailstones. (9) As 
the clouds released torrents of rain as thick as 
massive columns, the earth was submerged in 
the flood, and high ground could no longer be 
distinguished from low. (10) The cows and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

651 
 other animals, shivering from th e excessive 
rain and wind, and the cowherd men and ladies, 
pained by the cold, all approached Lord Go-
vinda for shelter. (11) Trembling from the dis-
tress brought about by the severe rainfall, and 
trying to cover their heads and calves with their 
own bodies,  the cows approached the lotus feet 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (12) 
[The cowherd men and women addressed the 
Lord:] K ṛṣṇa, K ṛṣṇa, O most fortunate one, 
please deliver the cows from the wrath of Indra! 
O Lord, You are so affectionate to Your dev o-
tees. Please save us also. (13) Seeing the inhab-
itants of His Gokula rendered practically un-
conscious by the onslaught of hail and blasting 
wind, the Supreme Lord Hari understood that 
this was the work of angry Indra. (14) [Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa said to Himself:] Bec ause We have 
stopped his sacrifice, Indra has caused this un-
usually fierce, unseasonable rain, together with 
terrible winds and hail. (15) By My mystic 
power I will completely counteract this disturb-
ance caused by Indra. Demigods like Indra are 
proud of th eir opulence, and out of foolishness 
they falsely consider themselves the Lord of the 
universe. I will now destroy such ignorance. 
(16) Since the demigods are endowed with the 
mode of goodness, the false pride of consider-
ing oneself the Lord should certain ly not affect 
them. When I break the false prestige of those 
bereft of goodness, My purpose is to bring them 
relief. (17) I must therefore protect the cowherd 
community by My transcendental potency, for 
I am their shelter, I am their master, and indeed 
they are My own family. After all, I have taken 
a vow to protect My devotees. (18)  

Having said this, Lord K ṛṣṇa, who is Vi ṣṇu 
Himself, picked up Govardhana Hill with one 
hand and held it aloft just as easily as a child 
holds up a mushroom. (19) The Lord then  ad-
dressed the cowherd community: O Mother, O 
Father, O residents of Vraja, if you wish you 
may now come under this hill with your cows. 
(20) You should have no fear that this mountain 
will fall from My hand. And don’t be afraid of 
the wind and rain, for y our deliverance from 
these afflictions has already been arranged. 
(21) Their minds thus pacified by Lord K ṛṣṇa, they all entered beneath the hill, where they 
found ample room for themselves and all their 
cows, wagons, servants and priests, and for all 
other members of the community as well. (22) 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, forgetting hunger and thirst and 
putting aside all considerations of personal 
pleasure, stood there holding up the hill for 
seven days as the people of Vraja gazed upon 
Him. (23) When Indra observed this  exhibition 
of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s mystic power, he became most 
astonished. Pulled down from his platform of 
false pride, and his intentions thwarted, he or-
dered his clouds to desist. (24) Seeing that the 
fierce wind and rain had now ceased, the sky 
had become cl ear of rainclouds, and the sun had 
risen, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the lifter of Govardhana Hill, 
spoke to the cowherd community as follows. 
(25) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] My dear cowherd men, 
please go out with your wives, children and 
possessions. Give up your fear. The win d and 
rain have stopped, and the rivers’ high waters 
have subsided. (26) After collecting their re-
spective cows and loading their paraphernalia 
into their wagons, the cowherd men went out. 
The women, children and elderly persons grad-
ually followed them. (2 7) While all living crea-
tures looked on, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead put down the hill in its original place, 
just as it had stood before. (28)  

All the residents of V ṛndāvana were over-
whelmed with ecstatic love, and they came for-
ward and greeted Śr ī Kṛṣṇa according to their 
individual relationships with Himsome em-
bracing Him, others bowing down to Him, and 
so forth. The cowherd women presented water 
mixed with yogurt and unbroken barleycorns as 
a token of honor, and they showered auspicious 
benedict ions upon Him. (29) Mother Yaśodā, 
mother Rohi ṇī, Nanda Mahārāja and Balarāma, 
the greatest of the strong, all embraced K ṛṣṇa. 
Overwhelmed with affection, they offered Him 
their blessings. (30) In the heavens, O King, all 
the demigods, including the Siddha s, Sādhyas, 
Gandharvas and Cāra ṇas, sang the praises of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa and showered down flowers in 
great satisfaction. (31) My dear Parīk ṣit, the 
demigods in heaven resoundingly played their 
conchshells and kettledrums, and the best of the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

652 
 Gandharvas, led by Tumburu, began to sing. 
(32) Surrounded by His loving cowherd boy-
friends and Lord Balarāma, K ṛṣṇa then went off 
to the place where He had been tending His 
cows. The cowherd girls returned to their 
homes, singing joyfully about the lifting of 
Govardhana Hil l and other glorious deeds per-
formed by Lord K ṛṣṇa, who had so deeply 
touched their hearts. (33)  

SB 10.26: Wonderful K ṛṣṇa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  The cowherd 
men were astonished when they saw K ṛṣṇa’s 
activities, such as lifting Govardhana Hill. Un-
able to  understand His transcendental potency, 
they approached Nanda Mahārāja and spoke as 
follows. (1) [The cowherd men said:] Since this 
boy performs such extraordinary activities, 
how could He warrant a birth among worldly 
men like usa birth that for Him would  seem 
contemptible? (2) How could this seven -year-
old boy playfully hold up the great hill 
Govardhana with one hand, just as a mighty el-
ephant holds up a lotus flower? (3) As a mere 
infant who had hardly yet opened His eyes, He 
drank the breast milk of the  powerful demoness 
Pūtanā and then sucked out her very life air as 
well, just as the force of time sucks out the 
youth of one’s body. (4) Once, when only three 
months old, little K ṛṣṇa was crying and kicking 
up His feet as He lay beneath a huge cart. Then 
the cart fell and turned upside -down simply be-
cause it was struck by the tip of His toe. (5) At 
the age of one, while sitting peacefully He was 
taken up into the sky by the demon T ṛṇāvarta. 
But baby K ṛṣṇa grabbed the demon’s neck, 
causing him great pain, a nd thus killed him. (6) 
Once, His mother tied Him with ropes to a mor-
tar because she had caught Him stealing butter. 
Then, crawling on His hands, He dragged the 
mortar between a pair of arjuna trees and pulled 
them down. (7) Another time, when K ṛṣṇa was 
tending the calves in the forest together with 
Balarāma and the cowherd boys, the demon 
Bakāsura came with the intention of killing 
Kṛṣṇa. But K ṛṣṇa seized this inimical demon by 
the mouth and tore him apart. (8) Desiring to 
kill K ṛṣṇa, the demon Vatsa disgu ised himself as a calf and entered among K ṛṣṇa’s calves. But 
Kṛṣṇa killed the demon and, using his body, en-
joyed the sport of knocking kapittha fruits 
down from the trees. (9) Together with Lord 
Balarāma, K ṛṣṇa killed the jackass demon and 
all his friends,  thereby securing the safety of the 
Tālavana forest, which abounded with fully rip-
ened palm fruits. (10) After arranging for the 
mighty Lord Balarāma to kill the terrible de-
mon Pralamba, K ṛṣṇa saved Vraja’s cowherd 
boys and their animals from a forest fire . (11) 
Kṛṣṇa chastised the most poisonous serpent, 
Kāliya, and after humbling him He drove him 
forcibly from the lake of the Yamunā. In this 
way the Lord made the water of that river free 
of the snake’s powerful poison. (12) Dear 
Nanda, how is it that we a nd all the other resi-
dents of Vraja cannot give up our constant af-
fection for your son? And how is it that He is 
so spontaneously attracted to us? (13) On the 
one hand this boy is only seven years old, and 
on the other we see that He has lifted the great 
hill Govardhana. Therefore, O King of Vraja, a 
doubt about your son arises within us. (14)  

Nanda Mahārāja replied:  O cowherd men, 
just hear my words and let all your doubts con-
cerning my son be gone. Some time ago Garga 
Muni spoke to me as follows about th is boy. 
(15) [Garga Muni had said:] Your son K ṛṣṇa 
appears as an incarnation in every millennium. 
In the past He assumed three different col-
orswhite, red and yellowand now He has ap-
peared in a blackish color. (16) For many rea-
sons, this beautiful son of yo urs sometimes ap-
peared previously as the son of Vasudeva. 
Therefore, those who are learned sometimes 
call this child Vāsudeva. (17) For this son of 
yours there are many forms and names accord-
ing to His transcendental qualities and activi-
ties. These are kno wn to me, but people in gen-
eral do not understand them. (18) To increase 
the transcendental bliss of the cowherd men of 
Gokula, this child will always act auspiciously 
for you. And by His grace only, you will sur-
pass all difficulties. (19) O Nanda Mahārāja , as 
recorded in history, when there was an irregu-
lar, incapable government, Indra having been 
dethroned, and when honest people were being 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

653 
 harassed and disturbed by thieves, this child ap-
peared in order to curb the rogues and to protect 
the people and ena ble them to flourish. (20) De-
mons cannot harm the demigods, who always 
have Lord Vi ṣṇu on their side. Similarly, any 
person or group attached to all -auspicious 
Kṛṣṇa cannot be defeated by enemies. (21) 
Therefore, O Nanda Mahārāja, this child of 
yours is as  good as Nārāya ṇa. In His transcen-
dental qualities, opulence, name, fame and in-
fluence, He is exactly like Nārāya ṇa. Thus you 
should not be astonished hy His activities. (22) 
[Nanda Mahārāja continued:] After Garga Ṛṣi 
spoke these words to me and returned home, I 
began to consider that K ṛṣṇa, who keeps us free 
from trouble, is actually an expansion of Lord 
Nārāya ṇa. (23) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī contin-
ued:] Having heard Nanda Mahārāja relate the 
statements of Garga Muni, the residents of 
Vṛndāvana became enlivened . Their perplexity 
was gone, and they worshiped Nanda and Lord 
Kṛṣṇa with great respect. (24)  

Indra became angry when his sacrifice was 
disrupted, and thus he caused rain and hail to 
fall on Gokula, accompanied by lightning and 
powerful winds, all of whic h brought great suf-
fering to the cowherds, animals and women 
there. When Lord K ṛṣṇa, who is by nature al-
ways compassionate, saw the condition of 
those who had only Him as their shelter, He 
smiled broadly and lifted Govardhana Hill with 
one hand, just as a small child picks up a mush-
room to play with it. Holding up the hill, He 
protected the cowherd community. May He, 
Govinda, the Lord of the cows and the de-
stroyer of Indra’s false pride, be pleased with 
us. (25)  

SB 10.27: Lord Indra and Mother Su-
rabhi Offe r Prayers  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After K ṛṣṇa had 
lifted Govardhana Hill and thus protected the 
inhabitants of Vraja from the terrible rainfall, 
Surabhi, the mother of the cows, came from her 
planet to see K ṛṣṇa. She was accompanied by 
Indra. (1) Indra was  very ashamed of having of-
fended the Lord. Approaching Him in a solitary place, Indra fell down and lay his helmet, 
whose effulgence was as brilliant as the sun, 
upon the Lord’s lotus feet. (2) Indra had now 
heard of and seen the transcendental power of 
omnipotent K ṛṣṇa, and his false pride in being 
the lord of the three worlds was thus defeated. 
Holding his hands together in supplication, he 
addressed the Lord as follows. (3)  

King Indra said:  Your transcendental form, 
a manifestation of pure goodness, is undis-
turbed by change, shining with knowledge and 
devoid of passion and ignorance. In You does 
not exist the mighty flow of the modes of ma-
terial nature, which is based on illusion and ig-
norance. (4) How, then, could there exist in 
You the symptoms of an i gnorant personsuch 
as greed, lust, anger and envywhich are pro-
duced by one’s previous involvement in mate-
rial existence and which cause one to become 
further entangled in material existence? And 
yet as the Supreme Lord You impose punish-
ment to protect reli gious principles and curb 
down the wicked. (5) You are the father and 
spiritual master of this entire universe, and also 
its supreme controller. You are insurmountable 
time, imposing punishment upon the sinful for 
their own benefit. Indeed, in Your various  in-
carnations, selected by Your own free will, You 
act decisively to remove the false pride of those 
who presume themselves masters of this world. 
(6) Even fools like me, who proudly think 
themselves universal lords, quickly give up 
their conceit and direc tly take to the path of the 
spiritually progressive when they see You are 
fearless even in the face of time. Thus You pun-
ish the mischievous only to instruct them. (7) 
Engrossed in pride over my ruling power, igno-
rant of Your majesty, I offended You. O Lor d, 
may You forgive me. My intelligence was be-
wildered, but let my consciousness never again 
be so impure. (8) You descend into this world, 
O transcendent Lord, to destroy the warlords 
who burden the earth and create many terrible 
disturbances. O Lord, you simultaneously act 
for the welfare of those who faithfully serve 
Your lotus feet. (9) Obeisances unto You, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the great 
Soul, who are all -pervading and who reside in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

654 
 the hearts of all. My obeisances unto You, 
Kṛṣṇa, the chi ef of the Yadu dynasty. (10) Unto 
Him who assumes transcendental bodies ac-
cording to the desires of His devotees, unto 
Him whose form is itself pure consciousness, 
unto Him who is everything, who is the seed of 
everything and who is the Soul of all creatur es, 
I offer my obeisances. (11) My dear Lord, when 
my sacrifice was disrupted I became fiercely 
angry because of false pride. Thus I tried to de-
stroy Your cowherd community with severe 
rain and wind. (12) O Lord, You have shown 
mercy to me by shattering my  false pride and 
defeating my attempt [to punish V ṛndāvana]. 
To You, the Supreme Lord, spiritual master and 
Supreme Soul, I have now come for shelter. 
(13) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus glorified by 
Indra, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, smi led and then spoke to him as fol-
lows in a voice resonant like the clouds. (14)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
My dear Indra, it was out of mercy that I 
stopped the sacrifice meant for you. You were 
greatly intoxicated by your opulence as King of  
heaven, and I wanted you to always remember 
Me. (15) A man blinded by intoxication with 
his power and opulence cannot see Me nearby 
with the rod of punishment in My hand. If I de-
sire his real welfare, I drag him down from his 
materially fortunate position . (16) Indra, you 
may now go. Execute My order and remain in 
your appointed position as King of heaven. But 
be sober, without false pride. (17)  

Mother Surabhi, along with her progeny, the 
cows, then offered her obeisances to Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. Respectfully reque sting His attention, 
the gentle lady addressed the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, who was present before her 
as a cowherd boy. (18)  

Mother Surabhi said:  O K ṛṣṇa, K ṛṣṇa, 
greatest of mystics! O Soul and origin of the 
universe! You are the master of the wor ld, and 
by Your grace, O infallible Lord, we have You 
as our master. (19) You are our worshipable Deity. Therefore, O Lord of the universe, for 
the benefit of the cows, the brāhma ṇas, the 
demigods and all other saintly persons, please 
become our Indra. (20 ) As ordered by Lord 
Brahmā, we shall perform Your bathing cere-
mony to coronate You as Indra. O Soul of the 
universe, You descend to this world to relieve 
the burden of the earth. (21)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having thus ap-
pealed to Lord K ṛṣṇa, mother Sura bhi per-
formed His bathing ceremony with her own 
milk, and Indra, ordered by Aditi and other 
mothers of the demigods, anointed the Lord 
with heavenly Ga ṅgā water from the trunk of 
Indra’s elephant carrier, Airāvata. Thus, in the 
company of the demigods and great sages, In-
dra coronated Lord K ṛṣṇa, the descendant of 
Daśārha, and gave Him the name Govinda. (22 -
23) Tumburu, Nārada and other Gandharvas, 
along with the Vidyādharas, Siddhas and 
Cāra ṇas, came there to sing the glories of Lord 
Hari, which purify the entire world. And the 
wives of the demigods, filled with joy, danced 
together in the Lord’s honor. (24)  

The most eminent demigods chanted the 
praises of the Lord and scattered wonderful 
showers of flowers all around Him. All three 
worlds felt supreme sati sfaction, and the cows 
drenched the surface of the earth with their 
milk. (25) Rivers flowed with various kinds of 
tasty liquids, trees exuded honey, edible plants 
came to maturity without cultivation, and hills 
gave forth jewels formerly hidden in their i nte-
riors. (26) O Parīk ṣit, beloved of the Kuru dyn-
asty, upon the ceremonial bathing of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, all living creatures, even those cruel by 
nature, became entirely free of enmity. (27) Af-
ter he had ceremonially bathed Lord Govinda, 
who is the master of th e cows and the cowherd 
community, King Indra took the Lord’s permis-
sion and, surrounded by the demigods and other 
higher beings, returned to his heavenly abode. 
(28) 

SB 10.28: K ṛṣṇa Rescues Nanda 
Mahārāja from the Abode of Varu ṇa 

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

655 
 Śrī Bādarāya ṇi said:  Having worshiped 
Lord Janārdana and fasted on the Ekādaśī day, 
Nanda Mahārāja entered the water of the 
Kālindī on the Dvādaśī to take his bath. (1) Be-
cause Nanda Mahārāja entered the water in the 
dark of night, disregarding that the time was in-
auspicious, a d emoniac servant of Varu ṇa 
seized him and brought him to his master. (2) 
O King, not seeing Nanda Mahārāja, the cow-
herd men loudly cried out, “O K ṛṣṇa! O 
Rāma!” Lord K ṛṣṇa heard their cries and under-
stood that His father had been captured by Var-
uṇa. Therefo re, the almighty Lord, who makes 
His devotees fearless, went to the court of Var-
uṇadeva. (3) Seeing that the Lord, H ṛṣīkeśa, 
had arrived, the demigod Varu ṇa worshiped 
Him with elaborate offerings. Varu ṇa was in a 
state of great jubilation upon seeing the L ord, 
and he spoke as follows. (4)  

Śrī Varu ṇa said:  Now my body has ful-
filled its function. Indeed, now the goal of my 
life is achieved, O Lord. Those who accept 
Your lotus feet, O Personality of Godhead, can 
transcend the path of material existence. (5) M y 
obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme 
Soul, within whom there is no trace of the illu-
sory energy, which orchestrates the creation of 
this world. (6) Your father, who is sitting here, 
was brought to me by  a foolish, ignorant serv-
ant of mine who did not understand his proper 
duty. Therefore, please forgive us. (7) O K ṛṣṇa, 
O seer of everything, please give Your mercy 
even to me. O Govinda, You are most affec-
tionate to Your father. Please take him home. 
(8) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus satisfied by 
Lord Varu ṇa, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, Lord of lords, took His father 
and returned home, where their relatives were 
overjoyed to see them. (9) Nanda Mahārāja had 
been astonished to see for the first time the 
great opulence of Varu ṇa, the ruler of the ocean 
planet, and also to see how Varu ṇa and his serv-
ants had offered such humble respect to K ṛṣṇa. 
Nanda described all this to his fellow cowherd 
men. (10) [Hearing about K ṛṣṇa’s pastimes with Varu ṇa,] the cowherd men considered that 
Kṛṣṇa must be the Supreme Lord, and their 
minds, O King, were filled with eagerness. 
They thought, “Will the Supreme Lord bestow 
upon us His transcendental abode?” (11) Be-
cause He sees everything, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Su-
prem e Personality of Godhead, automatically 
understood what the cowherd men were conjec-
turing. Wanting to show His compassion to 
them by fulfilling their desires, the Lord 
thought as follows. (12) [Lord K ṛṣṇa thought:] 
Certainly people in this world are wander ing 
among higher and lower destinations, which 
they achieve through activities performed ac-
cording to their desires and without full 
knowledge. Thus people do not know their real 
destination. (13)  

Thus deeply considering the situation, the 
all-merciful Su preme Personality of Godhead 
Hari revealed to the cowherd men His abode, 
which is beyond material darkness. (14) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa revealed the indestructible spiritual ef-
fulgence, which is unlimited, conscious and 
eternal. Sages see that spiritual existence in 
trance, when their consciousness is free of the 
modes of material nature. (15) The cowherd 
men were brought by Lord K ṛṣṇa to the 
Brahma -hrada, made to submerge in the water, 
and then lifted up. From the same vantage point 
that Akrūra saw the spiritual world , the cow-
herd men saw the planet of the Absolute Truth. 
(16) Nanda Mahārāja and the other cowherd 
men felt the greatest happiness when they saw 
that transcendental abode. They were espe-
cially amazed to see K ṛṣṇa Himself there, sur-
rounded by the personified  Vedas, who were 
offering Him prayers. (17)  

SB 10.29: K ṛṣṇa and the Gopīs Meet for 
the Rāsa Dance  

Śrī Bādarāya ṇi said:  Śrī K ṛṣṇa is the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, full in all opu-
lences, yet upon seeing those autumn nights 
scented with blossoming jas mine flowers, He 
turned His mind toward loving affairs. To ful-
fill His purposes He employed His internal po-
tency. (1) The moon then rose, anointing the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

656 
 face of the eastern horizon with the reddish hue 
of his comforting rays, and thus dispelling the 
pain of  all who watched him rise. The moon 
was like a beloved husband who returns after a 
long absence and adorns the face of his beloved 
wife with red ku ṅkuma. (2)  

Lord K ṛṣṇa saw the unbroken disk of the full 
moon glowing with the red effulgence of newly 
applie d vermilion, as if it were the face of the 
goddess of fortune. He also saw the kumuda lo-
tuses opening in response to the moon’s pres-
ence and the forest gently illumined by its rays. 
Thus the Lord began to play sweetly on His 
flute, attracting the minds of the beautiful -eyed 
gopīs. (3) When the young women of 
Vṛndāvana heard K ṛṣṇa’s flute -song, which 
arouses romantic feelings, their minds were 
captivated by the Lord. They went to where 
their lover waited, each unknown to the others, 
moving so quickly that th eir earrings swung 
back and forth. (4) Some of the gopīs were 
milking cows when they heard K ṛṣṇa’s flute. 
They stopped milking and went off to meet 
Him. Some left milk curdling on the stove, and 
others left cakes burning in the oven. (5) Some 
of them were getting dressed, feeding milk to 
their infants or rendering personal service to 
their husbands, but they all gave up these duties 
and went to meet K ṛṣṇa. Other gopīs were tak-
ing their evening meals, washing themselves, 
putting on cosmetics or applying kajj ala to their 
eyes. But all the gopīs stopped these activities 
at once and, though their clothes and ornaments 
were in complete disarray, rushed off to K ṛṣṇa. 
(6-7) Their husbands, fathers, brothers and 
other relatives tried to stop them, but K ṛṣṇa had 
already stolen their hearts. Enchanted by the 
sound of His flute, they refused to turn back. 
(8) Some of the gopīs, however, could not man-
age to get out of their houses, and instead they 
remained home with eyes closed, meditating 
upon Him in pure love. (9) For  those gopīs who 
could not go to see K ṛṣṇa, intolerable separa-
tion from their beloved caused an intense agony 
that burned away all impious karma. By medi-
tating upon Him they realized His embrace, and 
the ecstasy they then felt exhausted their mate-
rial piet y. Although Lord K ṛṣṇa is the Supreme Soul, these girls simply thought of Him as their 
male lover and associated with Him in that in-
timate mood. Thus their karmic bondage was 
nullified and they abandoned their gross mate-
rial bodies. (10 -11) 

Śrī Parīk ṣit M ahārāja said:  O sage, the 
gopīs knew K ṛṣṇa only as their lover, not as the 
Supreme Absolute Truth. So how could these 
girls, their minds caught up in the waves of the 
modes of nature, free themselves from material 
attachment? (12)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  This point was 
explained to you previously. Since even 
Śiśupāla, who hated K ṛṣṇa, achieved perfec-
tion, then what to speak of the Lord’s dear dev-
otees. (13) O King, the Supreme Lord is inex-
haustible and immeasurable, and He is un-
touched by the material modes  because He is 
their controller. His personal appearance in this 
world is meant for bestowing the highest bene-
fit on humanity. (14) Persons who constantly 
direct their lust, anger, fear, protective affec-
tion, feeling of impersonal oneness or friend-
ship tow ard Lord Hari are sure to become ab-
sorbed in thought of Him. (15) You should not 
be so astonished by K ṛṣṇa, the unborn master 
of all masters of mystic power, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. After all, it is the Lord 
who liberates this world. (16) Seein g that the 
girls of Vraja had arrived, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the best 
of speakers, greeted them with charming words 
that bewildered their minds. (17)  

Lord K ṛṣṇa said:  O most fortunate ladies, 
welcome. What may I do to please you? Is eve-
rything well in Vraja? Please  tell Me the reason 
for your coming here. (18) This night is quite 
frightening, and frightening creatures are lurk-
ing about. Return to Vraja, slender -waisted 
girls. This is not a proper place for women. (19) 
Not finding you at home, your mothers, fathers, 
sons, brothers and husbands are certainly 
searching for you. Don’t cause anxiety for your 
family members. (20) Now you have seen this 
Vṛndāvana forest, full of flowers and re-
splendent with the light of the full moon. You 
have seen the beauty of the trees, with their 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

657 
 leaves trembling in the gentle breeze coming 
from the Yamunā. So now go back to the cow-
herd village. Don’t delay. O chaste ladies, serve 
your husbands and give milk to your crying ba-
bies and calves. (21 -22) On the other hand, per-
haps you have co me here out of your great love 
for Me, which has taken control of your hearts. 
This is of course quite commendable on your 
part, since all living entities possess natural af-
fection for Me. (23) The highest religious duty 
for a woman is to sincerely serve h er husband, 
behave well toward her husband’s family and 
take good care of her children. (24) Women 
who desire a good destination in the next life 
should never abandon a husband who has not 
fallen from his religious standards, even if he is 
obnoxious, unfor tunate, old, unintelligent, 
sickly or poor. (25) For a woman from a re-
spectable family, petty adulterous affairs are al-
ways condemned. They bar her from heaven, 
ruin her reputation and bring her difficulty and 
fear. (26) Transcendental love for Me arises b y 
the devotional processes of hearing about Me, 
seeing My Deity form, meditating on Me and 
faithfully chanting My glories. The same result 
is not achieved by mere physical proximity. So 
please go back to your homes. (27)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Hearing the se un-
pleasant words spoken by Govinda, the gopīs 
became morose. Their great hopes were frus-
trated and they felt insurmountable anxiety. 
(28) Their heads hanging down and their heavy, 
sorrowful breathing drying up their reddened 
lips, the gopīs scratched th e ground with their 
toes. Tears flowed from their eyes, carrying 
their kajjala and washing away the vermilion 
smeared on their breasts. Thus they stood, si-
lently bearing the burden of their unhappiness. 
(29) Although K ṛṣṇa was their beloved, and alt-
hough t hey had abandoned all other objects of 
desire for His sake, He had been speaking to 
them unfavorably. Nonetheless, they remained 
unflinching in their attachment to Him. Stop-
ping their crying, they wiped their eyes and be-
gan to speak, their voices stammerin g with ag-
itation. (30)  
 The beautiful gopīs said:  O all -powerful 
one, You should not speak in this cruel way. Do 
not reject us, who have renounced all material 
enjoyment to render devotional service to Your 
lotus feet. Reciprocate with us, O stubborn one, 
just as the primeval Lord, Śrī Nārāya ṇa, recip-
rocates with His devotees in their endeavors for 
liberation. (31) Our dear K ṛṣṇa, as an expert in 
religion You have advised us that the proper re-
ligious duty for women is to faithfully serve 
their husbands, chi ldren and other relatives. We 
agree that this principle is valid, but actually 
this service should be rendered to You. After 
all, O Lord, You are the dearmost friend of all 
embodied souls. You are their most intimate 
relative and indeed their very Self. (3 2) Expert 
transcendentalists always direct their affection 
toward You because they recognize You as 
their true Self and eternal beloved. What use do 
we have for these husbands, children and rela-
tives of ours, who simply give us trouble? 
Therefore, O suprem e controller, grant us Your 
mercy. O lotus -eyed one, please do not cut 
down our long -cherished hope to have Your as-
sociation. (33) Until today our minds were ab-
sorbed in household affairs, but You easily 
stole both our minds and our hands away from 
our hou sework. Now our feet won’t move one 
step from Your lotus feet. How can we go back 
to Vraja? What would we do there? (34) Dear 
Kṛṣṇa, please pour the nectar of Your lips upon 
the fire within our heartsa fire You ignited with 
Your smiling glances and the swe et song of 
Your flute. If You do not, we will consign our 
bodies to the fire of separation from You, O 
friend, and thus like yogīs attain to the abode of 
Your lotus feet by meditation. (35)  

O lotus -eyed one, the goddess of fortune 
considers it a festive o ccasion whenever she 
touches the soles of Your lotus feet. You are 
very dear to the residents of the forest, and 
therefore we will also touch those lotus feet. 
From that time on we will be unable even to 
stand in the presence of any other man, for we 
will have been fully satisfied by You. (36) God-
dess Lak ṣmī, whose glance is sought after by 
the demigods with great endeavor, has 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

658 
 achieved the unique position of always remain-
ing on the chest of her Lord, Nārāya ṇa. Still, 
she desires the dust of His lotus feet,  even 
though she has to share that dust with Tulasī -
devī and indeed with the Lord’s many other 
servants. Similarly, we have approached the 
dust of Your lotus feet for shelter. (37) There-
fore, O vanquisher of all distress, please show 
us mercy. To approach Your lotus feet we 
abandoned our families and homes, and we 
have no desire other than to serve You. Our 
hearts are burning with intense desires gener-
ated by Your beautiful smiling glances. O jewel 
among men, please make us Your maidser-
vants. (38) Seeing Yo ur face encircled by curl-
ing locks of hair, Your cheeks beautified by 
earrings, Your lips full of nectar, and Your 
smiling glance, and also seeing Your two im-
posing arms, which take away our fear, and 
Your chest, which is the only source of pleasure 
for th e goddess of fortune, we must become 
Your maidservants. (39) Dear K ṛṣṇa, what 
woman in all the three worlds wouldn’t deviate 
from religious behavior when bewildered by 
the sweet, drawn -out melody of Your flute? 
Your beauty makes all three worlds auspicious . 
Indeed, even the cows, birds, trees and deer 
manifest the ecstatic symptom of bodily hair 
standing on end when they see Your beautiful 
form. (40) Clearly You have taken birth in this 
world to relieve the fear and distress of the peo-
ple of Vraja, just as the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, the primeval Lord, protects the do-
main of the demigods. Therefore, O friend of 
the distressed, kindly place Your lotus hand on 
Your maidservants’ heads and burning breasts. 
(41) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Smiling upon 
heari ng these despondent words from the gopīs, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the supreme master of all masters 
of mystic yoga, mercifully enjoyed with them, 
although He is self -satisfied. (42) Among the 
assembled gopīs, the infallible Lord K ṛṣṇa ap-
peared just like the moon surro unded by stars. 
He whose activities are so magnanimous made 
their faces blossom with His affectionate 
glances, and His broad smiles revealed the ef-
fulgence of His jasmine -bud-like teeth. (43) As the gopīs sang His praises, that leader of hun-
dreds of women sang loudly in reply. He 
moved among them, wearing His Vaijayantī 
garland, beautifying the V ṛndāvana forest. (44) 
Śrī K ṛṣṇa went with the gopīs to the bank of the 
Yamunā, where the sand was cooling and the 
wind, enlivened by the river’s waves, bore the 
fragrance of lotuses. There K ṛṣṇa threw His 
arms around the gopīs and embraced them. He 
aroused Cupid in the beautiful young ladies of 
Vraja by touching their hands, hair, thighs, 
belts and breasts, by playfully scratching them 
with His fingernails, and also by joking with 
them, glancing at them and laughing with them. 
In this way the Lord enjoyed His pastimes. (45 -
46) The gopīs became proud of themselves for 
having received such special attention from 
Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
and each of the m thought herself the best 
woman on earth. (47) Lord Keśava, seeing the 
gopīs too proud of their good fortune, wanted 
to relieve them of this pride and show them fur-
ther mercy. Thus He immediately disappeared. 
(48) 

SB 10.30: The Gopīs Search for K ṛṣṇa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  When Lord 
Kṛṣṇa disappeared so suddenly, the gopīs felt 
great sorrow at losing sight of Him, like a group 
of female elephants who have lost their mate. 
(1) As the cowherd women remembered Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, their hearts were overwhelmed by Hi s 
movements and loving smiles, His playful 
glances and enchanting talks, and by the many 
other pastimes He would enjoy with them. Thus 
absorbed in thoughts of K ṛṣṇa, the Lord of 
Ramā, the gopīs began acting out His various 
transcendental pastimes. (2) Beca use the be-
loved gopīs were absorbed in thoughts of their 
beloved K ṛṣṇa, their bodies imitated His way of 
moving and smiling, His way of beholding 
them, His speech and His other distinctive fea-
tures. Deeply immersed in thinking of Him and 
maddened by rememb ering His pastimes, they 
declared to one another, “I am K ṛṣṇa!” (3) 
Singing loudly of K ṛṣṇa, they searched for Him 
throughout the V ṛndāvana forest like a band of 
madwomen. They even asked the trees about 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

659 
 Him, who as the Supersoul is present inside and 
outside of all created things, just like the sky. 
(4) 

[The gopīs said:]  O aśvattha tree, O plak ṣa, 
O nyagrodha, have you seen K ṛṣṇa? That son 
of Nanda Mahārāja has gone away after steal-
ing our minds with His loving smiles and 
glances. (5) O kurabaka tree, O a śoka, O nāga, 
punnāga and campaka, has Balarāma’s younger 
brother, whose smile removes the audacity of 
all proud women, passed this way? (6) O most 
kind tulasī, to whom the feet of Govinda are so 
dear, have you seen that infallible one walk by, 
wearing you  and encircled by swarms of bees? 
(7) O mālati, O mallikā, O jāti and yūthikā, has 
Mādhava gone by here, giving you pleasure 
with the touch of His hand? (8) O cūta, O pri-
yāla, O panasa, āsana and kovidāra, O jambu, 
O arka, O bilva, bakula and āmra, O kadam ba 
and nīpa and all you other plants and trees liv-
ing by the banks of the Yamunā who have ded-
icated your very existence to the welfare of oth-
ers, we gopīs have lost our minds, so please tell 
us where K ṛṣṇa has gone. (9) O mother earth, 
what austerity did y ou perform to attain the 
touch of Lord Keśava’s lotus feet, which has 
brought you such great joy that your bodily 
hairs are standing on end? You appear very 
beautiful in this condition. Was it during the 
Lord’s current appearance that you acquired 
this ecs tatic symptom, or was it perhaps much 
earlier, when He stepped upon you in His form 
of the dwarf Vāmanadeva, or even earlier, 
when He embraced you in His form of the boar 
Varāhadeva? (10) O friend, wife of the deer, 
has Lord Acyuta been here with His belov ed, 
bringing great joy to your eyes? Indeed, blow-
ing this way is the fragrance of His garland of 
kunda flowers, which was smeared with the 
kuṅkuma from the breasts of His girlfriend 
when He embraced Her. (11) O trees, we see 
that you are bowing down. When the younger 
brother of Rāma walked by here, followed by 
intoxicated bees swarming around the tulasī 
mañjarīs decorating His garland, did He 
acknowledge your obeisances with His affec-
tionate glances? He must have been resting His arm on the shoulder of His beloved and carry-
ing a lotus flower in His free hand. (12) Let us 
ask these creepers about K ṛṣṇa. Even though 
they are embracing the arms of their husband, 
this tree, they certainly must have been touched 
by K ṛṣṇa’s fingernails, since out of joy they are 
manifesting eruptions on their skin. (13)  

Having spoken these words, the gopīs, dis-
traught from searching for K ṛṣṇa, began to act 
out His various pastimes, fully absorbed in 
thoughts of Him. (14) One gopī imitated 
Pūtanā, while another acted like infant K ṛṣṇa 
and pretended to suck her breast. Another gopī, 
crying in imitation of infant K ṛṣṇa, kicked a 
gopī who was taking the role of the cart demon, 
Śaka ṭāsura. (15) One gopī took the role of 
Tṛṇāvarta and carried away another, who was 
acting like infant K ṛṣṇa, while yet another gopī 
crawled about, her ankle bells tinkling as she 
pulled her feet. (16) Two gopīs acted like Rāma 
and K ṛṣṇa in the midst of several others, who 
took the role of cowherd boys. One gopī en-
acted K ṛṣṇa’s killing of the demon Vatsāsura, 
represented by another gopī, and a pair of gopīs 
acted out the killing of Bakāsura. (17) When 
one gopī perfectly imitated how K ṛṣṇa would 
call the cows who had wandered far away, how 
He would play His flute and how He would en-
gage in various sports, the oth ers congratulated 
her with exclamations of “Well done! Well 
done!” (18) Another gopī, her mind fixed on 
Kṛṣṇa, walked about with her arm resting on 
the shoulder of a friend and declared, “I am 
Kṛṣṇa! Just see how gracefully I move!” (19) 
“Don’t be afraid o f the wind and rain,” said one 
gopī. “I will save you.” And with that she lifted 
her shawl above her head. (20) [Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī continued:] O King, one gopī climbed 
on another’s shoulders and, putting her foot on 
the other’s head, said, “Go away from her e, O 
wicked snake! You should know that I have 
taken birth in this world just to punish the envi-
ous.” (21) Then another gopī spoke up: My 
dear cowherd boys, look at this raging forest 
fire! Quickly close your eyes and I will easily 
protect you. (22) One go pī tied up her slender 
companion with a flower garland and said, 
“Now I will bind this boy who has broken the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

660 
 butter pots and stolen the butter.” The second 
gopī then covered her face and beautiful eyes, 
pretending to be afraid. (23)  

While the gopīs were thus imitating K ṛṣṇa’s 
pastimes and asking V ṛndāvana’s creepers and 
trees where K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Soul, might be, 
they happened to see His footprints in a corner 
of the forest. (24) [The gopīs said:] The marks 
of a flag, lotus, thunderbolt, elephant goad,  bar-
leycorn and so forth on these footprints clearly 
distinguish them as belonging to that great soul, 
the son of Nanda Mahārāja. (25) The gopīs be-
gan following K ṛṣṇa’s path, as shown by His 
many footprints, but when they saw that these 
prints were thoroug hly intermixed with those 
of His dearmost consort, they became per-
turbed and spoke as follows. (26) [The gopīs 
said:] Here we see the footprints of some gopī 
who must have been walking along with the son 
of Nanda Mahārāja. He must have put His arm 
on Her s houlder, just as an elephant rests His 
trunk on the shoulder of an accompanying she -
elephant. (27) Certainly this particular gopī has 
perfectly worshiped the all -powerful Personal-
ity of Godhead, Govinda, since He was so 
pleased with Her that He abandoned t he rest of 
us and brought Her to a secluded place. (28) O 
girls! The dust of Govinda’s lotus feet is so sa-
cred that even Brahmā, Śiva and the goddess 
Ramā take that dust upon their heads to dispel 
sinful reactions. (29) These footprints of that 
special gop ī greatly disturb us. Of all the gopīs, 
She alone was taken away to a secluded place, 
where She is enjoying the lips of K ṛṣṇa. Look, 
we can’t see Her footprints over here! It’s ob-
vious that the grass and sprouts were hurting 
the tender soles of Her feet, a nd so the lover 
lifted up His beloved. (30) Please observe, my 
dear gopīs, how in this place lusty K ṛṣṇa’s foot-
prints are pressed more deeply into the ground. 
Carrying the weight of His beloved must have 
been difficult for Him. And over here that in-
tellige nt boy must have put Her down to gather 
some flowers. (31) Just see how in this place 
dear K ṛṣṇa collected flowers for His beloved. 
Here He has left the impression of only the 
front part of His feet because He was standing 
on His toes to reach the flowers.  (32) Certainly Kṛṣṇa sat down here with His girlfriend to ar-
range Her hair. The lusty boy must have made 
a crown for that lusty girl out of the flowers He 
had collected. (33) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī contin-
ued:] Lord K ṛṣṇa enjoyed with that gopī, alt-
hough He enj oys only within, being self -satis-
fied and complete in Himself. Thus by contrast 
He showed the wretchedness of ordinary lusty 
men and hardhearted women. (34) As the gopīs 
wandered about, their minds completely bewil-
dered, they pointed out various signs of K ṛṣṇa’s 
pastimes. The particular gopī whom K ṛṣṇa had 
led into a secluded forest when He had aban-
doned all the other young girls began to think 
Herself the best of women. “My beloved has 
rejected all the other gopīs,” She thought, “even 
though they are drive n by Cupid himself. He 
has chosen to reciprocate with Me alone.” (35 -
36) 

As the two lovers passed through one part of 
the V ṛndāvana forest, the special gopī began 
feeling proud of Herself. She told Lord Keśava, 
“I cannot walk any further. Please carry Me 
wherever You want to go.” (37) Thus ad-
dressed, Lord K ṛṣṇa replied, “Just climb on My 
shoulder.” But as soon as He said this, He dis-
appeared. His beloved consort then immedi-
ately felt great remorse. (38) She cried out: O 
master! My lover! O dearmost, where are You? 
Where are You? Please, O mighty -armed one, 
O friend, show Yourself to Me, Your poor serv-
ant! (39) Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: While con-
tinuing to search out K ṛṣṇa’s path, the gopīs 
discovered their unhappy friend close by. She 
was bewildered by separat ion from Her lover. 
(40) She told them how Mādhava had given 
Her much respect, but how She then suffered 
dishonor because of Her miSBehavior. The go-
pīs were extremely amazed to hear this. (41) In 
search of K ṛṣṇa, the gopīs then entered the 
depths of the fo rest as far as the light of the 
moon shone. But when they found themselves 
engulfed in darkness, they decided to turn back. 
(42) 

Their minds absorbed in thoughts of Him, 
they conversed about Him, acted out His pas-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

661 
 times and felt themselves filled with His pres-
ence. They completely forgot about their 
homes as they loudly sang the glories of 
Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental qualities. (43) The go-
pīs again came to the bank of the Kālindī. Med-
itating on K ṛṣṇa and eagerly hoping He would 
come, they sat down together to si ng of Him. 
(44) 

SB 10.31: The Gopīs’ Songs of Separation  

The gopīs said:  O beloved, Your birth in the 
land of Vraja has made it exceedingly glorious, 
and thus Indirā, the goddess of fortune, always 
resides here. It is only for Your sake that we, 
Your dev oted servants, maintain our lives. We 
have been searching everywhere for You, so 
please show Yourself to us. (1) O Lord of love, 
in beauty Your glance excels the whorl of the 
finest, most perfectly formed lotus within the 
autumn pond. O bestower of benedic tions, You 
are killing the maidservants who have given 
themselves to You freely, without any price. 
Isn’t this murder? (2) O greatest of personali-
ties, You have repeatedly saved us from all 
kinds of dangerfrom poisoned water, from the 
terrible man -eater Ag ha, from the great rains, 
from the wind demon, from the fiery thunder-
bolt of Indra, from the bull demon and from the 
son of Maya Dānava. (3) You are not actually 
the son of the gopī Yaśodā, O friend, but rather 
the indwelling witness in the hearts of all e m-
bodied souls. Because Lord Brahmā prayed for 
You to come and protect the universe, You 
have now appeared in the Sātvata dynasty. (4)  

O best of the V ṛṣṇis, Your lotuslike hand, 
which holds the hand of the goddess of fortune, 
grants fearlessness to those w ho approach Your 
feet out of fear of material existence. O lover, 
please place that wish -fulfilling lotus hand on 
our heads. (5) O You who destroy the suffering 
of Vraja’s people, O hero of all women, Your 
smile shatters the false pride of Your devotees. 
Please, dear friend, accept us as Your maidser-
vants and show us Your beautiful lotus face. (6) 
Your lotus feet destroy the past sins of all em-
bodied souls who surrender to them. Those feet 
follow after the cows in the pastures and are the eternal abode of t he goddess of fortune. Since 
You once put those feet on the hoods of the 
great serpent Kāliya, please place them upon 
our breasts and tear away the lust in our hearts. 
(7) O lotus -eyed one, Your sweet voice and 
charming words, which attract the minds of th e 
intelligent, are bewildering us more and more. 
Our dear hero, please revive Your maidservants 
with the nectar of Your lips. (8) The nectar of 
Your words and the descriptions of Your activ-
ities are the life and soul of those suffering in 
this material wor ld. These narrations, transmit-
ted by learned sages, eradicate one’s sinful re-
actions and bestow good fortune upon whoever 
hears them. These narrations are broadcast all 
over the world and are filled with spiritual 
power. Certainly those who spread the mess age 
of Godhead are most munificent. (9) Your 
smiles, Your sweet, loving glances, the inti-
mate pastimes and confidential talks we en-
joyed with Youall these are auspicious to med-
itate upon, and they touch our hearts. But at the 
same time, O deceiver, they ve ry much agitate 
our minds. (10)  

Dear master, dear lover, when You leave the 
cowherd village to herd the cows, our minds are 
disturbed with the thought that Your feet, more 
beautiful than a lotus, will be pricked by the 
spiked husks of grain and the rough grass and 
plants. (11) At the end of the day You repeat-
edly show us Your lotus face, covered with 
dark blue locks of hair and thickly powdered 
with dust. Thus, O hero, You arouse lusty de-
sires in our minds. (12) Your lotus feet, which 
are worshiped by Lord  Brahmā, fulfill the de-
sires of all who bow down to them. They are 
the ornament of the earth, they give the highest 
satisfaction, and in times of danger they are the 
appropriate object of meditation. O lover, O de-
stroyer of anxiety, please put those lotus feet 
upon our breasts. (13) O hero, kindly distribute 
to us the nectar of Your lips, which enhances 
conjugal pleasure and vanquishes grief. That 
nectar is thoroughly relished by Your vibrating 
flute and makes people forget any other attach-
ment. (14) When Y ou go off to the forest during 
the day, a tiny fraction of a second becomes like 
a millennium for us because we cannot see 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

662 
 You. And even when we can eagerly look upon 
Your beautiful face, so lovely with its adorn-
ment of curly locks, our pleasure is hindere d by 
our eyelids, which were fashioned by the fool-
ish creator. (15) Dear Acyuta, You know very 
well why we have come here. Who but a 
cheater like You would abandon young women 
who come to see Him in the middle of the night, 
enchanted by the loud song of Hi s flute? Just to 
see You, we have completely rejected our hus-
bands, children, ancestors, brothers and other 
relatives. (16) Our minds are repeatedly bewil-
dered as we think of the intimate conversations 
we had with You in secret, feel the rise of lust 
in ou r hearts and remember Your smiling face, 
Your loving glances and Your broad chest, the 
resting place of the goddess of fortune. Thus we 
experience the most severe hankering for You. 
(17) O beloved, Your all -auspicious appear-
ance vanquishes the distress of those living in 
Vraja’s forests. Our minds long for Your asso-
ciation. Please give to us just a bit of that med-
icine, which counteracts the disease in Your 
devotees’ hearts. (18) O dearly beloved! Your 
lotus feet are so soft that we place them gently 
on our  breasts, fearing that Your feet will be 
hurt. Our life rests only in You. Our minds, 
therefore, are filled with anxiety that Your ten-
der feet might be wounded by pebbles as You 
roam about on the forest path. (19)  

SB 10.32: The Reunion  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī s aid: O King, having 
thus sung and spoken their hearts out in various 
charming ways, the gopīs began to weep 
loudly. They were very eager to see Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. (1) Then Lord K ṛṣṇa, a smile on His lo-
tus face, appeared before the gopīs. Wearing a 
garland and a y ellow garment, He directly ap-
peared as one who can bewilder the mind of 
Cupid, who himself bewilders the minds of or-
dinary people. (2) When the gopīs saw that 
their dearmost K ṛṣṇa had returned to them, they 
all stood up at once, and out of their affection 
for Him their eyes bloomed wide. It was as if 
the air of life had reentered their bodies. (3) 
One gopī joyfully took K ṛṣṇa’s hand between 
her folded palms, and another placed His arm, anointed with sandalwood paste, on her shoul-
der. (4) A slender gopī resp ectfully took in her 
joined hands the betel nut He had chewed, and 
another gopī, burning with desire, put His lotus 
feet on her breasts. (5) One gopī, beside herself 
with loving anger, bit her lips and stared at Him 
with frowning eyebrows, as if to wound H im 
with her harsh glances. (6) Another gopī looked 
with unblinking eyes upon His lotus face, but 
even after deeply relishing its sweetness She 
did not feel satiated, just as mystic saints are 
never satiated when meditating upon the Lord’s 
feet. (7) One gop ī took the Lord through the ap-
erture of her eyes and placed Him within her 
heart. Then, with her eyes closed and her bodily 
hairs standing on end, she continuously em-
braced Him within. Thus immersed in transcen-
dental ecstasy, she resembled a yogī meditatin g 
upon the Lord. (8) All the gopīs enjoyed the 
greatest festivity when they saw their beloved 
Keśava again. They gave up the distress of sep-
aration, just as people in general forget their 
misery when they gain the association of a spir-
itually enlightened p erson. (9) Encircled by the 
gopīs, who were now relieved of all distress, 
Lord Acyuta, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, shone forth splendidly. My dear King, 
Kṛṣṇa thus appeared like the Supersoul encir-
cled by His spiritual potencies. (10)  

The almighty  Lord then took the gopīs with 
Him to the bank of the Kālindī, who with the 
hands of her waves had scattered piles of soft 
sand upon the shore. In that auspicious place 
the breeze, bearing the fragrance of blooming 
kunda and mandāra flowers, attracted many  
bees, and the abundant rays of the autumn 
moon dispelled the darkness of night. (11 -12) 
Their heartache vanquished by the ecstasy of 
seeing K ṛṣṇa, the gopīs, like the personified 
Vedas before them, felt their desires com-
pletely fulfilled. For their dear f riend K ṛṣṇa 
they arranged a seat with their shawls which 
were smeared with the ku ṅkuma powder from 
their breasts. (13) Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, for whom the great 
masters of mystic meditation arrange a seat 
within their hearts, took His seat in the assem-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

663 
 bly of gopīs. His transcendental body, the ex-
clusive abode of beauty and opulence within 
the three worlds, shone brilliantly as the gopīs 
worshiped Him. (14) Śrī K ṛṣṇa had awakened 
romantic desires within the gopīs, and they 
honored Hi m by glancing at Him with playful 
smiles, gesturing amorously with their eye-
brows, and massaging His hands and feet as 
they held them in their laps. Even while wor-
shiping Him, however, they felt somewhat an-
gry, and thus they addressed Him as follows. 
(15) 

The gopīs said:  Some people reciprocate 
the affection only of those who are affectionate 
toward them, while others show affection even 
to those who are indifferent or inimical. And 
yet others will not show affection toward any-
one. Dear K ṛṣṇa, please prope rly explain this 
matter to us. (16)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
So-called friends who show affection for each 
other only to benefit themselves are actually 
selfish. They have no true friendship, nor are 
they following the true principles of r eligion. 
Indeed, if they did not expect benefit for them-
selves, they would not reciprocate. (17) My 
dear slender -waisted gopīs, some people are 
genuinely merciful or, like parents, naturally 
affectionate. Such persons, who devotedly 
serve even those who fa il to reciprocate with 
them, are following the true, faultless path of 
religion, and they are true well -wishers. (18) 
Then there are those individuals who are spirit-
ually self -satisfied, materially fulfilled or by 
nature ungrateful or simply envious of sup eri-
ors. Such persons will not love even those who 
love them, what to speak of those who are in-
imical. (19) But the reason I do not immedi-
ately reciprocate the affection of living beings 
even when they worship Me, O gopīs, is that I 
want to intensify their loving devotion. They 
then become like a poor man who has gained 
some wealth and then lost it, and who thus be-
comes so anxious about it that he can think of 
nothing else. (20) My dear girls, understanding 
that simply for My sake you had rejected the 
author ity of worldly opinion, of the Vedas and of your relatives, I acted as I did only to in-
crease your attachment to Me. Even when I re-
moved Myself from your sight by suddenly dis-
appearing, I never stopped loving you. There-
fore, My beloved gopīs, please do not  harbor 
any bad feelings toward Me, your beloved. (21) 
I am not able to repay My debt for your spotless 
service, even within a lifetime of Brahmā. Your 
connection with Me is beyond reproach. You 
have worshiped Me, cutting off all domestic 
ties, which are d ifficult to break. Therefore, 
please let your own glorious deeds be your 
compensation. (22)  

SB 10.33: The Rāsa Dance  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  When the cow-
herd girls heard the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead speak these most charming words, 
they forgot their  distress caused by separation 
from Him. Touching His transcendental limbs, 
they felt all their desires fulfilled. (1) There on 
the Yamunā’s banks Lord Govinda then began 
the pastime of the rāsa dance in the company of 
those jewels among women, the faithfu l gopīs, 
who joyfully linked their arms together. (2) The 
festive rāsa dance commenced, with the gopīs 
arrayed in a circle. Lord K ṛṣṇa expanded Him-
self and entered between each pair of gopīs, and 
as that master of mystic power placed His arms 
around their necks, each girl thought He was 
standing next to her alone. The demigods and 
their wives were overwhelmed with eagerness 
to witness the rāsa dance, and they soon 
crowded the sky with their hundreds of celestial 
airplanes. (3) Kettledrums then resounded in 
the sky while flowers rained down and the chief 
Gandharvas and their wives sang Lord K ṛṣṇa’s 
spotless glories. (4) A tumultuous sound arose 
from the armlets, ankle bells and waist bells of 
the gopīs as they sported with their beloved 
Kṛṣṇa in the circle of  the rāsa dance. (5) In the 
midst of the dancing gopīs, Lord K ṛṣṇa ap-
peared most brilliant, like an exquisite sapphire 
in the midst of golden ornaments. (6) As the go-
pīs sang in praise of K ṛṣṇa, their feet danced, 
their hands gestured, and their eyebrows m oved 
with playful smiles. With their braids and belts 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

664 
 tied tight, their waists bending, their faces per-
spiring, the garments on their breasts moving 
this way and that, and their earrings swinging 
on their cheeks, Lord K ṛṣṇa’s young consorts 
shone like stre aks of lightning in a mass of 
clouds. (7) Eager to enjoy conjugal love, their 
throats colored with various pigments, the go-
pīs sang loudly and danced. They were over-
joyed by K ṛṣṇa’s touch, and they sang songs 
that filled the entire universe. (8) One gopī, 
joining Lord Mukunda in His singing, sang 
pure melodious tones that rose harmoniously 
above His. K ṛṣṇa was pleased and showed great 
appreciation for her performance, saying “Ex-
cellent! Excellent!” Then another gopī repeated 
the same melody, but in a specia l metrical pat-
tern, and K ṛṣṇa praised her also. (9) When one 
gopī grew tired from the rāsa dance, She turned 
to Kṛṣṇa, standing at Her side holding a baton, 
and grasped His shoulder with Her arm. The 
dancing had loosened Her bracelets and the 
flowers in He r hair. (10) Upon the shoulder of 
one gopī K ṛṣṇa placed His arm, whose natural 
blue-lotus fragrance was mixed with that of the 
sandalwood pulp anointing it. As the gopī rel-
ished that fragrance, her bodily hair stood on 
end in jubilation, and she kissed His  arm. (11) 
Next to K ṛṣṇa’s cheek one gopī put her own, 
beautified by the effulgence of her earrings, 
which glittered as she danced. K ṛṣṇa then care-
fully gave her the betel nut He was chewing. 
(12) Another gopī became fatigued as she 
danced and sang, the be lls on her ankles and 
waist tinkling. So she placed upon her breasts 
the comforting lotus hand of Lord Acyuta, who 
was standing by her side. (13)  

Having attained as their intimate lover Lord 
Acyuta, the exclusive consort of the goddess of 
fortune, the gop īs enjoyed great pleasure. They 
sang His glories as He held their necks with His 
arms. (14) Enhancing the beauty of the gopīs’ 
faces were the lotus flowers behind their ears, 
the locks of hair decorating their cheeks, and 
drops of perspiration. The reverbe ration of their 
armlets and ankle bells made a loud musical 
sound, and their chaplets scattered. Thus the 
gopīs danced with the Supreme Lord in the 
arena of the rāsa dance as swarms of bees sang in accompaniment. (15) In this way Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the original L ord Nārāya ṇa, master of 
the goddess of fortune, took pleasure in the 
company of the young women of Vraja by em-
bracing them, caressing them and glancing lov-
ingly at them as He smiled His broad, playful 
smiles. It was just as if a child were playing 
with his  own reflection. (16) Their senses over-
whelmed by the joy of having His physical as-
sociation, the gopīs could not prevent their hair, 
their dresses and the cloths covering their 
breasts from becoming disheveled. Their gar-
lands and ornaments scattered, O he ro of the 
Kuru dynasty. (17) The wives of the demigods, 
observing K ṛṣṇa’s playful activities from their 
airplanes, were entranced and became agitated 
with lust. Indeed, even the moon and his entou-
rage, the stars, became astonished. (18) Ex-
panding Himself a s many times as there were 
cowherd women to associate with, the Supreme 
Lord, though self -satisfied, playfully enjoyed 
their company. (19) Seeing that the gopīs were 
fatigued from conjugal enjoyment, my dear 
King, merciful K ṛṣṇa lovingly wiped their 
faces with His comforting hand. (20) The gopīs 
honored their hero with smiling glances sweet-
ened by the beauty of their cheeks and the ef-
fulgence of their curly locks and glittering 
golden earrings. Overjoyed from the touch of 
His fingernails, they chanted the g lories of His 
all-auspicious transcendental pastimes. (21) 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s garland had been crushed during 
His conjugal dalliance with the gopīs and col-
ored vermilion by the ku ṅkuma powder on their 
breasts. To dispel the fatigue of the gopīs, 
Kṛṣṇa entered th e water of the Yamunā, fol-
lowed swiftly by bees who were singing like 
the best of the Gandharvas. He appeared like a 
lordly elephant entering the water to relax in the 
company of his consorts. Indeed, the Lord had 
transgressed all worldly and Vedic moralit y 
just as a powerful elephant might break the 
dikes in a paddy field. (22) My dear King, in 
the water K ṛṣṇa found Himself being splashed 
on all sides by the laughing gopīs, who looked 
at Him with love. As the demigods worshiped 
Him by showering flowers fro m their airplanes, 
the self -satisfied Lord took pleasure in playing 
like the king of the elephants. (23) Then the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

665 
 Lord strolled through a small forest on the bank 
of the Yamunā. This forest was filled to its lim-
its with breezes carrying the fragrances of a ll 
the flowers growing on the land and in the wa-
ter. Followed by His entourage of bees and 
beautiful women, Lord K ṛṣṇa appeared like an 
intoxicated elephant with his she -elephants. 
(24) Although the gopīs were firmly attached to 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, whose desires a re always fulfilled, 
the Lord was not internally affected by any 
mundane sex desire. Still, to perform His pas-
times the Lord took advantage of all those 
moonlit autumn nights, which inspire poetic 
descriptions of transcendental affairs. (25)  

Parīk ṣit Mahā rāja said:  O brāhma ṇa, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord of 
the universe, has descended to this earth along 
with His plenary portion to destroy irreligion 
and reestablish religious principles. Indeed, He 
is the original speaker, follower and gua rdian 
of moral laws. How, then, could He have vio-
lated them by touching other men’s wives? (26 -
27) O faithful upholder of vows, please destroy 
our doubt by explaining to us what purpose the 
self-satisfied Lord of the Yadus had in mind 
when He behaved so co ntemptibly. (28)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  The status of 
powerful controllers is not harmed by any ap-
parently audacious transgression of morality 
we may see in them, for they are just like fire, 
which devours everything fed into it and re-
mains unpolluted. (2 9) One who is not a great 
controller should never imitate the behavior of 
ruling personalities, even mentally. If out of 
foolishness an ordinary person does imitate 
such behavior, he will simply destroy himself, 
just as a person who is not Rudra would dest roy 
himself if he tried to drink an ocean of poison. 
(30) The statements of the Lord’s empowered 
servants are always true, and the acts they per-
form are exemplary when consistent with those 
statements. Therefore, one who is intelligent 
should carry out the ir instructions. (31) My 
dear Prabhu, when these great persons who are 
free from false ego act piously in this world, 
they have no selfish motives to fulfill, and even 
when they act in apparent contradiction to the laws of piety, they are not subject to si nful re-
actions. (32) How, then, could the Lord of all 
created beingsanimals, men and demigodshave 
any connection with the piety and impiety that 
affect His subject creatures? (33) Material ac-
tivities never entangle the devotees of the Su-
preme Lord, who are  fully satisfied by serving 
the dust of His lotus feet. Nor do material ac-
tivities entangle those intelligent sages who 
have freed themselves from the bondage of all 
fruitive reactions by the power of yoga. So how 
could there be any question of bondage for  the 
Lord Himself, who assumes His transcendental 
forms according to His own sweet will? (34) He 
who lives as the overseeing witness within the 
gopīs and their husbands, and indeed within all 
embodied living beings, assumes forms in this 
world to enjoy tra nscendental pastimes. (35) 
When the Lord assumes a humanlike body to 
show mercy to His devotees, He engages in 
such pastimes as will attract those who hear 
about them to become dedicated to Him. (36) 
The cowherd men, bewildered by K ṛṣṇa’s illu-
sory potency,  thought their wives had remained 
home at their sides. Thus they did not harbor 
any jealous feelings against Him. (37) After an 
entire night of Brahmā had passed, Lord K ṛṣṇa 
advised the gopīs to return to their homes. Alt-
hough they did not wish to do so, t he Lord’s 
beloved consorts complied with His command. 
(38) 

Anyone who faithfully hears or describes 
the Lord’s playful affairs with the young gopīs 
of Vṛndāvana will attain the Lord’s pure devo-
tional service. Thus he will quickly become so-
ber and conquer lust, the disease of the heart. 
(39) 

SB 10.34: Nanda Mahārāja Saved and 
Śaṅkhacū ḍa Slain  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  One day the cow-
herd men, eager to take a trip to worship Lord 
Śiva, traveled by bullock carts to the Ambikā 
forest. (1) O King, after arriving  there, they 
bathed in the Sarasvatī and then devotedly wor-
shiped with various paraphernalia the powerful 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

666 
 Lord Paśupati and his consort, goddess Am-
bikā. (2) The cowherd men gave the brāhma ṇas 
gifts of cows, gold, clothing and cooked grains 
mixed with honey . Then the cowherds prayed, 
“May the lord be pleased with us.” (3) Nanda, 
Sunanda and the other greatly fortunate cow-
herds spent that night on the bank of the Saras-
vatī, strictly observing their vows. They fasted, 
taking only water. (4)  

During the night a  huge and extremely hun-
gry snake appeared in that thicket. Slithering on 
his belly up to the sleeping Nanda Mahārāja, 
the snake began swallowing him. (5) In the 
clutches of the snake, Nanda Mahārāja cried 
out, “K ṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, my dear boy! This huge 
serpent is swallowing me! Please save me, who 
am surrendered to You!” (6) When the cowherd 
men heard the cries of Nanda, they immediately 
rose up and saw that he was being swallowed. 
Distraught, they beat the serpent with blazing 
torches. (7) But even though the f irebrands 
were burning him, the serpent would not re-
lease Nanda Mahārāja. Then the Supreme Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, master of His devotees, came to the spot 
and touched the snake with His foot. (8) The 
snake had all his sinful reactions destroyed by 
the touch of the Su preme Lord’s divine foot, 
and thus he gave up his serpent body and ap-
peared in the form of a worshipable 
Vidyādhara. (9) The Supreme Lord H ṛṣīkeśa 
then questioned this personality, who was 
standing before Him with his head bowed, his 
brilliantly effulgent body bedecked with golden 
necklaces. (10) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] My dear sir, 
you appear so wonderful, glowing with such 
great beauty. Who are you? And who forced 
you to assume this terrible body of a snake? 
(11) 

The serpent replied:  I am the well -known 
Vidyā dhara named Sudarśana. I was very opu-
lent and beautiful, and I used to wander freely 
in all directions in my airplane. Once I saw 
some homely sages of the lineage of A ṅgirā 
Muni. Proud of my beauty, I ridiculed them, 
and because of my sin they made me assu me 
this lowly form. (12 -13) It was actually for my 
benefit that those merciful sages cursed me, since now I have been touched by the foot of 
the supreme spiritual master of all the worlds 
and have thus been relieved of all inauspicious-
ness. (14) My Lord, Y ou destroy all fear for 
those who, fearing this material world, take 
shelter of You. By the touch of Your feet I am 
now freed from the curse of the sages. O de-
stroyer of distress, please let me return to my 
planet. (15) O master of mystic power, O great 
personality, O Lord of the devotees, I surrender 
to You. Please command me as You will, O su-
preme God, Lord of all lords of the universe. 
(16) O infallible one, I was immediately freed 
from the brāhma ṇas’ punishment simply by 
seeing You. Anyone who chants Yo ur name 
purifies all who hear his chanting, as well as 
himself. How much more beneficial, then, is 
the touch of Your lotus feet? (17) Thus receiv-
ing the permission of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the demigod 
Sudarśana circumambulated Him, bowed down 
to offer Him homage and  then returned to his 
heavenly planet. Nanda Mahārāja was thus de-
livered from peril. (18) The inhabitants of Vraja 
were astonished to see the mighty power of Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa. Dear King, they then completed their 
worship of Lord Śiva and returned to Vraja, 
along the way respectfully describing K ṛṣṇa’s 
powerful acts. (19)  

Once Lord Govinda and Lord Rāma, the 
performers of wonderful feats, were playing in 
the forest at night with the young girls of Vraja. 
(20) K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma wore flower garlands 
and spotless ga rments, and Their limbs were 
beautifully decorated and anointed. The 
women sang Their glories in a charming way, 
bound to Them by affection. (21) The two 
Lords praised the nightfall, signaled by the ris-
ing of the moon and the appearance of stars, a 
lotus -scented breeze and bees intoxicated by 
the fragrance of jasmine flowers. (22) K ṛṣṇa 
and Balarāma sang, producing the entire range 
of musical sounds simultaneously. Their sing-
ing brought happiness to the ears and minds of 
all living beings. (23) The gopīs be came 
stunned when they heard that song. Forgetting 
themselves, O King, they did not notice that 
their fine garments were becoming loose and 
their hair and garlands disheveled. (24)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

667 

While Lord K ṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma thus 
played according to Their own swee t will and 
sang to the point of apparent intoxication, a 
servant of Kuvera named Śa ṅkhacū ḍa came 
upon the scene. (25) O King, even as the two 
Lords looked on, Śa ṅkhacū ḍa brazenly began 
driving the women off toward the north. The 
women, who had accepted K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
as their Lords, began to cry out to Them. (26) 
Hearing Their devotees crying out “K ṛṣṇa! 
Rāma!” and seeing that they were just like cows 
being stolen by a thief, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma be-
gan to run after the demon. (27) The Lords 
called out in reply, “Do not fear!” Then They 
picked up logs of the śala tree and quickly pur-
sued that lowest of Guhyakas, who swiftly ran 
away. (28) When Śa ṅkhacū ḍa saw the two of 
Them coming toward him like the personified 
forces of Time and Death, he was filled with 
anxiety. Confused, he abandoned the women 
and fled for his life. (29) Lord Govinda chased 
the demon wherever he ran, eager to take his 
crest jewel. Meanwhile Lord Balarāma stayed 
with the women to protect them. (30) The 
mighty Lord overtook Śa ṅkhacū ḍa from  a great 
distance as if from nearby, my dear King, and 
then with His fist the Lord removed the wicked 
demon’s head, together with his crest jewel. 
(31) Having thus killed the demon Śa ṅkhacū ḍa 
and taken away his shining jewel, Lord K ṛṣṇa 
gave it to His elde r brother with great satisfac-
tion as the gopīs watched. (32)  

SB 10.35: The Gopīs Sing of K ṛṣṇa as He 
Wanders in the Forest  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Whenever K ṛṣṇa 
went to the forest, the minds of the gopīs would 
run after Him, and thus the young girls sadl y 
spent their days singing of His pastimes. (1)  

The gopīs said:  When Mukunda vibrates 
the flute He has placed to His lips, stopping its 
holes with His tender fingers, He rests His left 
cheek on His left arm and makes His eyebrows 
dance. At that time the d emigoddesses travel-
ing in the sky with their husbands, the Siddhas, 
become amazed. As those ladies listen, they are embarrassed to find their minds yielding to the 
pursuit of lusty desires, and in their distress 
they are unaware that the belts of their gar ments 
are loosening. (2 -3) 

O girls! This son of Nanda, who gives joy to 
the distressed, bears steady lightning on His 
chest and has a smile like a jeweled necklace. 
Now please hear something wonderful. When 
He vibrates His flute, Vraja’s bulls, deer and 
cows, standing in groups at a great distance, are 
all captivated by the sound, and they stop chew-
ing the food in their mouths and cock their ears. 
Stunned, they appear as if asleep, or like figures 
in a painting. (4 -5) 

My dear gopī, sometimes Mukunda imita tes 
the appearance of a wrestler by decorating 
Himself with leaves, peacock feathers and col-
ored minerals. Then, in the company of 
Balarāma and the cowherd boys, He plays His 
flute to call the cows. At that time the rivers 
stop flowing, their water stunned  by the ecstasy 
they feel as they eagerly wait for the wind to 
bring them the dust of His lotus feet. But like 
us, the rivers are not very pious, and thus they 
merely wait with their arms trembling out of 
love. (6 -7) 

Kṛṣṇa moves about the forest in the co m-
pany of His friends, who vividly chant the glo-
ries of His magnificent deeds. He thus appears 
just like the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
exhibiting His inexhaustible opulences. When 
the cows wander onto the mountainsides and 
Kṛṣṇa calls out to them with the sound of His 
flute, the trees and creepers in the forest re-
spond by becoming so luxuriant with fruits and 
flowers that they seem to be manifesting Lord 
Viṣṇu within their hearts. As their branches 
bend low with the weight, the filaments on their 
trunks  and vines stand erect out of the ecstasy 
of love of God, and both the trees and the 
creepers pour down a rain of sweet sap. (8 -11) 

O goddesses of Vraja, when K ṛṣṇa is enjoy-
ing Himself with Balarāma on the mountain 
slopes, playfully wearing a flower garla nd on 
the top of His head, He engladdens all with the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

668 
 resonant vibrations of His flute. Thus He de-
lights the entire world. At that time the nearby 
cloud, afraid of offending a great personality, 
thunders very gently in accompaniment. The 
cloud showers flow ers onto his dear friend 
Kṛṣṇa and shades Him from the sun like an um-
brella. (12 -13) 

O pious mother Yaśodā, your son, who is 
expert in all the arts of herding cows, has in-
vented many new styles of flute -playing. When 
He takes His flute to His bimba -red li ps and 
sends forth the tones of the harmonic scale in 
variegated melodies, Brahmā, Śiva, Indra and 
other chief demigods become confused upon 
hearing the sound. Although they are the most 
learned authorities, they cannot ascertain the 
essence of that music,  and thus they bow down 
their heads and hearts. (14 -15) 

As K ṛṣṇa strolls through Vraja with His lo-
tus-petal -like feet, marking the ground with the 
distinctive emblems of flag, thunderbolt, lotus 
and elephant goad, He relieves the distress the 
ground feels  from the cows’ hooves. As He 
plays His renowned flute, His body moves with 
the grace of an elephant. Thus we gopīs, who 
become agitated by Cupid when K ṛṣṇa play-
fully glances at us, stand as still as trees, una-
ware that our hair and garments are slackening . 
(16-17) 

Now K ṛṣṇa is standing somewhere counting 
His cows on a string of gems. He wears a gar-
land of tulasī flowers that bear the fragrance of 
His beloved, and He has thrown His arm over 
the shoulder of an affectionate cowherd boy-
friend. As K ṛṣṇa plays His flute and sings, the 
music attracts the black deer’s wives, who ap-
proach that ocean of transcendental qualities 
and sit down beside Him. Just like us cowherd 
girls, they have given up all hope for happiness 
in family life. (18 -19) 

O sinless Yaśodā, yo ur darling child, the son 
of Mahārāja Nanda, has festively enhanced His 
attire with a jasmine garland, and He is now 
playing along the Yamunā in the company of 
the cows and cowherd boys, amusing His dear companions. The gentle breeze honors Him 
with its so othing fragrance of sandalwood, 
while the various Upadevas, standing on all 
sides like panegyrists, offer their music, sing-
ing and gifts of tribute. (20 -21) 

Out of great affection for the cows of Vraja, 
Kṛṣṇa became the lifter of Govardhana Hill. At 
the e nd of the day, having rounded up all His 
own cows, He plays a song on His flute, while 
exalted demigods standing along the path wor-
ship His lotus feet and the cowherd boys ac-
companying Him chant His glories. His garland 
is powdered by the dust raised by th e cows’ 
hooves, and His beauty, enhanced by His fa-
tigue, creates an ecstatic festival for everyone’s 
eyes. Eager to fulfill His friends’ desires, K ṛṣṇa 
is the moon arisen from the womb of mother 
Yaśodā. (22 -23) 

As K ṛṣṇa respectfully greets His well -wish-
ing friends, His eyes roll slightly as if from in-
toxication. He wears a flower garland, and the 
beauty of His soft cheeks is accentuated by the 
brilliance of His golden earrings and the white-
ness of His face, which has the color of a badara 
berry. With His c heerful face resembling the 
moon, lord of the night, the Lord of the Yadus 
moves with the grace of a regal elephant. Thus 
He returns in the evening, delivering the cows 
of Vraja from the heat of the day. (24 -25) 

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, thus 
during the daytime the women of V ṛndāvana 
took pleasure in continuously singing about the 
pastimes of K ṛṣṇa, and those ladies’ minds and 
hearts, absorbed in Him, were filled with great 
festivity. (26)  

SB 10.36: The Slaying of Ari ṣṭā, the Bull 
Demon  

Śukadeva Goswāmī said:  The demon 
Ariṣṭa then came to the cowherd village. Ap-
pearing in the form of a bull with a large hump, 
he made the earth tremble as he tore it apart 
with his hooves. (1) Ari ṣṭāsura bellowed very 
harshly and pawed the ground. With his tail 
raised and his eyes glaring, he began to tear up 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

669 
 the embankments with the tips of his horns, 
every now and then passing a little stool and 
urine. (2) My dear King, clouds hovered about 
sharp -horned Ari ṣṭāsura’s hump, mistaking it 
for a mountain, and when the c owherd men and 
ladies caught sight of the demon, they were 
struck with terror. Indeed, the strident reverber-
ation of his roar so frightened the pregnant 
cows and women that they lost their fetuses in 
miscarriages. (3 -4) The domestic animals fled 
the pastur e in fear, O King, and all the inhabit-
ants rushed to Lord Govinda for shelter, crying, 
“Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa!” (5) When the Supreme Lord 
saw the cowherd community distraught and 
fleeing in fear, He calmed them, saying, “Don’t 
be afraid.” Then He called out to the bull de-
mon as follows. (6) You fool! What do you 
think you’re doing, you wicked rascal, fright-
ening the cowherd community and their ani-
mals when I am here just to punish corrupt mis-
creants like you! (7) Having spoken these 
words, the infallible Lord Hari s lapped His 
arms with His palms, further angering Ari ṣṭa 
with the loud sound. The Lord then casually 
threw His mighty, serpentine arm over the 
shoulder of a friend and stood facing the de-
mon. (8) Thus provoked, Ari ṣṭa pawed the 
ground with one of his hooves  and then, with 
the clouds hovering around his upraised tail, fu-
riously charged K ṛṣṇa. (9) Pointing the tips of 
his horns straight ahead and glaring menac-
ingly at Lord K ṛṣṇa from the corners of his 
bloodshot eyes, Ari ṣṭa rushed toward Him at 
full speed, li ke a thunderbolt hurled by Indra. 
(10) The Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa seized 
Ariṣṭāsura by the horns and threw him back 
eighteen steps, just as an elephant might do 
when fighting a rival elephant. (11) Thus re-
pulsed by the Supreme Lord, the bull demon 
got up and, breathing hard and sweating all 
over his body, again charged Him in a mindless 
rage. (12) As Ari ṣṭa attacked, Lord K ṛṣṇa 
seized him by the horns and knocked him to the 
ground with His foot. The Lord then thrashed 
him as if he were a wet cloth, and finally He 
yanked out one of the demon’s horns and struck 
him with it until he lay prostrate. (13) Vomiting 
blood and profusely excreting stool and urine, 
kicking his legs and rolling his eyes about, Ariṣṭāsura thus went painfully to the abode of 
Death. The demigo ds honored Lord K ṛṣṇa by 
scattering flowers upon Him. (14) Having thus 
killed the bull demon Ari ṣṭa, He who is a festi-
val for the gopīs’ eyes entered the cowherd vil-
lage with Balarāma. (15)  

After Ari ṣṭāsura had been killed by K ṛṣṇa, 
who acts wonderfully, Nārada Muni went to 
speak to King Ka ṁsa. That powerful sage of 
godly vision addressed the King as follows. 
(16) [Nārada told Ka ṁsa:] Yaśodā’s child was 
actually a daughter, and K ṛṣṇa is the son of 
Devakī. Also, Rāma is the son of Rohi ṇī. Out 
of fear, Vasud eva entrusted K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma to his friend Nanda Mahārāja, and it 
is these two boys who have killed your men. 
(17) Upon hearing this, the master of the Bho-
jas became furious and lost control of his 
senses. He picked up a sharp sword to kill 
Vasudeva. ( 18) But Nārada restrained Ka ṁsa 
by reminding him that it was the two sons of 
Vasudeva who would cause his death. Ka ṁsa 
then had Vasudeva and his wife shackled in 
iron chains. (19) After Nārada left, King Ka ṁsa 
summoned Keśī and ordered him, “Go kill 
Rāma a nd K ṛṣṇa.” (20) The King of the Bhojas 
next called for his ministers, headed by 
Muṣṭika, Cā ṇūra, Śala and Tośala, and also for 
his elephant -keepers. The King addressed them 
as follows. (21) My dear heroic Cā ṇūra and 
Muṣṭika, please hear this. Rāma and K ṛṣṇa, the 
sons of Ānakadundubhi [Vasudeva], are living 
in Nanda’s cowherd village. It has been pre-
dicted that these two boys will be the cause of 
my death. When They are brought here, kill 
Them on the pretext of engaging Them in a 
wrestling match. (22 -23) Ere ct a wrestling ring 
with many surrounding viewing stands, and 
bring all the residents of the city and the outly-
ing districts to see the open competition. (24) 
You, elephant -keeper, my good man, should 
position the elephant Kuvalayāpī ḍa at the en-
trance to t he wrestling arena and have him kill 
my two enemies. (25) Commence the bow sac-
rifice on the Caturdaśī day in accordance with 
the relevant Vedic injunctions. In ritual slaugh-
ter offer the appropriate kinds of animals to the 
magnanimous Lord Śiva. (26)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

670 

Havi ng thus commanded his ministers, 
Kaṁsa next called for Akrūra, the most emi-
nent of the Yadus. Ka ṁsa knew the art of se-
curing personal advantage, and thus he took 
Akrūra’s hand in his own and spoke to him as 
follows. (27) My dear Akrūra, most charitable 
one, please do me a friendly favor out of re-
spect. Among the Bhojas and V ṛṣṇis, there is 
no one else as kind to us as you. (28) Gentle 
Akrūra, you always carry out your duties so-
berly, and therefore I am depending on you, just 
as powerful Indra took shelter o f Lord Vi ṣṇu to 
achieve his goals. (29)  

Please go to Nanda’s village, where the two 
sons of Ānakadundubhi are living, and without 
delay bring Them here on this chariot. (30) The 
demigods, who are under the protection of 
Viṣṇu, have sent these two boys as my death. 
Bring Them here, and also have Nanda and the 
other cowherd men come with gifts of tribute. 
(31) After you bring K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, I will 
have Them killed by my elephant, who is as 
powerful as death itself. And if by chance They 
escape from him,  I will have Them killed by my 
wrestlers, who are as strong as lightning. (32) 
When these two have been killed, I will kill 
Vasudeva and all Their lamenting relativesthe 
Vṛṣṇis, Bhojas and Daśārhas. (33) I will also 
kill my old father, Ugrasena, who is gre edy for 
my kingdom, and I will kill his brother Devaka 
and all my other enemies as well. (34) Then, 
my friend, this earth will be free of thorns. (35) 
My elder relative Jarāsandha and my dear 
friend Dvivida are solid well -wishers of mine, 
as are Śambara, N araka and Bā ṇa. I will use 
them all to kill off those kings who are allied 
with the demigods, and then I will rule the 
earth. (36) Now that you understand my inten-
tions, please go at once and bring K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma to watch the bow sacrifice and see the 
opulence of the Yadus’ capital. (37)  

Śrī Akrūra said:  O King, you have expertly 
devised a process to free yourself of misfor-
tune. Still, one should be equal in success and 
failure, since it is certainly destiny that pro-duces the results of one’s work. (38 ) An ordi-
nary person is determined to act on his desires 
even when fate prevents their fulfillment. 
Therefore, he encounters both happiness and 
distress. Yet even though such is the case, I will 
execute your order. (39)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having thus in-
structed Akrūra, King Ka ṁsa dismissed his 
ministers and retired to his quarters, and Akrūra 
returned home. (40)  

SB 10.37: The Killing of the Demons Keśi 
and Vyoma  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  The demon Keśī, 
sent by Ka ṁsa, appeared in Vraja as a great 
horse.  Running with the speed of the mind, he 
tore up the earth with his hooves. The hairs of 
his mane scattered the clouds and the demi-
gods’ airplanes throughout the sky, and he ter-
rified everyone present with his loud neighing. 
(1-2) Seeing the Lord standing b efore him, Keśī 
ran toward Him in extreme rage, his mouth 
gaping as if to swallow up the sky. Rushing 
with furious speed, the unconquerable and un-
approachable horse demon tried to strike the lo-
tus-eyed Lord with his two front legs. (3) But 
the transcendent al Lord dodged Keśī’s blow 
and then with His arms angrily seized the de-
mon by the legs, whirled him around in the air 
and contemptuously threw him the distance of 
one hundred bow -lengths, just as Garu ḍa might 
throw a snake. Lord K ṛṣṇa then stood there. (4)  

Upon regaining consciousness Keśī angrily 
got up, opened his mouth wide and again 
rushed to attack Lord K ṛṣṇa. But the Lord just 
smiled and thrust His left arm into the horse’s 
mouth as easily as one would make a snake en-
ter a hole in the ground. (5) Keś ī’s teeth imme-
diately fell out when they touched the Supreme 
Lord’s arm, which to the demon felt as hot as 
molten iron. Within Keśī’s body the Supreme 
Personality’s arm then expanded greatly, like a 
diseased stomach swelling because of neglect. 
(6) As Lord  Kṛṣṇa’s expanding arm completely 
blocked Keśī’s breathing, his legs kicked con-
vulsively, his body became covered with sweat, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

671 
 and his eyes rolled around. The demon then 
passed stool and fell on the ground, dead. (7) 
The mighty -armed K ṛṣṇa withdrew His arm 
from Keśī’s body, which now appeared like a 
long karka ṭikā fruit. Without the least display 
of pride at having so effortlessly killed His en-
emy, the Lord accepted the demigods’ worship 
in the form of flowers rained down from above. 
(8) My dear King, therea fter Lord K ṛṣṇa was 
approached in a solitary place by the great sage 
among the demigods, Nārada Muni. That most 
exalted devotee spoke as follows to the Lord, 
who effortlessly performs His pastimes. (9)  

[Nārada Muni said:]  O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, un-
limited Lord, s ource of all mystic power, Lord 
of the universe! O Vāsudeva, shelter of all be-
ings and best of the Yadus! O master, You are 
the Supreme Soul of all created beings, sitting 
unseen within the cave of the heart like the fire 
dormant within kindling wood. You are the wit-
ness within everyone, the Supreme Personality 
and the ultimate controlling Deity. (10 -11) You 
are the shelter of all souls, and being the su-
preme controller, You fulfill Your desires 
simply by Your will. By Your personal creative 
potency You man ifested in the beginning the 
primal modes of material nature, and through 
their agency You create, maintain and then de-
stroy this universe. (12) You, that very same 
creator, have now descended to the earth to an-
nihilate the Daitya, Pramatha and Rāk ṣasa de-
mons who are posing as kings, and also to pro-
tect the godly. (13) The horse demon was so 
terrifying that his neighing frightened the dem-
igods into leaving their heavenly kingdom. But 
by our good fortune You have enjoyed the sport 
of killing him. (14)  

In just two days, O almighty Lord, I will see 
the deaths of Cā ṇūra, Mu ṣṭika and other wres-
tlers, along with those of the elephant Kuva-
layāpī ḍa and King Ka ṁsaall by Your hand. 
Then I will see You kill Kālayavana, Mura, 
Naraka and the conch demon, and I will also  
see You steal the pārijāta flower and defeat In-
dra. I will then see You marry many daughters 
of heroic kings after paying for them with Your 
valor. Then, O Lord of the universe, in Dvārakā You will deliver King N ṛga from a curse and 
take for Yourself the Syamantaka jewel, to-
gether with another wife. You will bring back a 
brāhma ṇa’s dead son from the abode of Your 
servant Yamarāja, and thereafter You will kill 
Pauṇḍraka, burn down the city of Kāśī and slay 
Dantavakra, and You will also put an end to the 
King of Cedi during the great Rājasūya sacri-
fice. I shall see all these heroic pastimes, along 
with many others You will perform during 
Your residence in Dvārakā. These pastimes are 
glorified on this earth in the songs of transcen-
dental poets. (15 -20) Subsequ ently I will see 
You appear as time personified, serving as Ar-
juna’s chariot driver and destroying entire ar-
mies of soldiers to rid the earth of her burden. 
(21) Let us approach You, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, for shelter. You are full of 
perfectl y pure spiritual awareness and are al-
ways situated in Your original identity. Since 
Your will is never thwarted, You have already 
achieved all possible desirable things, and by 
the power of Your spiritual energy You remain 
eternally aloof from the flow of the qualities of 
illusion. (22)  

I bow down to You, the supreme controller, 
who are dependent only on Yourself. By Your 
potency You have constructed the unlimited 
particular arrangements of this universe. Now 
you have appeared as the greatest hero among 
the Yadus, V ṛṣṇis and Sātvatas and have cho-
sen to participate in human warfare. (23) 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Having thus ad-
dressed Lord K ṛṣṇa, the chief of the Yadu dyn-
asty, Nārada bowed down and offered Him 
obeisances. Then that great sage and most em-
inent d evotee took his leave from the Lord and 
went away, feeling great joy at having directly 
seen Him. (24)  

After killing the demon Keśī in battle, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead continued to 
tend the cows and other animals in the company 
of His joyful cow herd boyfriends. Thus He 
brought happiness to all the residents of 
Vṛndāvana. (25) One day the cowherd boys, 
while grazing their animals on the mountain 
slopes, played the game of stealing and hiding, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

672 
 acting out the roles of rival thieves and herders. 
(26) In that game, O King, some acted as 
thieves, others as shepherds and others as 
sheep. They played their game happily, without 
fear of danger. (27) A powerful magician 
named Vyoma, son of the demon Maya, then 
appeared on the scene in the guise of a cowherd  
boy. Pretending to join the game as a thief, he 
proceeded to steal most of the cowherd boys 
who were acting as sheep. (28) Gradually the 
great demon abducted more and more of the 
cowherd boys and cast them into a mountain 
cave, which he sealed shut with a  boulder. Fi-
nally only four or five boys acting as sheep re-
mained in the game. (29) Lord K ṛṣṇa, who shel-
ters all saintly devotees, understood perfectly 
well what Vyomāsura was doing. Just as a lion 
grabs a wolf, K ṛṣṇa forcefully seized the demon 
as he was taking away more cowherd boys. (30) 
The demon changed into his original form, as 
big and powerful as a great mountain. But try 
as he might to free himself, he could not do so, 
having lost his strength from being held in the 
Lord’s tight grip. (31) Lord Acy uta clutched 
Vyomāsura between His arms and threw him to 
the ground. Then, while the demigods in 
heaven looked on, K ṛṣṇa killed him in the same 
way that one kills a sacrificial animal. (32)  

Kṛṣṇa then smashed the boulder blocking 
the cave’s entrance and l ed the trapped cow-
herd boys to safety. Thereafter, as the demigods 
and cowherd boys sang His glories, He returned 
to His cowherd village, Gokula. (33)  

SB 10.38: Akrūra’s Arrival in V ṛndāvana  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After passing the 
night in the city of M athurā, the high -minded 
Akrūra mounted his chariot and set off for the 
cowherd village of Nanda Mahārāja. (1) As he 
traveled on the road, the great soul Akrūra felt 
tremendous devotion for the lotus -eyed Person-
ality of Godhead, and thus he began to conside r 
as follows. (2) [Śrī Akrūra thought:] What pi-
ous deeds have I done, what severe austerities 
undergone, what worship performed or charity 
given so that today I will see Lord Keśava? (3) 
Since I am a materialistic person absorbed simply in sense gratificat ion, I think it is as dif-
ficult for me to have gotten this opportunity to 
see Lord Uttama ḥśloka as it would be for one 
born a śūdra to be allowed to recite the Vedic 
mantras. (4) But enough of such thoughts! Af-
ter all, even a fallen soul like me can have t he 
chance to behold the infallible Supreme Lord, 
for one of the conditioned souls being swept 
along in the river of time may sometimes reach 
the shore. (5) Today all my sinful reactions 
have been eradicated and my birth has become 
worthwhile, since I will offer my obeisances to 
the Supreme Lord’s lotus feet, which mystic 
yogīs meditate upon. (6) Indeed, today King 
Kaṁsa has shown me extreme mercy by send-
ing me to see the lotus feet of Lord Hari, who 
has now appeared in this world. Simply by the 
effulgence o f His toenails, many souls in the 
past have transcended the insurmountable dark-
ness of material existence and achieved libera-
tion. (7) Those lotus feet are worshiped by 
Brahmā, Śiva and all the other demigods, by the 
goddess of fortune, and also by the gre at sages 
and Vai ṣṇavas. Upon those lotus feet the Lord 
walks about the forest while herding the cows 
with His companions, and those feet are 
smeared with the ku ṅkuma from the gopīs’ 
breasts. (8) Surely I shall see the face of Lord 
Mukunda, since the deer a re now walking past 
me on my right. That face, framed by His curly 
hair, is beautified by His attractive cheeks and 
nose, His smiling glances and His reddish lotus 
eyes. (9) I am going to see the Supreme Lord 
Viṣṇu, the reservoir of all beauty, who by His 
own sweet will has now assumed a humanlike 
form to relieve the earth of her burden. Thus 
there is no denying that my eyes will achieve 
the perfection of their existence. (10) He is the 
witness of material cause and effect, yet He is 
always free from false identification with them. 
By His internal potency He dispels the darkness 
of separation and confusion. The individual 
souls in this world, who are manifested here 
when He glances upon His material creative en-
ergy, indirectly perceive Him in the activities 
of their life airs, senses and intelligence. (11) 
All sins are destroyed and all good fortune is 
created by the Supreme Lord’s qualities, activ-
ities and appearances, and words that describe 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

673 
 these three things animate, beautify and purify 
the world. On the other hand, words bereft of 
His glories are like the decorations on a corpse. 
(12) That same Supreme Lord has descended 
into the dynasty of the Sātvatas to delight the 
exalted demigods, who maintain the principles 
of religion He has created. Residing in 
Vṛndāvana, He spreads His fame, which the 
demigods glorify in song and which brings aus-
piciousness to all. (13) Today I shall certainly 
see Him, the goal and spiritual master of the 
great souls. Seeing Him brings jubilation to all 
who have eyes, for He is th e true beauty of the 
universe. Indeed, His personal form is the shel-
ter desired by the goddess of fortune. Now all 
the dawns of my life have become auspicious. 
(14) 

Then I will at once alight from my chariot 
and bow down to the lotus feet of K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma, the Supreme Personalities of God-
head. Theirs are the same feet that great mystic 
yogīs striving for self -realization bear within 
their minds. I will also offer my obeisances to 
the Lords’ cowherd boyfriends and to all the 
other residents of V ṛndāvan a. (15) And when I 
have fallen at His feet, the almighty Lord will 
place His lotus hand upon my head. For those 
who seek shelter in Him because they are 
greatly disturbed by the powerful serpent of 
time, that hand removes all fear. (16) By offer-
ing charity  to that lotus hand, Purandara and 
Bali earned the status of Indra, King of heaven, 
and during the pleasure pastimes of the rāsa 
dance, when the Lord wiped away the gopīs’ 
perspiration and removed their fatigue, the 
touch of their faces made that hand as f ragrant 
as a sweet flower. (17) The infallible Lord will 
not consider me an enemy, even though Ka ṁsa 
has sent me here as his messenger. After all, the 
omniscient Lord is the actual knower of the 
field of this material body, and with His perfect 
vision He w itnesses, both externally and inter-
nally, all the endeavors of the conditioned 
soul’s heart. (18) Thus He will cast His smiling, 
affectionate glance upon me as I remain fixed 
with joined palms, fallen in obeisances at His 
feet. Then all my contamination wi ll at once be 
dispelled, and I will give up all doubts and feel the most intense bliss. (19) Recognizing me as 
an intimate friend and relative, K ṛṣṇa will em-
brace me with His mighty arms, instantly sanc-
tifying my body and diminishing to nil all my 
material  bondage, which is due to fruitive ac-
tivities. (20) Having been embraced by the all -
famous Lord K ṛṣṇa, I will humbly stand before 
Him with bowed head and joined palms, and 
He will address me, “My dear Akrūra.” At that 
very moment my life’s purpose will be ful-
filled. Indeed, the life of anyone whom the Su-
preme Personality fails to recognize is simply 
pitiable. (21) The Supreme Lord has no favorite 
and no dearmost friend, nor does He consider 
anyone undesirable, despicable or fit to be ne-
glected. All the same , He lovingly reciprocates 
with His devotees in whatever manner they 
worship Him, just as the trees of heaven fulfill 
the desires of whoever approaches them. (22) 
And then Lord K ṛṣṇa’s elder brother, the fore-
most of the Yadus, will grasp my joined hands 
while I am still standing with my head bowed, 
and after embracing me He will take me to His 
house. There He will honor me with all items 
of ritual welcome and inquire from me about 
how Ka ṁsa has been treating His family mem-
bers. (23)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī contin ued:  My dear 
King, while the son of Śvaphalka, traveling on 
the road, thus meditated deeply on Śrī K ṛṣṇa, 
he reached Gokula as the sun was beginning to 
set. (24) In the cowherd pasture Akrūra saw the 
footprints of those feet whose pure dust the rul-
ers of a ll the planets in the universe hold on 
their crowns. Those footprints of the Lord, dis-
tinguished by such marks as the lotus, barley-
corn and elephant goad, made the ground won-
derfully beautiful. (25) Increasingly agitated by 
ecstasy at seeing the Lord’s foo tprints, his bod-
ily hairs standing on end because of his pure 
love, and his eyes filled with tears, Akrūra 
jumped down from his chariot and began roll-
ing about among those footprints, exclaiming, 
“Ah, this is the dust from my master’s feet!” 
(26) 

The very  goal of life for all embodied beings 
is this ecstasy, which Akrūra experienced 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

674 
 when, upon receiving Ka ṁsa’s order, he put 
aside all pride, fear and lamentation and ab-
sorbed himself in seeing, hearing and describ-
ing the things that reminded him of Lord K ṛṣṇa. 
(27) 

Akrūra then saw K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma in the 
village of Vraja, going to milk the cows. K ṛṣṇa 
wore yellow garments, Balarāma blue, and 
Their eyes resembled autumnal lotuses. One of 
those two mighty -armed youths, the shelters of 
the goddess of fortune , had a dark -blue com-
plexion, and the other’s was white. With Their 
fine-featured faces They were the most beauti-
ful of all persons. As They walked with the gait 
of young elephants, glancing about with com-
passionate smiles, Those two exalted personal-
ities beautified the cow pasture with the im-
pressions of Their feet, which bore the marks 
of the flag, lightning bolt, elephant goad and lo-
tus. The two Lords, whose pastimes are most 
magnanimous and attractive, were ornamented 
with jeweled necklaces and flower g arlands, 
anointed with auspicious, fragrant substances, 
freshly bathed, and dressed in spotless raiment. 
They were the primeval Supreme Personalities, 
the masters and original causes of the uni-
verses, who had for the welfare of the earth now 
descended in T heir distinct forms of Keśava 
and Balarāma. O King Parīk ṣit, They resem-
bled two gold -bedecked mountains, one of em-
erald and the other of silver, as with Their ef-
fulgence They dispelled the sky’s darkness in 
all directions. (28 -33) Akrūra, overwhelmed 
with affection, quickly jumped down from his 
chariot and fell at the feet of K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma like a rod. (34) The joy of seeing the 
Supreme Lord flooded Akrūra’s eyes with tears 
and decorated his limbs with eruptions of ec-
stasy. He felt such eagerness that h e could not 
speak to present himself, O King. (35) Recog-
nizing Akrūra, Lord K ṛṣṇa drew him close with 
His hand, which bears the sign of the chariot 
wheel, and then embraced him. K ṛṣṇa felt 
pleased, for He is always benignly disposed to-
ward His surrendered devotees. (36) As Akrūra 
stood with his head bowed, Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa 
[Balarāma] grasped his joined hands, and then Balarāma took him to His house in the com-
pany of Lord K ṛṣṇa. After inquiring from 
Akrūra whether his trip had been comfortable, 
Balarāma offer ed him a first -class seat, bathed 
his feet in accordance with the injunctions of 
scripture and respectfully served him milk with 
honey. (37 -38) 

The almighty Lord Balarāma presented 
Akrūra with the gift of a cow, massaged his feet 
to relieve him of fatigue  and then with great re-
spect and faith fed him suitably prepared food 
of various fine tastes. (39) When Akrūra had 
eaten to his satisfaction, Lord Balarāma, the su-
preme knower of religious duties, offered him 
aromatic herbs for sweetening his mouth, along 
with fragrances and flower garlands. Thus 
Akrūra once again enjoyed the highest pleas-
ure. (40) Nanda Mahārāja asked Akrūra: O de-
scendant of Daśārha, how are all of you main-
taining yourselves while that merciless Ka ṁsa 
remains alive? You are just like sheep  under the 
care of a butcher. (41) That cruel, self -serving 
Kaṁsa murdered the infants of his own sister 
in her presence, even as she cried in anguish. 
So why should we even ask about the well -be-
ing of you, his subjects? (42) Honored by 
Nanda Mahārāja with  these true and pleasing 
words of inquiry, Akrūra forgot the fatigue of 
his journey. (43)  

SB 10.39: Akrūra’s Vision  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having been 
honored so much by Lord Balarāma and Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, Akrūra, seated comfortably on a couch, 
felt that all t he desires he had contemplated on 
the road were now fulfilled. (1) My dear King, 
what is unattainable for one who has satisfied 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the shel-
ter of the goddess of fortune? Even so, those 
who are dedicated to His devotional se rvice 
never want anything from Him. (2)  

After the evening meal, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the son 
of Devakī, asked Akrūra how Ka ṁsa was treat-
ing their dear relatives and friends and what the 
King was planning to do. (3)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

675 
 The Supreme Lord said:  My dear, gentle 
Uncle Akr ūra, was your trip here comfortable? 
May all good fortune be yours. Are our well -
wishing friends and our relatives, both close 
and distant, happy and in good health? (4) But, 
my dear Akrūra, as long as King Ka ṁsathat 
disease of our family who goes by the n ame 
“maternal uncle”is still prospering, why should 
I even bother to ask about the well -being of our 
family members and his other subjects? (5) Just 
see how much suffering I have caused My of-
fenseless parents! Because of Me their sons 
were killed and they themselves imprisoned. 
(6) By good fortune We have today fulfilled 
Our desire to see you, Our dear relative. O gen-
tle uncle, please tell Us why you have come. (7)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  In response to the 
Supreme Lord’s request, Akrūra, the descend-
ant of Madhu, described the whole situation, in-
cluding King Ka ṁsa’s enmity toward the Ya-
dus and his attempt to murder Vasudeva. (8) 
Akrūra relayed the message he had been sent to 
deliver. He also described Ka ṁsa’s real inten-
tions and how Nārada had informed Ka ṁsa that 
Kṛṣṇa had been born as the son of Vasudeva. 
(9) Lord K ṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma, the van-
quisher of heroic opponents, laughed when 
They heard Akrūra’s words. The Lords then in-
formed Their father, Nanda Mahārāja, of King 
Kaṁsa’s orders. (10) Nanda Mahārāj a then is-
sued orders to the cowherd men by having the 
village constable make the following an-
nouncement throughout Nanda’s domain of 
Vraja: “Go collect all the available milk prod-
ucts. Bring valuable gifts and yoke your wag-
ons. Tomorrow we shall go to Math urā, present 
our milk products to the King and see a very 
great festival. The residents of all the outlying 
districts are also going.” (11 -12) 

When the young gopīs heard that Akrūra had 
come to Vraja to take K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma to 
the city, they became ext remely distressed. (13) 
Some gopīs felt so pained at heart that their 
faces turned pale from their heavy breathing. 
Others were so anguished that their dresses, 
bracelets and braids became loose. (14) Other 
gopīs entirely stopped their sensory activities and became fixed in meditation on K ṛṣṇa. They 
lost all awareness of the external world, just 
like those who attain the platform of self -reali-
zation. (15) And still other young women 
fainted simply by remembering the words of 
Lord Śauri [K ṛṣṇa]. These words,  decorated 
with wonderful phrases and expressed with af-
fectionate smiles, would deeply touch the 
young girls’ hearts. (16) The gopīs were fright-
ened at the prospect of even the briefest sepa-
ration from Lord Mukunda, so now, as they re-
membered His graceful gait, His pastimes, His 
affectionate, smiling glances, His heroic deeds 
and His joking words, which would relieve 
their distress, they were beside themselves with 
anxiety at the thought of the great separation 
about to come. They gathered in groups and 
spoke to one another, their faces covered with 
tears and their minds fully absorbed in Acyuta. 
(17-18) 

The gopīs said:  O Providence, you have no 
mercy! You bring embodied creatures together 
in friendship and love and then senselessly sep-
arate them before the y fulfill their desires. This 
whimsical play of yours is like a child’s game. 
(19) Having shown us Mukunda’s face, framed 
by dark locks and beautified by His fine cheeks, 
raised nose and gentle smiles, which eradicate 
all misery, you are now making that fa ce invis-
ible. This behavior of yours is not at all good. 
(20) O Providence, though you come here with 
the name Akrūra, you are indeed cruel, for like 
a fool you are taking away what you once gave 
usthose eyes with which we have seen, even in 
one feature of  Lord Madhudvi ṣa’s form, the 
perfection of your entire creation. (21)  

Alas, Nanda’s son, who breaks loving 
friendships in a second, will not even look di-
rectly at us. Forcibly brought under His control, 
we abandoned our homes, relatives, children 
and husb ands just to serve Him, but He is al-
ways looking for new lovers. (22) The dawn 
following this night will certainly be auspicious 
for the women of Mathurā. All their hopes will 
now be fulfilled, for as the Lord of Vraja enters 
their city, they will be able to drink from His 
face the nectar of the smile emanating from the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

676 
 corners of His eyes. (23) O gopīs, although our 
Mukunda is intelligent and very obedient to His 
parents, once He has fallen under the spell of 
the honey -sweet words of the women of Ma-
thurā a nd been enchanted by their alluring, shy 
smiles, how will He ever return to us unsophis-
ticated village girls? (24) When the Dāśārhas, 
Bhojas, Andhakas, V ṛṣṇis and Sātvatas see the 
son of Devakī in Mathurā, they will certainly 
enjoy a great festival for the ir eyes, as will all 
those who see Him traveling along the road to 
the city. After all, He is the darling of the god-
dess of fortune and the reservoir of all transcen-
dental qualities. (25)  

He who is doing this merciless deed should 
not be called Akrūra. He  is so extremely cruel 
that without even trying to console the sorrow-
ful residents of Vraja, he is taking away K ṛṣṇa, 
who is more dear to us than life itself. (26) 
Hard -hearted K ṛṣṇa has already mounted the 
chariot, and now the foolish cowherds are hur-
rying after Him in their bullock carts. Even the 
elders are saying nothing to stop Him. Today 
fate is working against us. (27) Let us directly 
approach Mādhava and stop Him from going. 
What can our family elders and other relatives 
do to us? Now that fate is s eparating us from 
Mukunda, our hearts are already wretched, for 
we cannot bear to give up His association even 
for a fraction of a second. (28) When He 
brought us to the assembly of the rāsa dance, 
where we enjoyed His affectionate and charm-
ing smiles, His  delightful secret talks, His play-
ful glances and His embraces, we passed many 
nights as if they were a single moment. O gopīs, 
how can we possibly cross over the insur-
mountable darkness of His absence? (29) How 
can we exist without Ananta’s friend K ṛṣṇa, 
who in the evening would return to Vraja in the 
company of the cowherd boys, His hair and 
garland powdered with the dust raised by the 
cows’ hooves? As He played His flute, He 
would captivate our minds with His smiling 
sidelong glances. (30)  

Śukadeva Gosv āmī said:  After speaking 
these words, the ladies of Vraja, who were so 
attached to K ṛṣṇa, felt extremely agitated by their imminent separation from Him. They for-
got all shame and loudly cried out, “O Go-
vinda! O Dāmodara! O Mādhava!” (31) But 
even as the go pīs cried out in this way, Akrūra, 
having at sunrise performed His morning wor-
ship and other duties, began to drive the chariot. 
(32) Led by Nanda Mahārāja, the cowherd men 
followed behind Lord K ṛṣṇa in their wagons. 
The men brought along many offerings fo r the 
King, including clay pots filled with ghee and 
other milk products. (33) [With His glances] 
Lord K ṛṣṇa somewhat pacified the gopīs, and 
they also followed behind for some time. Then, 
hoping He would give them some instruction, 
they stood still. (34) As He departed, that best 
of the Yadus saw how the gopīs were lament-
ing, and thus He consoled them by sending a 
messenger with this loving promise: “I will re-
turn.” (35) Sending their minds after K ṛṣṇa, the 
gopīs stood as motionless as figures in a paint-
ing. They remained there as long as the flag 
atop the chariot was visible, and even until they 
could no longer see the dust raised by the char-
iot wheels. (36) The gopīs then turned back, 
without hope that Govinda would ever return to 
them. Full of sorrow, th ey began to spend their 
days and nights chanting about the pastimes of 
their beloved. (37)  

My dear King, the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
traveling as swiftly as the wind in that chariot 
with Lord Balarāma and Akrūra, arrived at the 
river Kālindī, which destroys a ll sins. (38) The 
river’s sweet water was more effulgent than 
brilliant jewels. After Lord K ṛṣṇa had touched 
it for purification, He drank some from His 
hand. Then He had the chariot moved near a 
grove of trees and climbed back on, along with 
Balarāma. (39 ) Akrūra asked the two Lords to 
take Their seats on the chariot. Then, taking 
Their permission, he went to a pool in the Ya-
munā and took his bath as enjoined in the scrip-
tures. (40) While immersing himself in the wa-
ter and reciting eternal mantras from the  Vedas, 
Akrūra suddenly saw Balarāma and K ṛṣṇa be-
fore him. (41) Akrūra thought, “How can the 
two sons of Ānakadundubhi, who are sitting in 
the chariot, be standing here in the water? They 
must have left the chariot.” But when he came 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

677 
 out of the river, ther e They were on the chariot, 
just as before. Asking himself “Was the vision 
I had of Them in the water an illusion?” Akrūra 
reentered the pool. (42 -43) There Akrūra now 
saw Ananta Śe ṣa, the Lord of the serpents, re-
ceiving praise from Siddhas, Cāra ṇas, 
Gandh arvas and demons, who all had their 
heads bowed. The Personality of Godhead 
whom Akrūra saw had thousands of heads, 
thousands of hoods and thousands of helmets. 
His blue garment and His fair complexion, as 
white as the filaments of a lotus stem, made 
Him a ppear like white Kailāsa Mountain with 
its many peaks. (44 -45) Akrūra then saw the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead lying peace-
fully on the lap of Lord Ananta Śe ṣa. The com-
plexion of that Supreme Person was like a dark -
blue cloud. He wore yellow garments and  had 
four arms and reddish lotus -petal eyes. His face 
looked attractive and cheerful with its smiling, 
endearing glance and lovely eyebrows, its 
raised nose and finely formed ears, and its 
beautiful cheeks and reddish lips. The Lord’s 
broad shoulders and e xpansive chest were 
beautiful, and His arms long and stout. His neck 
resembled a conchshell, His navel was deep, 
and His abdomen bore lines like those on a ban-
yan leaf. (46 -48) He had large loins and hips, 
thighs like an elephant’s trunk, and shapely 
knees  and shanks. His raised ankles reflected 
the brilliant effulgence emanating from the 
nails on His petallike toes, which beautified His 
lotus feet. (49 -50) Adorned with a helmet, 
bracelets and armlets, which were all bedecked 
with many priceless jewels, and  also with a 
belt, a sacred thread, necklaces, ankle bells and 
earrings, the Lord shone with dazzling efful-
gence. In one hand He held a lotus flower, in 
the others a conchshell, discus and club. Grac-
ing His chest were the Śrīvatsa mark, the bril-
liant Kaust ubha gem and a flower garland. (51 -
52) Encircling the Lord and worshiping Him 
were Nanda, Sunanda and His other personal 
attendants; Sanaka and the other Kumāras; 
Brahmā, Rudra and other chief demigods; the 
nine chief brāhma ṇas; and the best of the 
saintly  devotees, headed by Prahlāda, Nārada 
and Uparicara Vasu. Each of these great per-
sonalities was worshiping the Lord by chanting sanctified words of praise in his own unique 
mood. Also in attendance were the Lord’s prin-
cipal internal potenciesŚrī, Pu ṣṭi, Gī r, Kānti, 
Kīrti, Tu ṣṭi, Ilā and Ūrjāas were His material 
potencies Vidyā, Avidyā and Māyā, and His in-
ternal pleasure potency, Śakti. (53 -55) 

As the great devotee Akrūra beheld all this, 
he became extremely pleased and felt enthused 
with transcendental dev otion. His intense ec-
stasy caused His bodily hairs to stand on end 
and tears to flow from his eyes, drenching his 
entire body. Somehow managing to steady 
himself, Akrūra bowed his head to the ground. 
Then he joined his palms in supplication and, 
in a voice  choked with emotion, very slowly 
and attentively began to pray. (56 -57) 

SB 10.40: The Prayers of Akrūra  

Śrī Akrūra said:  I bow down to You, the 
cause of all causes, the original and inexhaust-
ible Supreme Person, Nārāya ṇa. From the 
whorl of the lotus bor n from Your navel, 
Brahmā appeared, and by his agency this uni-
verse has come into being. (1) Earth; water; 
fire; air; ether and its source, false ego; the ma-
hat-tattva; the total material nature and her 
source, the Supreme Lord’s puru ṣa expansion; 
the mind ; the senses; the sense objects; and the 
senses’ presiding deitiesall these causes of the 
cosmic manifestation are born from Your tran-
scendental body. (2) The total material nature 
and these other elements of creation certainly 
cannot know You as You are, for they are man-
ifested in the realm of dull matter. Since You 
are beyond the modes of nature, even Lord 
Brahmā, who is bound up in these modes, does 
not know Your true identity. (3) Pure yogīs 
worship You, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, by conceiving  of You in the threefold 
form comprising the living entities, the material 
elements that constitute the living entities’ bod-
ies, and the controlling deities of those ele-
ments. (4) Brāhma ṇas who follow the regula-
tions concerning the three sacred fires worsh ip 
You by chanting mantras from the three Vedas 
and performing elaborate fire sacrifices for the 
various demigods, who have many forms and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

678 
 names. (5) In pursuit of spiritual knowledge, 
some persons renounce all material activities 
and, having thus become p eaceful, perform the 
sacrifice of philosophic investigation to wor-
ship You, the original form of all knowledge. 
(6) And yet othersthose whose intelligence is 
purefollow the injunctions of Vai ṣṇava scrip-
tures promulgated by You. Absorbing their 
minds in tho ught of You, they worship You as 
the one Supreme Lord manifesting in multiple 
forms. (7) There are still others, who worship 
You, the Supreme Lord, in the form of Lord 
Śiva. They follow the path described by him 
and interpreted in various ways by many teac h-
ers. (8) But all these people, my Lord, even 
those who have turned their attention away 
from You and are worshiping other deities, are 
actually worshiping You alone, O embodiment 
of all the demigods. (9) As rivers born from the 
mountains and filled by the  rain flow from all 
sides into the sea, so do all these paths in the 
end reach You, O master. (10)  

Goodness, passion and ignorance, the quali-
ties of Your material nature, entangle all condi-
tioned living beings, from Brahmā down to the 
nonmoving creatures.  (11) I offer My obei-
sances to You, who as the Supreme Soul of all 
beings witness everyone’s consciousness with 
unbiased vision. The current of Your material 
modes, produced by the force of ignorance, 
flows strongly among the living beings who as-
sume ident ities as demigods, humans and ani-
mals. (12) Fire is said to be Your face, the earth 
Your feet, the sun Your eye, and the sky Your 
navel. The directions are Your sense of hearing, 
the chief demigods Your arms, and the oceans 
Your abdomen. Heaven is thought to be Your 
head, and the wind Your vital air and physical 
strength. The trees and plants are the hairs on 
Your body, the clouds the hair on Your head, 
and the mountains the bones and nails of You, 
the Supreme. The passage of day and night is 
the blinking o f Your eyes, the progenitor of 
mankind Your genitals, and the rain Your se-
men. (13 -14) All the worlds, with their presid-
ing demigods and teeming populations, origi-
nate in You, the inexhaustible Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. These worlds travel within You, the basis of the mind and senses, just as 
aquatics swim in the sea or tiny insects burrow 
within an udumbara fruit. (15) To enjoy Your 
pastimes You manifest Yourself in various 
forms in this material world, and these incarna-
tions cleanse away all the unh appiness of those 
who joyfully chant Your glories. (16) I offer 
my obeisances to You, the cause of the crea-
tion, Lord Matsya, who swam about in the 
ocean of dissolution, to Lord Hayagrīva, the 
killer of Madhu and Kai ṭabha, to the immense 
tortoise [Lord Kūr ma], who supported Man-
dara Mountain, and to the boar incarnation 
[Lord Varāha], who enjoyed lifting the earth. 
(17-18) Obeisances to You, the amazing lion 
[Lord N ṛsiṁha], who remove Your saintly dev-
otees’ fear, and to the dwarf Vāmana, who 
stepped over the  three worlds. (19) Obeisances 
to You, Lord of the Bh ṛgus, who cut down the 
forest of the conceited royal order, and to Lord 
Rāma, the best of the Raghu dynasty, who put 
an end to the demon Rāva ṇa. (20) Obeisances 
to You, Lord of the Sātvatas, and to Your forms 
of Vāsudeva, Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and 
Aniruddha. (21) Obeisances to Your form as 
the faultless Lord Buddha, who will bewilder 
the Daityas and Dānavas, and to Lord Kalki, the 
annihilator of the meat -eaters posing as kings. 
(22) 

O Supreme Lord, the l iving entities in this 
world are bewildered by Your illusory energy. 
Becoming involved in the false concepts of “I” 
and “my,” they are forced to wander along the 
paths of fruitive work. (23) I too am deluded in 
this way, O almighty Lord, foolishly thinking  
my body, children, home, wife, money and fol-
lowers to be real, though they are actually as 
unreal as a dream. (24)  

Thus mistaking the temporary for the eter-
nal, my body for my self, and sources of misery 
for sources of happiness, I have tried to take 
pleasure in material dualities. Covered in this 
way by ignorance, I could not recognize You as 
the real object of my love. (25) Just as a fool 
overlooks a body of water covered by the veg-
etation growing in it and chases a mirage, so I 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

679 
 have turned away from Yo u. (26) My intelli-
gence is so crippled that I cannot find the 
strength to curb my mind, which is disturbed by 
material desires and activities and constantly 
dragged here and there by my obstinate senses. 
(27) Being thus fallen, I am approaching Your 
feet f or shelter, O Lord, because although the 
impure can never attain Your feet, I think it is 
nevertheless possible by Your mercy. Only 
when one’s material life has ceased, O lotus -
naveled Lord, can one develop consciousness 
of You by serving Your pure devotee s. (28) 
Obeisances to the Supreme Absolute Truth, the 
possessor of unlimited energies. He is the em-
bodiment of pure, transcendental knowledge, 
the source of all kinds of awareness, and the 
predominator of the forces of nature that rule 
over the living bein g. (29)  

O son of Vasudeva, obeisances to You, 
within whom all living beings reside. O Lord of 
the mind and senses, again I offer You my obei-
sances. O master, please protect me, who am 
surrendered unto You. (30)  

SB 10.41: K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma Enter 
Mathurā  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  While Akrūra 
was still offering prayers, the Supreme Lord 
Kṛṣṇa withdrew His form that He had revealed 
in the water, just as an actor winds up his per-
formance. (1) When Akrūra saw the vision dis-
appear, he came out of the water and q uickly 
finished his various ritual duties. He then re-
turned to the chariot, astonished. (2) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa asked Akrūra: Have you seen something 
wonderful on the earth, in the sky or in the wa-
ter? From your appearance, We think you have. 
(3) 

Śrī Akrūra said:  Whatever wonderful 
things the earth, sky or water contain, all exist 
in You. Since You encompass everything, 
when I am seeing You, what have I not seen? 
(4) And now that I am seeing You, O Supreme 
Absolute Truth, in whom reside all amazing 
things on the ea rth, in the sky and in the water, 
what amazing things could I see in this world? (5) With these words, Akrūra, the son of 
Gāndinī, began driving the chariot onward. At 
the end of the day he arrived in Mathurā with 
Lord Balarāma and Lord K ṛṣṇa. (6) Wherever  
they passed along the road, O King, the village 
people came forward and looked upon the two 
sons of Vasudeva with great pleasure. In fact, 
the villagers could not withdraw their eyes 
from Them. (7) Nanda Mahārāja and the other 
residents of V ṛndāvana, havi ng reached Ma-
thurā ahead of the chariot, had stopped at a gar-
den on the outskirts of the city to wait for K ṛṣṇa 
and Balarāma. (8) After joining Nanda and the 
others, the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa, the controller 
of the universe, took humble Akrūra’s hand in 
His o wn and, smiling, spoke as follows. (9) 
[Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] Take the chariot and enter 
the city ahead of us. Then go home. After rest-
ing here a while, we will go to see the city. (10)  

Śrī Akrūra said:  O master, without the two 
of You I shall not enter Mathu rā. I am Your 
devotee, O Lord, so it is not fair for You to 
abandon me, since You are always affectionate 
to Your devotees. (11) Come, let us go to my 
house with Your elder brother, the cowherd 
men and Your companions. O best of friends, 
O transcendental L ord, in this way please grace 
my house with its master. (12) I am simply an 
ordinary householder attached to ritual sacri-
fices, so please purify my home with the dust 
of Your lotus feet. By that act of purification, 
my forefathers, the sacrificial fires an d the 
demigods will all become satisfied. (13) By 
bathing Your feet, the exalted Bali Mahārāja at-
tained not only glorious fame and unequaled 
power but also the final destination of pure dev-
otees. (14) The water of the river Ganges has 
purified the three wo rlds, having become tran-
scendental by bathing Your feet. Lord Śiva ac-
cepted that water on his head, and by that wa-
ter’s grace the sons of King Sagara attained to 
heaven. (15) O Lord of lords, master of the uni-
verse, O You whose glories it is most pious to 
hear and chant! O best of the Yadus, O You 
whose fame is recounted in excellent poetry! O 
Supreme Lord Nārāya ṇa, I offer You my obei-
sances. (16)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

680 
 The Supreme Lord said:  I will come to 
Your house with My elder brother, but first I 
must satisfy My friends an d well -wishers by 
killing the enemy of the Yadu clan. (17)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus addressed 
by the Lord, Akrūra entered the city with a 
heavy heart. He informed King Ka ṁsa of the 
success of his mission and then went home. 
(18) Lord K ṛṣṇa desired to s ee Mathurā, so to-
ward evening He took Lord Balarāma and the 
cowherd boys with Him and entered the city. 
(19) The Lord saw Mathurā, with its tall gates 
and household entrances made of crystal, its 
immense archways and main doors of gold, its 
granaries and o ther storehouses of copper and 
brass, and its impregnable moats. Beautifying 
the city were pleasant gardens and parks. The 
main intersections were fashioned of gold, and 
there were mansions with private pleasure gar-
dens, along with guildhalls and many othe r 
buildings. Mathurā resounded with the calls of 
peacocks and pet turtledoves, who sat in the 
small openings of the lattice windows and on 
the gem -studded floors, and also on the col-
umned balconies and on the ornate rafters in 
front of the houses. These ba lconies and rafters 
were adorned with vaidūrya stones, diamonds, 
crystal quartz, sapphires, coral, pearls and em-
eralds. All the royal avenues and commercial 
streets were sprinkled with water, as were the 
side roads and courtyards, and flower garlands, 
newl y grown sprouts, parched grains and rice 
had been scattered about everywhere. Gracing 
the houses’ doorways were elaborately deco-
rated pots filled with water, which were be-
decked with mango leaves, smeared with yo-
gurt and sandalwood paste, and encircled by 
flower petals and ribbons. Near the pots were 
flags, rows of lamps, bunches of flowers and 
the trunks of banana and betel -nut trees. (20 -
23) 

The women of Mathurā hurriedly assembled 
and went forth to see the two sons of Vasudeva 
as They entered the city o n the King’s road, sur-
rounded by Their cowherd boyfriends. Some of 
the women, my dear King, eagerly climbed to 
the roofs of their houses to see Them. (24) Some of the ladies put their clothes and orna-
ments on backwards, others forgot one of their 
earrings or ankle bells, and others applied 
makeup to one eye but not the other. (25) Those 
who were taking their meals abandoned them, 
others went out without finishing their baths or 
massages, women who were sleeping at once 
rose when they heard the commotion, an d 
mothers breast -feeding their infants simply put 
them aside. (26) The lotus -eyed Lord, smiling 
as He recalled His bold pastimes, captivated 
those ladies’ minds with His glances. He 
walked with the gait of a lordly elephant in rut, 
creating a festival for their eyes with His tran-
scendental body, which is the source of pleas-
ure for the divine goddess of fortune. (27) The 
ladies of Mathurā had repeatedly heard about 
Kṛṣṇa, and thus as soon as they saw Him their 
hearts melted. They felt honored that He was 
sprinkling upon them the nectar of His glances 
and broad smiles. Taking Him into their hearts 
through their eyes, they embraced Him, the em-
bodiment of all ecstasy, and as their bodily 
hairs stood on end, O subduer of enemies, they 
forgot the unlimited distres s caused by His ab-
sence. (28) Their lotus faces blooming with af-
fection, the ladies who had climbed to the roofs 
of the mansions rained down showers of flow-
ers upon Lord Balarāma and Lord K ṛṣṇa. (29) 
Brāhma ṇas standing along the way honored the 
two Lords w ith presentations of yogurt, unbro-
ken barleycorns, pots full of water, garlands, 
fragrant substances such as sandalwood paste, 
and other items of worship. (30) The women of 
Mathurā exclaimed: Oh, what severe austerities 
the gopīs must have performed to be able to 
regularly see K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, who are the 
greatest source of pleasure for all mankind! 
(31) 

Seeing a washerman approaching who had 
been dyeing some clothes, K ṛṣṇa asked him for 
the finest laundered garments he had. (32) 
[Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] Plea se give suitable gar-
ments to the two of Us, who certainly deserve 
them. If you grant this charity, you will un-
doubtedly receive the greatest benefit. (33) 
Thus requested by the Supreme Lord, who is 
perfectly complete in all respects, that arrogant 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

681 
 servant of the King became angry and replied 
insultingly. (34) [The washerman said:] You 
impudent boys! You’re accustomed to roaming 
the mountains and forests, and yet You would 
dare put on such clothes as these! These are the 
King’s possessions You’re asking for!  (35) 
Fools, get out of here quickly! Don’t beg like 
this if You want to stay alive. When someone 
is too bold, the King’s men arrest him and kill 
him and take all his property. (36) As the wash-
erman thus spoke brazenly, the son of Devakī 
became angry, and then merely with His finger-
tips He separated the man’s head from his 
body. (37) The washerman’s assistants all 
dropped their bundles of clothes and fled down 
the road, scattering in all directions. Lord K ṛṣṇa 
then took the clothes. (38) K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
put on pairs of garments that especially pleased 
Them, and then K ṛṣṇa distributed the remain-
ing clothes among the cowherd boys, leaving 
some scattered on the ground. (39)  

Thereupon a weaver came forward and, 
feeling affection for the Lords, nicely adorned  
Their attire with cloth ornaments of various 
colors. (40) K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma looked re-
splendent, each in His own unique, wonder-
fully ornamented outfit. They resembled a pair 
of young elephants, one white and the other 
black, decorated for a festive occasi on. (41) 
Pleased with the weaver, the Supreme Lord 
Kṛṣṇa blessed him that after death he would 
achieve the liberation of attaining a form like 
the Lord’s, and that while in this world he 
would enjoy supreme opulence, physical 
strength, influence, memory an d sensory vigor. 
(42) 

The two Lords then went to the house of the 
garland -maker Sudāmā. When Sudāmā saw 
Them he at once stood up and then bowed 
down, placing his head on the ground. (43) Af-
ter offering Them seats and bathing Their feet, 
Sudāmā worshiped T hem and Their compan-
ions with arghya, garlands, pān, sandalwood 
paste and other presentations. (44) [Sudāmā 
said:] O Lord, my birth is now sanctified and 
my family free of contamination. Now that You both have come here, my forefathers, the dem-
igods and th e great sages are certainly all satis-
fied with me. (45) You two Lords are the ulti-
mate cause of this entire universe. To bestow 
sustenance and prosperity upon this realm, You 
have descended with Your plenary expansions. 
(46) Because You are the well -wishin g friends 
and Supreme Soul of the whole universe, You 
regard all with unbiased vision. Therefore, alt-
hough You reciprocate Your devotees’ loving 
worship, You always remain equally disposed 
toward all living beings. (47) Please order me, 
Your servant, to do  whatever You wish. To be 
engaged by You in some service is certainly a 
great blessing for anyone. (48) [Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī continued:] O best of kings, having 
spoken these words, Sudāmā could understand 
what K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma wanted. Thus with 
great pleasu re he presented Them with garlands 
of fresh, fragrant flowers. (49) Beautifully 
adorned with these garlands, K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma were delighted, and so were Their 
companions. The two Lords then offered the 
surrendered Sudāmā, who was bowing down 
before Them , whatever benedictions he de-
sired. (50) Sudāmā chose unshakable devotion 
for K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Soul of all existence; 
friendship with His devotees; and transcenden-
tal compassion for all living beings. (51)  

Not only did Lord K ṛṣṇa grant Sudāmā these 
bene dictions, but He also awarded him 
strength, long life, fame, beauty and ever -in-
creasing prosperity for his family. Then K ṛṣṇa 
and His elder brother took Their leave. (52)  

SB 10.42: The Breaking of the Sacrificial 
Bow  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  As He walked 
down the King’s road, Lord Mādhava then saw 
a young hunchback woman with an attractive 
face, who carried a tray of fragrant ointments 
as she walked along. The bestower of the ec-
stasy of love smiled and inquired from her as 
follows. (1) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] Wh o are you, O 
beautiful -thighed one? Ah, ointment! Who is it 
for, my dear lady? Please tell Us truthfully. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

682 
 Give Us both some of your finest ointment and 
you will soon gain a great boon. (2)  

The maidservant replied:  O handsome 
one, I am a servant of King Ka ṁsa, who highly 
regards me for the ointments I make. My name 
is Trivakrā. Who else but You two deserve my 
ointments, which the lord of the Bhojas likes so 
much? (3) Her mind overwhelmed by K ṛṣṇa’s 
beauty, charm, sweetness, smiles, words and 
glances, Trivak rā gave both K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma generous amounts of ointment. (4)  

Anointed with these most excellent cosmet-
ics, which adorned Them with hues that con-
trasted with Their complexions, the two Lords 
appeared extremely beautiful. (5) Lord K ṛṣṇa 
was pleased wit h Trivakrā, so He decided to 
straighten that hunchbacked girl with the lovely 
face just to demonstrate the result of seeing 
Him. (6) Pressing down on her toes with both 
His feet, Lord Acyuta placed one upward -
pointing finger of each hand under her chin and  
straightened up her body. (7) Simply by Lord 
Mukunda’s touch, Trivakrā was suddenly 
transformed into an exquisitely beautiful 
woman with straight, evenly proportioned 
limbs and large hips and breasts. (8)  

Now endowed with beauty, character and 
generosity , Trivakrā began to feel lusty desires 
for Lord Keśava. Taking hold of the end of His 
upper cloth, she smiled and addressed Him as 
follows. (9) [Trivakrā said:] Come, O hero, let 
us go to my house. I cannot bear to leave You 
here. O best of males, please t ake pity on me, 
since You have agitated my mind. (10) Thus 
entreated by the woman, Lord K ṛṣṇa first 
glanced at the face of Balarāma, who was 
watching the incident, and then at the faces of 
the cowherd boys. Then with a laugh K ṛṣṇa re-
plied to her as follows . (11) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] 
O lady with beautiful eyebrows, as soon as I 
fulfill My purpose I will certainly visit your 
house, where men can relieve their anxiety. In-
deed, you are the best refuge for Us homeless 
travelers. (12) Leaving her with these sweet 
words, Lord K ṛṣṇa walked further down the 
road. The merchants along the way worshiped Him and His elder brother by presenting Them 
with various respectful offerings, including 
pān, garlands and fragrant substances. (13) The 
sight of K ṛṣṇa aroused Cupid in t he hearts of 
the city women. Thus agitated, they forgot 
themselves. Their clothes, braids and bangles 
became disheveled, and they stood as still as 
figures in a painting. (14)  

Lord K ṛṣṇa then asked the local people 
where the arena was in which the bow sac rifice 
would take place. When He went there He saw 
the amazing bow, which resembled Lord In-
dra’s. (15) That most opulent bow was guarded 
by a large company of men, who were respect-
fully worshiping it. K ṛṣṇa pushed His way for-
ward and, despite the guards’ a ttempts to stop 
Him, picked it up. (16) Easily lifting the bow 
with His left hand, Lord Urukrama strung it in 
a fraction of a second as the King’s guards 
looked on. He then powerfully pulled the string 
and snapped the bow in half, just as an excited 
elepha nt might break a stalk of sugar cane. (17) 
The sound of the bow’s breaking filled the earth 
and sky in all directions. Upon hearing it, 
Kaṁsa was struck with terror. (18) The enraged 
guards then took up their weapons and, wanting 
to seize K ṛṣṇa and His com panions, surrounded 
them and shouted, “Grab Him! Kill Him!” (19) 
Seeing the guards coming upon Them with evil 
intent, Balarāma and Keśava took up the two 
halves of the bow and began striking them 
down. (20) After also killing a contingent of 
soldiers sent by Ka ṁsa, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
left the sacrificial arena by its main gate and 
continued Their walk about the city, happily 
looking at the opulent sights. (21) Having wit-
nessed the amazing deed K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
had performed, and seeing Their strength, bol d-
ness and beauty, the people of the city thought 
They must be two prominent demigods. (22) As 
They strolled about at will, the sun began to set, 
so They left the city with the cowherd boys and 
returned to the cowherds’ wagon encampment. 
(23) At the time of  Mukunda’s [K ṛṣṇa’s] depar-
ture from V ṛndāvana, the gopīs had foretold 
that the residents of Mathurā would enjoy many 
benedictions, and now the gopīs’ predictions 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

683 
 were coming true, for those residents were gaz-
ing upon the beauty of K ṛṣṇa, the jewel among 
men. Indeed, the goddess of fortune desired the 
shelter of that beauty so much that she aban-
doned many other men, although they wor-
shiped her. (24)  

After K ṛṣṇa’s and Balarāma’s feet were 
bathed, the two Lords ate rice with milk. Then, 
although knowing what Kaṁsa intended to do, 
They spent the night there comfortably. (25)  

Wicked King Ka ṁsa, on the other hand, was 
terrified, having heard how K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma had broken the bow and killed his 
guards and soldiers, all simply as a game. He 
remained awake for a long time, and both while 
awake and while dreaming he saw many bad 
omens, messengers of death. (26 -27) When he 
looked at his reflection he could not see his 
head; for no reason the moon and stars ap-
peared double; he saw a hole in his shadow; he 
could not  hear the sound of his life air; trees 
seemed covered with a golden hue; and he 
could not see his footprints. He dreamt that he 
was being embraced by ghosts, riding a donkey 
and drinking poison, and also that a naked man 
smeared with oil was passing by wea ring a gar-
land of nalada flowers. Seeing these and other 
such omens both while dreaming and while 
awake, Ka ṁsa was terrified by the prospect of 
death, and out of anxiety he could not sleep. 
(28-31) 

When the night had finally passed and the 
sun rose up aga in from the water, Ka ṁsa set 
about arranging for the grand wrestling festival. 
(32) The King’s men performed the ritual wor-
ship of the wrestling arena, sounded their 
drums and other instruments and decorated the 
viewing galleries with garlands, flags, ribb ons 
and arches. (33) The city -dwellers and resi-
dents of the outlying districts, led by brāhma ṇas 
and k ṣatriyas, came and sat down comfortably 
in the galleries. The royal guests received spe-
cial seats. (34) Surrounded by his ministers, 
Kaṁsa took his seat o n the imperial dais. But 
even as he sat amidst his various provincial rul-
ers, his heart trembled. (35) While the musical instruments loudly played in the rhythmic me-
ters appropriate for wrestling matches, the lav-
ishly ornamented wrestlers proudly entered t he 
arena with their coaches and sat down. (36) En-
thused by the pleasing music, Canura, Mu ṣṭika, 
Kūṭa, Śala and Tośala sat down on the wres-
tling mat. (37) Nanda Mahārāja and the other 
cowherds, summoned by the King of the Bho-
jas, presented him with their of ferings and then 
took their seats in one of the galleries. (38)  

SB 10.43: K ṛṣṇa Kills the Elephant Kuva-
layāpī ḍa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O chastiser of en-
emies, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, having executed 
all necessary purification, then heard the kettle-
drums reso unding at the wrestling arena, and 
They went there to see what was happening. (1) 
When Lord K ṛṣṇa reached the entrance to the 
arena, He saw the elephant Kuvalayāpī ḍa 
blocking His way at the urging of his keeper. 
(2) Securely binding up His clothes and tyin g 
back His curly locks, Lord K ṛṣṇa addressed the 
elephant -keeper with words as grave as the 
rumbling of a cloud. (3) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] O 
driver, driver, move aside at once and let Us 
pass! If you don’t, this very day I will send both 
you and your elephant  to the abode of Yama-
rāja! (4) Thus threatened, the elephant -keeper 
became angry. He goaded his furious elephant, 
who appeared equal to time, death and Yama-
rāja, into attacking Lord K ṛṣṇa. (5)  

The lord of the elephants charged K ṛṣṇa and 
violently seized H im with his trunk. But K ṛṣṇa 
slipped away, struck him a blow and disap-
peared from his view among his legs. (6) Infur-
iated at being unable to see Lord Keśava, the 
elephant sought Him out with his sense of 
smell. Once again Kuvalayāpī ḍa seized the 
Lord with the end of his trunk, only to have the 
Lord forcefully free Himself. (7) Lord K ṛṣṇa 
then grabbed the powerful Kuvalayāpī ḍa by the 
tail and playfully dragged him twenty -five 
bow-lengths as easily as Garu ḍa might drag a 
snake. (8) As Lord Acyuta held on to t he ele-
phant’s tail, the animal tried to twist away to 
the left and to the right, making the Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

684 
 swerve in the opposite direction, as a young 
boy would swerve when pulling a calf by the 
tail. (9) K ṛṣṇa then came face to face with the 
elephant and slapped h im and ran away. Kuva-
layāpī ḍa pursued the Lord, managing to touch 
Him again and again with each step, but K ṛṣṇa 
outmaneuvered the elephant and made him trip 
and fall. (10) As K ṛṣṇa dodged about, He play-
fully fell on the ground and quickly got up 
again. The  raging elephant, thinking K ṛṣṇa was 
down, tried to gore Him with his tusks but 
struck the earth instead. (11) His prowess 
foiled, the lordly elephant Kuvalayāpī ḍa went 
into a frenzied rage out of frustration. But the 
elephant -keepers goaded him on, and he  furi-
ously charged K ṛṣṇa once again. (12) The Su-
preme Lord, killer of the demon Madhu, con-
fronted the elephant as he attacked. Seizing his 
trunk with one hand, K ṛṣṇa threw him to the 
ground. (13) Lord Hari then climbed onto the 
elephant with the ease of a mighty lion, pulled 
out a tusk, and with it killed the beast and his 
keepers. (14)  

Leaving the dead elephant aside, Lord K ṛṣṇa 
held on to the tusk and entered the wrestling 
arena. With the tusk resting on His shoulder, 
drops of the elephant’s blood and sw eat sprin-
kled all over Him, and His lotus face covered 
with fine drops of His own perspiration, the 
Lord shone with great beauty. (15)  

My dear King, Lord Baladeva and Lord 
Janārdana, each carrying one of the elephant’s 
tusks as His chosen weapon, entered the arena 
with several cowherd boys. (16) The various 
groups of people in the arena regarded K ṛṣṇa in 
different ways when He entered it with His el-
der brother. The wrestlers saw K ṛṣṇa as a light-
ning bolt, the men of Mathurā as the best of 
males, the women as Cupid in person, the cow-
herd men as their relative, the impious rulers as 
a chastiser, His parents as their child, the King 
of the Bhojas as death, the unintelligent as the 
Supreme Lord’s universal form, the yogīs as 
the Absolute Truth and the V ṛṣṇis as their su-
preme worshipable Deity. (17) When Ka ṁsa 
saw that Kuvalayāpī ḍa was dead and the two 
brothers were invincible, he was overwhelmed with anxiety, O King. (18) Arrayed with varie-
gated ornaments, garlands and garments, just 
like a pair of excellently c ostumed actors, the 
two mighty -armed Lords shone splendidly in 
the arena. Indeed, They overpowered the minds 
of all onlookers with Their effulgences. (19) O 
King, as the citizens of the city and the people 
from outlying districts gazed upon those two 
Supre me Personalities from their seats in the 
galleries, the force of the people’s happiness 
caused their eyes to open wide and their faces 
to blossom. They drank in the vision of the 
Lords’ faces without becoming satiated. (20) 
The people seemed to be drinking  Kṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma with their eyes, licking Them with 
their tongues, smelling Them with their nostrils 
and embracing Them with their arms. Re-
minded of the Lords’ beauty, character, charm 
and bravery, the members of the audience be-
gan describing these feat ures to one another ac-
cording to what they had seen and heard. (21 -
22) [The people said:] These two boys are cer-
tainly expansions of the Supreme Lord 
Nārāya ṇa who have descended to this world in 
the home of Vasudeva. (23)  

This one [K ṛṣṇa] took birth from mother 
Devakī and was brought to Gokula, where He 
has remained concealed all this time, growing 
up in the house of King Nanda. (24) He made 
Pūtanā and the whirlwind demon meet with 
death, pulled down the twin Arjuna trees, and 
killed Śa ṅkhacū ḍa, Keśī, Dhen uka and similar 
demons. (25) He saved the cows and the cow-
herds from a forest fire and subdued the serpent 
Kāliya. He removed Lord Indra’s false pride by 
holding up the best of mountains with one hand 
for an entire week, thus protecting the inhabit-
ants of Gokula from rain, wind and hail. (26 -
27) The gopīs overcame all kinds of distress 
and experienced great happiness by seeing His 
face, which is always cheerful with smiling 
glances and ever free of fatigue. (28) It is said 
that under His full protection the  Yadu dynasty 
will become extremely famous and attain 
wealth, glory and power. (29) This lotus -eyed 
elder brother of His, Lord Balarāma, is the pro-
prietor of all transcendental opulences. He has 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

685 
 killed Pralamba, Vatsaka, Baka and other de-
mons. (30)  

While the people talked in this way and the 
musical instruments resounded, the wrestler 
Cāṇūra addressed K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma with the 
following words. (31) [Cā ṇūra said:] O son of 
Nanda, O Rāma, You two are well respected by 
courageous men and are both skillful a t wres-
tling. Having heard of Your prowess, the King 
has called You here, wanting to see for himself. 
(32) Subjects of the King who try to please him 
with their thoughts, acts and words are sure to 
achieve good fortune, but those who fail to do 
so will suff er the opposite fate. (33) It is well 
known that cowherd boys are always joyful as 
they tend their calves, and that the boys play-
fully wrestle with each other while grazing 
their animals in the various forests. (34)  

Therefore, let’s do what the King wants . 
Everyone will be pleased with us, for the king 
embodies all living beings. (35)  

Hearing this, Lord K ṛṣṇa, who liked to wres-
tle and welcomed the challenge, replied with 
words appropriate to the time and place. (36) 
[Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] Although forest -dwel lers, 
We are also subjects of the Bhoja king. We 
must gratify his desires, for such behavior will 
confer upon Us the greatest benefit. (37) We 
are just young boys and should play with those 
of equal strength. The wrestling match must go 
on properly so that  irreligion does not taint the 
respectable members of the audience. (38)  

Cāṇūra said:  You aren’t really a child or 
even a young man, and neither is Balarāma, the 
strongest of the strong. After all, You playfully 
killed an elephant who had the strength of a 
thousand other elephants. (39) Therefore, You 
two should fight powerful wrestlers. There’s 
certainly nothing unfair about that. You, O de-
scendant of V ṛṣṇi, can show Your prowess 
against me, and Balarāma can fight with 
Muṣṭika. (40)  

SB 10.44: The Killing  of Ka ṁsa 
 Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus addressed, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa made up His mind to accept the 
challenge. He paired off with Cā ṇūra, and Lord 
Balarāma with Mu ṣṭika. (1)  

Seizing each other’s hands and locking legs 
with each other, the opponents struggled pow-
erfully, eager for victory. (2) They each struck 
fists against fists, knees against knees, head 
against head and chest against chest. (3) Each 
fighter contended with his opponent by drag-
ging him about in circles, shoving and crushing 
him, throwing him down and running before 
and behind him. (4) Forcefully lifting and car-
rying each other, pushing each other away and 
holding each other down, the fighters hurt even 
their own bodies in their great eagerness for 
victory. (5)  

My dear King, all the women present, con-
sidering the match an unfair fight between the 
strong and the weak, felt extreme anxiety due 
to compassion. They assembled in groups 
around the arena and spoke to one another as 
follows. (6) [The women said:] Alas, what a 
greatly irreligious act the mem bers of this royal 
assembly are committing! As the King watches 
this fight between the strong and the weak, they 
also want to see it. (7) What comparison can 
there be between these two professional wres-
tlers, with limbs as strong as lightning bolts and 
bodies resembling mighty mountains, and these 
two young, immature boys with exceedingly 
tender limbs? (8) Religious principles have cer-
tainly been violated in this assembly. One 
should not remain for even a moment in a place 
where irreligion is flourishing. ( 9) A wise per-
son should not enter an assembly if he knows 
the participants there are committing acts of 
impropriety. And if, having entered such an as-
sembly, he fails to speak the truth, speaks 
falsely or pleads ignorance, he will certainly in-
cur sin. (10)  Just see the lotus face of K ṛṣṇa as 
He darts around His foe! That face, covered 
with drops of perspiration brought on by the 
strenuous fight, resembles a lotus covered with 
dew. (11) Don’t you see the face of Lord 
Balarāma, with its eyes copper -red from H is 
anger toward Mu ṣṭika and its beauty enhanced 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

686 
 by His laughter and His absorption in the fight? 
(12) How pious are the tracts of land in Vraja, 
for there the primeval Personality of Godhead, 
disguising Himself with human traits, wanders 
about, enacting Hi s many pastimes! Adorned 
with wonderfully variegated forest garlands, 
He whose feet are worshiped by Lord Śiva and 
goddess Ramā vibrates His flute as He tends the 
cows in the company of Balarāma. (13) What 
austerities must the gopīs have performed! 
With th eir eyes they always drink the nectar of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s form, which is the essence of 
loveliness and is not to be equaled or surpassed. 
That form is the only abode of beauty, fame and 
opulence. It is self -perfect, ever fresh and ex-
tremely rare. (14) The ladi es of Vraja are the 
most fortunate of women because, with their 
minds fully attached to K ṛṣṇa and their throats 
always choked up with tears, they constantly 
sing about Him while milking the cows, win-
nowing grain, churning butter, gathering cow 
dung for fue l, riding on swings, taking care of 
their crying babies, sprinkling the ground with 
water, cleaning their houses, and so on. By their 
exalted K ṛṣṇa consciousness they automati-
cally acquire all desirable things. (15) When the 
gopīs hear K ṛṣṇa playing His fl ute as He leaves 
Vraja in the morning with His cows or returns 
with them at sunset, the young girls quickly 
come out of their houses to see Him. They must 
have performed many pious activities to be able 
to see Him as He walks on the road, His smiling 
face mercifully glancing upon them. (16)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  As the 
women spoke thus, O hero of the Bhāratas, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the master of all mystic power, 
made up His mind to kill His opponent. (17) 
Out of affection for the two Lords, Their par-
ents [D evakī and Vasudeva] became over-
whelmed with sorrow when they heard the 
women’s fearful statements. They grieved, not 
knowing their sons’ strength. (18) Lord 
Balarāma and Mu ṣṭika, expertly displaying nu-
merous wrestling techniques, battled each other 
in the same way that Lord K ṛṣṇa and His oppo-
nent did. (19) The harsh blows from the Su-
preme Lord’s limbs fell like crushing lightning 
bolts upon Cā ṇūra, breaking every part of his body and causing him more and more pain and 
fatigue. (20) Furious, Cā ṇūra attacked Lord 
Vāsudeva with the speed of a hawk and struck 
His chest with both fists. (21) No more shaken 
by the demon’s mighty blows than an elephant 
struck with a flower garland, Lord K ṛṣṇa 
grabbed Cā ṇūra by his arms, swung him around 
several times and hurled him  onto the ground 
with great force. His clothes, hair and garland 
scattering, the wrestler fell down dead, like a 
huge festival column collapsing. (22 -23) Simi-
larly, Mu ṣṭika struck Lord Balabhadra with his 
fist and was slain. Receiving a violent blow 
from t he mighty Lord’s palm, the demon trem-
bled all over in great pain, vomited blood and 
then fell lifeless onto the ground, like a tree 
blown down by the wind. (24 -25) Confronted 
next by the wrestler Kū ṭa, Lord Balarāma, the 
best of fighters, playfully and non chalantly 
killed him with His left fist, O King. (26) Then 
Kṛṣṇa kicked inŚala’s head and tore Tośala in 
half, and both wrestlers fell down dead. (27) 
Cāṇūra, Mu ṣṭika, Kū ṭa, Śala and Tośala having 
been killed, the remaining wrestlers all fled for 
their liv es. (28) K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma then called 
Their young cowherd boyfriends to join Them, 
and in their company the Lords danced about 
and sported, Their ankle bells resounding as 
musical instruments played. (29)  

Everyone except Ka ṁsa rejoiced at the won-
derful feat K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma had performed. 
The exalted brāhma ṇas and great saints ex-
claimed, “Excellent! Excellent!” (30) The 
Bhoja king, seeing that his best wrestlers had 
all been killed or had fled, stopped the musical 
performance originally meant for his p leasure 
and spoke the following words. (31) [Ka ṁsa 
said:] Drive the two wicked sons of Vasudeva 
out of the city! Confiscate the cowherds’ prop-
erty and arrest that fool Nanda! (32) Kill that 
most evil fool Vasudeva! And also kill my fa-
ther, Ugrasena, along with his followers, who 
have all sided with our enemies! (33) As Ka ṁsa 
thus raved so audaciously, the infallible Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, intensely angry, quickly and easily 
jumped up onto the high royal dais. (34) Seeing 
Lord K ṛṣṇa approaching like death personified, 
the quick -witted Ka ṁsa instantly rose from his 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

687 
 seat and took up his sword and shield. (35) 
Sword in hand, Ka ṁsa moved quickly from 
side to side like a hawk in the sky. But Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, whose fearsome strength is irresistible, 
powerfully seized the demon jus t as the son of 
Tārk ṣya might capture a snake. (36) Grabbing 
Kaṁsa by the hair and knocking off his crown, 
the lotus -naveled Lord threw him off the ele-
vated dais onto the wrestling mat. Then the in-
dependent Lord, the support of the entire uni-
verse, threw H imself upon the King. (37) As a 
lion drags a dead elephant, the Lord then 
dragged Ka ṁsa’s dead body along the ground 
in full view of everyone present. O King, all the 
people in the arena tumultuously cried out, 
“Oh! Oh!” (38) Ka ṁsa had always been dis-
turbe d by the thought that the Supreme Lord 
was to kill him. Therefore, when drinking, eat-
ing, moving about, sleeping or simply breath-
ing, the King had always seen the Lord before 
him with the disc weapon in His hand. Thus 
Kaṁsa achieved the rare boon of attain ing a 
form like the Lord’s. (39)  

Kaṁsa’s eight younger brothers, led by 
Kaṅka and Nyagrodhaka, then attacked the 
Lords in a rage, seeking to avenge their 
brother’s death. (40) As they ran swiftly toward 
the two Lords, ready to strike, the son of Rohi ṇī 
slew them with His club just as a lion easily 
kills other animals. (41) Kettledrums re-
sounded in the sky as Brahmā, Śiva and other 
demigods, the Lord’s expansions, rained down 
flowers upon Him with pleasure. They chanted 
His praises, and their wives danced. (42) My 
dear King, the wives of Ka ṁsa and his brothers, 
aggrieved by the death of their well -wishing 
husbands, came forward with tearful eyes, beat-
ing their heads. (43) Embracing their husbands, 
who lay on a hero’s final bed, the sorrowful 
women loudly lam ented while shedding con-
stant tears. (44) [The women cried out:] Alas, 
O master, O dear one, O knower of religious 
principles! O kind and compassionate protector 
of the shelterless! By your being slain we have 
also been slain, together with your household 
and offspring. (45) O great hero among men, 
bereft of you, its master, this city has lost its 
beauty, just as we have, and all festivity and good fortune within it have come to an end. 
(46) O dear one, you have been brought to this 
state because of the ter rible violence you com-
mitted against innocent creatures. How can one 
who harms others attain happiness? (47) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa causes the appearance and disappearance 
of all beings in this world, and He is their main-
tainer as well. One who disrespects Him can 
never prosper happily. (48)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After consoling 
the royal ladies, Lord K ṛṣṇa, sustainer of all the 
worlds, arranged for the prescribed funeral rites 
to be performed. (49) Then K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma released Their mother and father 
from bondag e and offered obeisances to them, 
touching their feet with Their heads. (50) 
Devakī and Vasudeva, now knowing K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma to be the Lords of the universe, 
simply stood with joined palms. Being appre-
hensive, they did not embrace their sons. (51)  

SB 10.45: K ṛṣṇa Rescues His Teacher’s 
Son 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Understanding 
that His parents were becoming aware of His 
transcendental opulences, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead thought that this should not be 
allowed to happen. Thus He expanded His 
Yoga-māyā, which bewilders His devotees. (1) 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the greatest of the Sātvatas, ap-
proached His parents with His elder brother. 
Humbly bowing His head and gratifying them 
by respectfully addressing them as “My dear 
mother” and “My dear father,” K ṛṣṇa spoke as 
follows. (2) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] Dear Father, be-
cause of Us, your two sons, you and mother 
Devakī always remained in anxiety and could 
never enjoy Our childhood, boyhood or youth. 
(3) Deprived by fate, We could not live with 
you and enjoy the pamper ed happiness most 
children enjoy in their parents’ home. (4) With 
one’s body one can acquire all goals of life, and 
it is one’s parents who give the body birth and 
sustenance. Therefore, no mortal man can re-
pay his debt to his parents, even if he serves 
them for a full lifetime of a hundred years. (5) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

688 
 A son who, though able to do so, fails to pro-
vide for his parents with his physical resources 
and wealth is forced after his death to eat his 
own flesh. (6) A man who, though able to do 
so, fails to support hi s elderly parents, chaste 
wife, young child or spiritual master, or who 
neglects a brāhma ṇa or anyone who comes to 
him for shelter, is considered dead, though 
breathing. (7) Thus We have wasted all these 
days, unable as We were to properly honor you 
becaus e Our minds were always disturbed by 
fear of Ka ṁsa. (8) Dear Father and Mother, 
please forgive Us for not serving you. We are 
not independent and have been greatly frus-
trated by cruel Ka ṁsa. (9)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus beguiled by 
the words of Lord Ha ri, the Supreme Soul of 
the universe, who by His internal illusory po-
tency appeared to be a human, His parents joy-
fully raised Him up on their laps and embraced 
Him. (10) Pouring out a shower of tears upon 
the Lord, His parents, who were bound up by 
the ro pe of affection, could not speak. They 
were overwhelmed, O King, and their throats 
choked up with tears. (11)  

Thus having comforted His mother and fa-
ther, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, ap-
pearing as the son of Devakī, installed His ma-
ternal grandfath er, Ugrasena, as King of the 
Yadus. (12) The Lord told him: O mighty King, 
We are your subjects, so please command Us. 
Indeed, because of the curse of Yayāti, no Yadu 
may sit on the royal throne. (13) Since I am pre-
sent in your entourage as your personal a t-
tendant, all the demigods and other exalted per-
sonalities will come with heads bowed to offer 
you tribute. What, then, to speak of the rulers 
of men? (14) The Lord then brought all His 
close family members and other relatives back 
from the various places to which they had fled 
in fear of Ka ṁsa. He received the Yadus, 
Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas, Madhus, Dāśārhas, Kukuras 
and other clans with due honor, and He also 
consoled them, for they were weary of living in 
foreign lands. Then Lord K ṛṣṇa, the creator of 
the unive rse, resettled them in their homes and 
gratified them with valuable gifts. (15 -16) The members of these clans, protected by the arms 
of Lord K ṛṣṇa and Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, felt that all 
their desires were fulfilled. Thus they enjoyed 
perfect happiness while li ving at home with 
their families. Because of the presence of K ṛṣṇa 
and Balarāma, they no longer suffered from the 
fever of material existence. Every day these 
loving devotees could see Mukunda’s ever -
cheerful lotus face, which was decorated with 
beautiful,  merciful smiling glances. (17 -18) 
Even the most elderly inhabitants of the city ap-
peared youthful, full of strength and vitality, for 
with their eyes they constantly drank the elixir 
of Lord Mukunda’s lotus face. (19)  

Then, O exalted Parīk ṣit, the Suprem e Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, along with Lord 
Balarāma, approached Nanda Mahārāja. The 
two Lords embraced him and then addressed 
him as follows. (20) [K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
said:] O Father, you and mother Yaśodā have 
affectionately maintained Us and cared for Us 
so much! Indeed, parents love their children 
more than their own lives. (21) They are the 
real father and mother who care for, as they 
would their own sons, children abandoned by 
relatives unable to maintain and protect them. 
(22) Now you should all  return to Vraja, dear 
Father. We shall come to see you, Our dear rel-
atives who suffer in separation from Us, as 
soon as We have given some happiness to your 
well-wishing friends. (23) Thus consoling 
Nanda Mahārāja and the other men of Vraja, 
the infallibl e Supreme Lord respectfully hon-
ored them with gifts of clothing, jewelry, 
household utensils and so on. (24) Nanda 
Mahārāja was overwhelmed with affection 
upon hearing K ṛṣṇa’s words, and his eyes 
brimmed with tears as he embraced the two 
Lords. Then he wen t back to Vraja with the 
cowherd men. (25)  

My dear King, then Vasudeva, the son of 
Śūrasena, arranged for a priest and other 
brāhma ṇas to perform his two sons’ second -
birth initiation. (26) Vasudeva honored these 
brāhma ṇas by worshiping them and giving 
them fine ornaments and well -ornamented 
cows with their calves. All these cows wore 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

689 
 gold necklaces and linen wreaths. (27) The 
magnanimous Vasudeva then remembered the 
cows he had mentally given away on the occa-
sion of K ṛṣṇa’s and Balarāma’s birth. Ka ṁsa 
had stolen those cows, and Vasudeva now re-
covered them and gave them away in charity 
also. (28) After attaining twice -born status 
through initiation, the Lords, sincere in Their 
vows, took the further vow of celibacy from 
Garga Muni, the spiritual master of t he Yadus. 
(29) Concealing Their innately perfect 
knowledge by Their humanlike activities, those 
two omniscient Lords of the universe, Them-
selves the origin of all branches of knowledge, 
next desired to reside at the school of a spiritual 
master. Thus They approached Sāndīpani 
Muni, a native of Kāsī living in the city of 
Avantī. (30 -31) 

Sāndīpani thought very highly of these two 
self-controlled disciples, whom he had ob-
tained so fortuitously. By serving him as devot-
edly as one would serve the Supreme Lord 
Himself, They showed others an irreproachable 
example of how to worship the spiritual master. 
(32) That best of brāhma ṇas, the spiritual mas-
ter Sāndīpani, was satisfied with Their submis-
sive behavior, and thus he taught Them the en-
tire Vedas, together with their six corollaries 
and the Upani ṣads. (33) He also taught Them 
the Dhanur -veda, with its most confidential se-
crets; the standard books of law; the methods of 
logical reasoning and philosophical debate; and 
the sixfold science of politics. (34) O King, 
those best of persons, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma, be-
ing Themselves the original promulgators of all 
varieties of knowledge, could immediately as-
similate each and every subject after hearing it 
explained just once. Thus with fixed concentra-
tion They learned the six ty-four arts and skills 
in as many days and nights. Thereafter, O King, 
They satisfied Their spiritual master by offer-
ing him guru -dakṣiṇā. (35 -36) O King, the 
learned brāhma ṇa Sāndīpani carefully consid-
ered the two Lords’ glorious and amazing qual-
ities an d Their superhuman intelligence. Then, 
after consulting with his wife, he chose as his 
remuneration the return of his young son, who 
had died in the ocean at Prabhāsa. (37) “So be it,” replied those two great chariot warriors of 
limitless might, and They a t once mounted 
Their chariot and set off for Prabhāsa. When 
They reached that place, They walked up to the 
shore and sat down. In a moment the deity of 
the ocean, recognizing Them to be the Supreme 
Lords, approached Them with offerings of trib-
ute. (38) The  Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa addressed 
the lord of the ocean: Let the son of My guru be 
presented at oncethe one you seized here with 
your mighty waves. (39)  

The ocean replied:  O Lord K ṛṣṇa, it was 
not I who abducted him, but a demonic de-
scendant of Diti named Pañ cajana, who travels 
in the water in the form of a conch. (40) “In-
deed,” the ocean said, “that demon has taken 
him away.” Hearing this, Lord K ṛṣṇa entered 
the ocean, found Pañcajana and killed him. But 
the Lord did not find the boy within the de-
mon’s belly.  (41) 

Lord Janārdana took the conchshell that had 
grown around the demon’s body and went back 
to the chariot. Then He proceeded to Sa ṁya-
manī, the beloved capital of Yamarāja, the lord 
of death. Upon arriving there with Lord 
Balarāma, He loudly blew His co nchshell, and 
Yamarāja, who keeps the conditioned souls in 
check, came as soon as he heard the resounding 
vibration. Yamarāja elaborately worshiped the 
two Lords with great devotion, and then he ad-
dressed Lord K ṛṣṇa, who lives in everyone’s 
heart: “O Supre me Lord Vi ṣṇu, what shall I do 
for You and Lord Balarāma, who are playing 
the part of ordinary humans?” (42 -44) 

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
Suffering the bondage of his past activity, My 
spiritual master’s son was brought here to you. 
O great  King, obey My command and bring this 
boy to Me without delay. (45) Yamarāja said, 
“So be it,” and brought forth the guru’s son. 
Then those two most exalted Yadus presented 
the boy to Their spiritual master and said to 
him, “Please select another boon.” (4 6) 

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

690 
 The spiritual master said:  My dear boys, 
You two have completely fulfilled the disci-
ple’s obligation to reward his spiritual master. 
Indeed, with disciples like You, what further 
desires could a guru have? (47) O heroes, now 
please return home. May You r fame sanctify 
the world, and may the Vedic hymns be ever 
fresh in Your minds, both in this life and the 
next. (48) Thus receiving Their guru’s permis-
sion to leave, the two Lords returned to Their 
city on Their chariot, which moved as swiftly 
as the wind and resounded like a cloud. (49) All 
the citizens rejoiced upon seeing K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma, whom they had not seen for many 
days. The people felt just like those who have 
lost their wealth and then regained it. (50)  

SB 10.46: Uddhava Visits V ṛndāvana  

Śuka deva Gosvāmī said:  The supremely 
intelligent Uddhava was the best counselor of 
the V ṛṣṇi dynasty, a beloved friend of Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa and a direct disciple of B ṛhaspati. (1) 
The Supreme Lord Hari, who relieves the dis-
tress of all who surrender to Him, once took the 
hand of His fully devoted, dearmost friend Ud-
dhava and addressed him as follows. (2) [Lord 
Kṛṣṇa said:] Dear gentle Uddhava, go to Vraja 
and give pleasure to Our parents. And also re-
lieve the gopīs, suffering in separation from 
Me, by giving them My message. (3) The 
minds of those gopīs are always absorbed in 
Me, and their very lives are ever devoted to Me. 
For My sake they have abandoned everything 
related to their bodies, renouncing ordinary 
happiness in this life, as well as religious duties 
necessary for such happiness in the next life. I 
alone am their dearmost beloved and, indeed, 
their very Self. I personally sustain such devo-
tees, who for My sake give up all worldly du-
ties. (4) My dear Uddhava, for those women of 
Gokula I am the most cherish ed object of love. 
Thus when they remember Me, who am so far 
away, they are overwhelmed by the anxiety of 
separation. (5) Simply because I have promised 
to return to them, My fully devoted cowherd 
girlfriends struggle to maintain their lives 
somehow or oth er. (6)  
 Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus addressed, 
O King, Uddhava respectfully accepted his 
master’s message, mounted his chariot and set 
off for Nanda -gokula. (7) The fortunate Ud-
dhava reached Nanda Mahārāja’s pastures just 
as the sun was setting, and since  the returning 
cows and other animals were raising dust with 
their hooves, his chariot passed unnoticed. (8)  

Gokula resounded on all sides with the 
sounds of bulls in rut fighting with one another 
for fertile cows; with the mooing of cows, bur-
dened by the ir udders, chasing after their 
calves; with the noise of milking and of the 
white calves jumping here and there; with the 
loud reverberation of flute -playing; and with 
the singing of the all -auspicious deeds of K ṛṣṇa 
and Balarāma by the cowherd men and wom en, 
who made the village resplendent with their 
wonderfully ornamented attire. The cowherds’ 
homes in Gokula appeared most charming with 
their abundant paraphernalia for worship of the 
sacrificial fire, the sun, unexpected guests, the 
cows, the brāhma ṇas, the forefathers and the 
demigods. On all sides lay the flowering forest, 
echoing with flocks of birds and swarms of 
bees and beautified by its lakes crowded with 
swans, kāra ṇḍava ducks and bowers of lotuses. 
(9-13) 

As soon as Uddhava arrived at Nanda 
Mahā rāja’s home, Nanda came forward to meet 
him. The cowherd King embraced him in great 
happiness and worshiped him as nondifferent 
from Lord Vāsudeva. (14) After Uddhava had 
eaten first -class food, been seated comfortably 
on a bed and been relieved of his fat igue by a 
foot massage and other means, Nanda inquired 
from him as follows. (15) [Nanda Mahārāja 
said:] My dear most fortunate one, does the son 
of Śūra fare well, now that he is free and has 
rejoined his children and other relatives? (16) 
Fortunately, bec ause of his own sins, the sinful 
Kaṁsa has been killed, along with all his broth-
ers. He always hated the saintly and righteous 
Yadus. (17) Does K ṛṣṇa remember us? Does 
He remember His mother and His friends and 
well-wishers? Does He remember the cow-
herds a nd their village of Vraja, of which He is 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

691 
 the master? Does He remember the cows, 
Vṛndāvana forest and Govardhana Hill? (18)  

Will Govinda return even once to see His 
family? If He ever does, we may then glance 
upon His beautiful face, with its beautiful ey es, 
nose and smile. (19) We were saved from the 
forest fire, the wind and rain, the bull and ser-
pent demonsfrom all such insurmountable, 
deadly dangersby that very great soul, K ṛṣṇa. 
(20) As we remember the wonderful deeds 
Kṛṣṇa performed, His playful side long glances, 
His smiles and His words, O Uddhava, we for-
get all our material engagements. (21) When 
we see the places where Mukunda enjoyed His 
sporting pastimesthe rivers, hills and forests He 
decorated with His feetour minds become to-
tally absorbed in H im. (22) In my opinion, 
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma must be two exalted dem-
igods who have come to this planet to fulfill 
some great mission of the demigods. Such was 
foretold by Garga Ṛṣi. (23) After all, K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma killed Ka ṁsa, who was as strong as 
ten th ousand elephants, as well as the wrestlers 
Cāṇūra and Mu ṣṭika and the elephant Kuva-
layāpī ḍa. They killed them all sportingly, as 
easily as a lion disposes of small animals. (24) 
With the ease of a royal elephant breaking a 
stick, K ṛṣṇa broke a powerful, gi ant bow three 
tālas long. He also held a mountain aloft for 
seven days with just one hand. (25) Here in 
Vṛndāvana, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma easily de-
stroyed demons like Pralamba, Dhenuka, 
Arista, T ṛṇāvarta and Baka, who had them-
selves defeated both demigods and other de-
mons. (26)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus intensely 
remembering K ṛṣṇa again and again, Nanda 
Mahārāja, his mind completely attached to the 
Lord, felt extreme anxiety and fell silent, over-
come by the strength of his love. (27) As 
mother Yaśodā heard t he descriptions of her 
son’s activities, she poured out her tears, and 
milk flowed from her breasts out of love. (28) 
Uddhava then joyfully addressed Nanda 
Mahārāja, having clearly seen the supreme lov-
ing attraction he and Yaśodā felt for K ṛṣṇa, the 
Suprem e Personality of Godhead. (29)   
Śrī Uddhava said:  O respectful Nanda, cer-
tainly you and mother Yaśodā are the most 
praiseworthy persons in the entire world, since 
you have developed such a loving attitude to-
ward Lord Nārāya ṇa, the spiritual master of all 
living beings. (30) These two Lords, Mukunda 
and Balarāma, are each the seed and womb of 
the universe, the creator and His creative po-
tency. They enter the hearts of living beings 
and control their conditioned awareness. They 
are the primeval Supreme. (31) Anyone, even a 
person in an impure state, who absorbs his 
mind in Him for just a moment at the time of 
death burns up all traces of sinful reactions and 
immediately attains the supreme transcendental 
destination in a pure, spiritual form as effulgent 
as th e sun. You two have rendered exceptional 
loving service to Him, Lord Nārāya ṇa, the Su-
persoul of all and the cause of all existence, the 
great soul who, although the original cause of 
everything, has a humanlike form. What pious 
deeds could still be require d of you? (32 -33) In-
fallible K ṛṣṇa, the Lord of the devotees, will 
soon return to Vraja to satisfy His parents. (34) 
Having killed Ka ṁsa, the enemy of all the Ya-
dus, in the wrestling arena, K ṛṣṇa will now 
surely fulfill His promise to you by coming 
back. ( 35) O most fortunate ones, do not la-
ment. You will see K ṛṣṇa again very soon. He 
is present in the hearts of all living beings, just 
as fire lies dormant in wood. (36)  

For Him no one is especially dear or despic-
able, superior or inferior, and yet He is no t in-
different to anyone. He is free from all desire 
for respect and yet gives respect to all others. 
(37) He has no mother, no father, no wife, chil-
dren or other relatives. No one is related to 
Him, and yet no one is a stranger to Him. He 
has no material b ody and no birth. (38) He has 
no work to do in this world that would oblige 
Him to take birth in pure, impure or mixed spe-
cies of life. Yet to enjoy His pastimes and de-
liver His saintly devotees, He manifests Him-
self. (39) Although beyond the three modes o f 
material naturegoodness, passion and ignoran-
cethe transcendental Lord accepts association 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

692 
 with them as His play. Thus the unborn Su-
preme Lord utilizes the material modes to cre-
ate, maintain and destroy. (40) Just as a person 
who is whirling around percei ves the ground to 
be turning, one who is affected by false ego 
thinks himself the doer, when actually only his 
mind is acting. (41) The Supreme Lord Hari is 
certainly not your son alone. Rather, being the 
Lord, He is the son, Soul, father and mother of 
everyone. (42) Nothing can be said to exist in-
dependent of Lord Acyutanothing heard or 
seen, nothing in the past, present or future, 
nothing moving or unmoving, great or small. 
He indeed is everything, for He is the Supreme 
Soul. (43)  

While K ṛṣṇa’s messenger  continued speak-
ing with Nanda, the night ended, O King. The 
women of the cowherd village rose from bed 
and, lighting lamps, worshiped their household 
deities. Then they began churning the yogurt 
into butter. (44) As they pulled on the churning 
ropes with their bangled arms, the women of 
Vraja shone with the splendor of their jewels, 
which reflected the lamps’ light. Their hips, 
breasts and necklaces moved about, and their 
faces, anointed with reddish ku ṅkuma, glowed 
radiantly with the luster of their earri ngs re-
flecting from their cheeks. (45) As the ladies of 
Vraja loudly sang the glories of lotus -eyed 
Kṛṣṇa, their songs blended with the sound of 
their churning, ascended to the sky and dissi-
pated all inauspiciousness in every direction. 
(46) 

When the godl y sun had risen, the people of 
Vraja noticed the golden chariot in front of 
Nanda Mahārāja’s doorway. “Who does this 
belong to?” they asked. (47) “Perhaps Akrūra 
has returnedhe who fulfilled Ka ṁsa’s desire by 
taking lotus -eyed K ṛṣṇa to Mathurā. (48) “Is he  
going to use our flesh to offer funeral oblations 
for his master, who was so satisfied with his 
service?” As the women were speaking in this 
way, Uddhava appeared, having finished his 
early -morning duties. (49)  

SB 10.47: The Song of the Bee  
 Śukadeva Gos vāmī said:  The young 
women of Vraja became astonished upon see-
ing Lord K ṛṣṇa’s servant, who had long arms, 
whose eyes resembled a newly grown lotus, 
who wore a yellow garment and a lotus garland, 
and whose lotuslike face glowed with brightly 
polished earri ngs. “Who is this handsome 
man?” the gopīs asked. “Where has he come 
from, and whom does he serve? He’s wearing 
Kṛṣṇa’s clothes and ornaments!” Saying this, 
the gopīs eagerly crowded around Uddhava, 
whose shelter was the lotus feet of Lord Ut-
tama ḥśloka, Śr ī Kṛṣṇa. (1 -2) Bowing their 
heads in humility, the gopīs duly honored Ud-
dhava with their shy, smiling glances and pleas-
ing words. They took him to a quiet place, 
seated him comfortably and began to question 
him, for they recognized him to be a messenger 
from K ṛṣṇa, the master of the goddess of for-
tune. (3) [The gopīs said:] We know that you 
are the personal servant of K ṛṣṇa, the chief of 
the Yadus, and that you have come here on the 
order of your good master, who desires to give 
pleasure to His parents. (4)  We see nothing else 
He might consider worth remembering in these 
cow pastures of Vraja. Indeed, the bonds of af-
fection for one’s family members are difficult 
to break, even for a sage. (5) The friendship 
shown toward othersthose who are not family 
members is motivated by personal interest, and 
thus it is a pretense that lasts only until one’s 
purpose is fulfilled. Such friendship is just like 
the interest men take in women, or bees in flow-
ers. (6) Prostitutes abandon a penniless man, 
subjects an incompetent  king, students their 
teacher once they have finished their education, 
and priests a man who has remunerated them 
for a sacrifice. (7) Birds abandon a tree when 
its fruits are gone, guests a house after they 
have eaten, animals a forest that has burnt 
down , and a lover the woman he has enjoyed, 
even though she remains attached to him. (8) 
Thus speaking, the gopīs, whose words, bodies 
and minds were fully dedicated to Lord Go-
vinda, put aside all their regular work now that 
Kṛṣṇa’s messenger, Śrī Uddhava, had  arrived 
among them. Constantly remembering the ac-
tivities their beloved K ṛṣṇa had performed in 
His childhood and youth, they sang about them 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

693 
 and cried without shame. (9 -10) One of the go-
pīs, while meditating on Her previous associa-
tion with K ṛṣṇa, saw a h oneybee before Her 
and imagined it to be a messenger sent by Her 
beloved. Thus She spoke as follows. (11)  

The gopī said:  O honeybee, O friend of a 
cheater, don’t touch My feet with your whisk-
ers, which are smeared with the ku ṅkuma that 
rubbed onto K ṛṣṇa’s garland when it was 
crushed by the breasts of a rival lover! Let 
Kṛṣṇa satisfy the women of Mathurā. One who 
sends a messenger like you will certainly be 
ridiculed in the Yadus’ assembly. (12) After 
making us drink the enchanting nectar of His 
lips only o nce, K ṛṣṇa suddenly abandoned us, 
just as you might quickly abandon some flow-
ers. How is it, then, that Goddess Padmā will-
ingly serves His lotus feet? Alas! The answer 
must certainly be that her mind has been stolen 
away by His deceitful words. (13) O bee,  why 
do you sing here so much about the Lord of the 
Yadus, in front of us homeless people? These 
topics are old news to us. Better you sing about 
that friend of Arjuna in front of His new girl-
friends, the burning desire in whose breasts He 
has now relieved . Those ladies will surely give 
you the charity you are begging. (14) In heaven, 
on earth or in the subterranean sphere, what 
women are unavailable to Him? He simply 
arches His eyebrows and smiles with deceptive 
charm, and they all become His. The supreme 
goddess herself worships the dust of His feet, 
so what is our position in comparison? But at 
least those who are wretched can chant His 
name, Uttama ḥśloka. (15) Keep your head off 
My feet! I know what you’re doing. You ex-
pertly learned diplomacy from Mukun da, and 
now you come as His messenger with flattering 
words. But He abandoned those who for His 
sake alone gave up their children, husbands and 
all other relations. He’s simply ungrateful. 
Why should I make up with Him now? (16) 
Like a hunter, He cruelly s hot the king of the 
monkeys with arrows. Because He was con-
quered by a woman, He disfigured another 
woman who came to Him with lusty desires. 
And even after consuming the gifts of Bali 
Mahārāja, He bound him up with ropes as if he were a crow. So let us gi ve up all friendship 
with this dark -complexioned boy, even if we 
can’t give up talking about Him. (17) To hear 
about the pastimes that K ṛṣṇa regularly per-
forms is nectar for the ears. For those who rel-
ish just a single drop of that nectar, even once, 
their dedication to material duality is ruined. 
Many such persons have suddenly given up 
their wretched homes and families and, them-
selves becoming wretched, traveled here to 
Vṛndāvana to wander about like birds, begging 
for their living. (18) Faithfully taking  His de-
ceitful words as true, we became just like the 
black deer’s foolish wives, who trust the cruel 
hunter’s song. Thus we repeatedly felt the sharp 
pain of lust caused by the touch of His nails. O 
messenger, please talk about something besides 
Kṛṣṇa. (19) O friend of My dear one, has My 
beloved sent you here again? I should honor 
you, friend, so please choose whatever boon 
you wish. But why have you come back here to 
take us to Him, whose conjugal love is so diffi-
cult to give up? After all, gentle bee, H is con-
sort is the goddess Śrī, and she is always with 
Him, staying upon His chest. (20) O Uddhava! 
It is indeed regrettable that K ṛṣṇa resides in 
Mathurā. Does He remember His father’s 
household affairs and His friends, the cowherd 
boys? O great soul! Does  He ever talk about us, 
His maidservants? When will He lay on our 
heads His aguru -scented hand? (21)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having heard 
this, Uddhava then tried to pacify the gopīs, 
who were most eager to see Lord K ṛṣṇa. He 
thus began relating to them th e message of their 
beloved. (22)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  Certainly you gopīs are 
all-successful and are universally worshiped 
because you have dedicated your minds in this 
way to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Vāsudeva. (23) Devotional service unto Lord 
Kṛṣṇa is attained by charity, strict vows, auster-
ities and fire sacrifices, by japa, study of Vedic 
texts, observance of regulative principles and, 
indeed, by the performance of many other aus-
picious practices. (24) By your great fortune 
you have established  an unexcelled standard of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

694 
 pure devotion for the Lord, Uttama ḥślokaa 
standard even the sages can hardly attain. (25) 
By your great fortune you have left your sons, 
husbands, bodily comforts, relatives and homes 
in favor of the supreme male, who is known as  
Kṛṣṇa. (26) You have rightfully claimed the 
privilege of unalloyed love for the transcenden-
tal Lord, O most glorious gopīs. Indeed, by ex-
hibiting your love for K ṛṣṇa in separation from 
Him, you have shown me great mercy. (27) My 
good ladies, now please he ar your beloved’s 
message, which I, the confidential servant of 
my master, have come here to bring you. (28)  

The Supreme Lord said:  You are never ac-
tually separated from Me, for I am the Soul of 
all creation. Just as the elements of natureether, 
air, fire , water and earthare present in every cre-
ated thing, so I am present within everyone’s 
mind, life air and senses, and also within the 
physical elements and the modes of material 
nature. (29) By Myself I create, sustain and 
withdraw Myself within Myself by the power 
of My personal energy, which comprises the 
material elements, the senses and the modes of 
nature. (30) Being composed of pure con-
sciousness, or knowledge, the soul is distinct 
from everything material and is uninvolved in 
the entanglements of the  modes of nature. We 
can perceive the soul through the three func-
tions of material nature known as wakefulness, 
sleep and deep sleep. (31) As a person just 
arisen from sleep may continue to meditate on 
a dream even though it is illusory, so by the 
agency o f the mind one meditates on the sense 
objects, which the senses can then obtain. 
Therefore, one should become fully alert and 
bring the mind under control. (32) According to 
intelligent authorities, this is the ultimate con-
clusion of all the Vedas, as well  as all practice 
of yoga, Sā ṅkhya, renunciation, austerity, sense 
control and truthfulness, just as the sea is the 
ultimate destination of all rivers. (33)  

But the actual reason why I, the beloved ob-
ject of your sight, have stayed far away from 
you is tha t I wanted to intensify your meditation 
upon Me and thus draw your minds closer to 
Me. (34) When her lover is far away, a woman thinks of him more than when he is present be-
fore her. (35) Because your minds are totally 
absorbed in Me and free from all othe r engage-
ment, you remember Me always, and so you 
will very soon have Me again in your presence. 
(36) Although some gopīs had to remain in the 
cowherd village and so could not join the rāsa 
dance to sport with Me at night in the forest, 
they were nonetheles s fortunate. Indeed, they 
attained Me by thinking of My potent pastimes. 
(37) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  The women of 
Vraja were pleased to hear this message from 
their dearmost K ṛṣṇa. His words having re-
vived their memory, they addressed Uddhava 
as follows. (38) The gopīs said: It is very good 
that Ka ṁsa, the enemy and persecutor of the 
Yadus, has now been killed, along with his fol-
lowers. And it is also very good that Lord 
Acyuta is living happily in the company of His 
well-wishing friends and relatives, who se 
every desire is now fulfilled. (39) Gentle Ud-
dhava, is the elder brother of Gada now bestow-
ing on the city women the pleasure that actually 
belongs to us? We suppose those ladies wor-
ship Him with generous glances full of affec-
tionate, shy smiles. (40) Ś rī Kṛṣṇa is expert in 
all kinds of conjugal affairs and is the darling 
of the city women. How can He not become en-
tangled, now that He’s constantly adored by 
their enchanting words and gestures? (41) O 
saintly one, does Govinda ever remember us 
during His conversations with the city women? 
Does He ever mention us village girls as He 
freely talks with them? (42) Does He recall 
those nights in the V ṛndāvana forest, lovely 
with lotus, jasmine and the bright moon? As we 
glorified His charming pastimes, He enjoy ed 
with us, His beloved girlfriends, in the circle of 
the rāsa dance, which resounded with the music 
of ankle bells. (43) Will that descendant of 
Daśārha return here and by the touch of His 
limbs bring back to life those who are now 
burning with the grief He Himself has caused? 
Will He save us in that way, just as Lord Indra 
brings a forest back to life with his water -bear-
ing clouds? (44) But why should K ṛṣṇa come 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

695 
 here after winning a kingdom, killing His ene-
mies and marrying the daughters of kings? He’s 
satisfied there, surrounded by all His friends 
and well -wishers. (45) The great soul K ṛṣṇa is 
the Lord of the goddess of fortune, and He au-
tomatically achieves whatever He desires. How 
can we forest -dwellers or any other women ful-
fill His purposes when He is  already fulfilled 
within Himself? (46) Indeed, the greatest hap-
piness is to renounce all desires, as even the 
prostitute Pi ṅgalā has declared. Yet even 
though we know this, we cannot give up our 
hopes of attaining K ṛṣṇa. (47) Who can bear to 
give up intim ate talks with Lord Uttama ḥśloka? 
Although He shows no interest in her, Goddess 
Śrī never moves from her place on His chest. 
(48) Dear Uddhava Prabhu, when K ṛṣṇa was 
here in the company of Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, He enjoyed 
all these rivers, hills, forests, cows and f lute 
sounds. (49) All these remind us constantly of 
Nanda’s son. Indeed, because we see K ṛṣṇa’s 
footprints, which are marked with divine sym-
bols, we can never forget Him. (50) O Ud-
dhava, how can we forget Him when our hearts 
have been stolen away by the ch arming way He 
walks, His generous smile and playful glances, 
and His honeylike words? (51) O master, O 
master of the goddess of fortune, O master of 
Vraja! O destroyer of all suffering, Govinda, 
please lift Your Gokula out of the ocean of dis-
tress in which  it is drowning! (52)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s messages having relieved their fever of 
separation, the gopīs then worshiped Uddhava, 
recognizing him as nondifferent from their 
Lord, K ṛṣṇa. (53) Uddhava remained there for 
several months, di spelling the gopīs’ sorrow by 
chanting the topics of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s pastimes. 
Thus he brought joy to all the people of Gokula. 
(54) All the days that Uddhava dwelled in 
Nanda’s cowherd village seemed like a single 
moment to the residents of Vraja, for Uddhav a 
was always discussing K ṛṣṇa. (55) That servant 
of Lord Hari, seeing the rivers, forests, moun-
tains, valleys and flowering trees of Vraja, en-
joyed inspiring the inhabitants of V ṛndāvana by 
reminding them of Lord K ṛṣṇa. (56)  
 Thus seeing how the gopīs were  always dis-
turbed because of their total absorption in 
Kṛṣṇa, Uddhava was supremely pleased. Desir-
ing to offer them all respect, he sang as follows. 
(57) 

[Uddhava sang:]  Among all persons on 
earth, these cowherd women alone have actu-
ally perfected their e mbodied lives, for they 
have achieved the perfection of unalloyed love 
for Lord Govinda. Their pure love is hankered 
after by those who fear material existence, by 
great sages, and by ourselves as well. For one 
who has tasted the narrations of the infinite  
Lord, what is the use of taking birth as a high -
class brāhma ṇa, or even as Lord Brahmā him-
self? (58) How amazing it is that these simple 
women who wander about the forest, seem-
ingly spoiled by improper behavior, have 
achieved the perfection of unalloyed l ove for 
Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Soul! Still, it is true that the 
Supreme Lord Himself awards His blessings 
even to an ignorant worshiper, just as the best 
medicine works even when taken by a person 
ignorant of its ingredients. (59) When Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa was danci ng with the gopīs in the rāsa -
līlā, the gopīs were embraced by the arms of the 
Lord. This transcendental favor was never be-
stowed upon the goddess of fortune or other 
consorts in the spiritual world. Indeed, never 
was such a thing even imagined by the most  
beautiful girls in the heavenly planets, whose 
bodily luster and aroma resemble the lotus 
flower. And what to speak of worldly women 
who are very beautiful according to material es-
timation? (60) The gopīs of V ṛndāvana have 
given up the association of thei r husbands, sons 
and other family members, who are very diffi-
cult to give up, and they have forsaken the path 
of chastity to take shelter of the lotus feet of 
Mukunda, K ṛṣṇa, which one should search for 
by Vedic knowledge. Oh, let me be fortunate 
enough to  be one of the bushes, creepers or 
herbs in V ṛndāvana, because the gopīs trample 
them and bless them with the dust of their lotus 
feet. (61)  

The goddess of fortune herself, along with 
Lord Brahmā and all the other demigods, who 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

696 
 are masters of yogic perfec tion, can worship the 
lotus feet of K ṛṣṇa only within her mind. But 
during the rāsa dance Lord K ṛṣṇa placed His 
feet upon these gopīs’ breasts, and by embrac-
ing those feet the gopīs gave up all distress. (62) 
I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from  
the feet of the women of Nanda Mahārāja’s 
cowherd village. When these gopīs loudly 
chant the glories of Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the vibration pu-
rifies the three worlds. (63)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Uddhava, the de-
scendant of Daśārha, then took permission to 
leave from  the gopīs and from mother Yaśodā 
and Nanda Mahārāja. He bade farewell to all 
the cowherd men and, about to depart, mounted 
his chariot. (64) As Uddhava was about to 
leave, Nanda and the others approached him 
bearing various items of worship. With tears in  
their eyes they addressed him as follows. (65) 
[Nanda and the other cowherds said:] May our 
mental functions always take shelter of K ṛṣṇa’s 
lotus feet, may our words always chant His 
names, and may our bodies always bow down 
to Him and serve Him. (66) Whe rever we are 
made to wander about this world by the Su-
preme Lord’s will, in accordance with the reac-
tions to our fruitive work, may our good works 
and charity always grant Us love for Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. (67) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] O 
ruler of men, thus hono red by the cowherd men 
with expressions of devotion for Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
Uddhava went back to the city of Mathurā, 
which was under K ṛṣṇa’s protection. (68) After 
falling down to pay his homage, Uddhava de-
scribed to Lord K ṛṣṇa the immense devotion of 
the residen ts of Vraja. Uddhava also described 
it to Vasudeva, Lord Balarāma and King 
Ugrasena and presented to them the gifts of 
tribute he had brought with him. (69)  

SB 10.48: K ṛṣṇa Pleases His Devotees  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Next, after assim-
ilating Uddhava’s re port, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the omniscient 
Soul of all that be, desired to satisfy the serving 
girl Trivakrā, who was troubled by lust. Thus 
He went to her house. (1) Trivakrā’s home was opulently appointed with expensive furnishi ngs 
and replete with sensual accoutrements meant 
to inspire sexual desire. There were banners, 
rows of strung pearls, canopies, fine beds and 
sitting places, and also fragrant incense, oil 
lamps, flower garlands and aromatic sandal-
wood paste. (2) When Triv akrā saw Him arriv-
ing at her house, she at once rose from her seat 
in a flurry. Coming forward graciously with her 
girlfriends, she respectfully greeted Lord 
Acyuta by offering Him an excellent seat and 
other articles of worship. (3) Uddhava also re-
ceived a seat of honor, since he was a saintly 
person, but he simply touched it and sat on the 
floor. Then Lord K ṛṣṇa, imitating the manners 
of human society, quickly made Himself com-
fortable on an opulent bed. (4) Trivakrā pre-
pared herself by bathing, anointing her body, 
and dressing in fine garments, by putting on 
jewelry, garlands and perfume, and also by 
chewing betel nut, drinking fragrant liquor, and 
so on. She then approached Lord Mādhava with 
shy, playful smiles and coquettish glances. (5) 
Calling forward His beloved, who was anxious 
and shy at the prospect of this new contact, the 
Lord pulled her by her bangled hands onto the 
bed. Thus He enjoyed with that beautiful girl, 
whose only trace of piety was her having of-
fered ointment to the Lord. (6) Simply by 
smelling the fragrance of K ṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, 
Trivakrā cleansed away the burning lust Cupid 
had aroused in her breasts, chest and eyes. With 
her two arms she embraced between her breasts 
her lover, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the personification of 
bliss, and thus she gave  up her long -standing 
distress. (7) Having thus gotten the hard -to-get 
Supreme Lord by the simple act of offering 
Him body ointment, unfortunate Trivakrā sub-
mitted to that Lord of freedom the following re-
quest. (8) [Trivakrā said:] O beloved, please 
stay h ere with me for a few days more and en-
joy. I cannot bear to give up Your association, 
O lotus -eyed one! (9) Promising her the fulfill-
ment of this lusty desire, considerate K ṛṣṇa, 
Lord of all beings, paid Trivakrā His respects 
and then returned with Uddhava  to His own su-
premely opulent residence. (10) Lord Vi ṣṇu, 
the Supreme Lord of all lords, is ordinarily dif-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

697 
 ficult to approach. One who has properly wor-
shiped Him and then chooses the benediction 
of mundane sense gratification is certainly of 
poor intelligen ce, for he is satisfied with an in-
significant result. (11)  

Then Lord K ṛṣṇa, wanting to have some 
things done, went to Akrūra’s house with 
Balarāma and Uddhava. The Lord also desired 
to please Akrūra. (12) Akrūra stood up in great 
joy when he saw them, his  own relatives and 
the greatest of exalted personalities, coming 
from a distance. After embracing them and 
greeting them, Akrūra bowed down to K ṛṣṇa 
and Balarāma and was greeted by Them in re-
turn. Then, when his guests had taken their 
seats, he worshiped t hem in accordance with 
scriptural rules. (13 -14) O King, Akrūra bathed 
the feet of Lord K ṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma and 
then poured the bath water on his head. He pre-
sented Them with gifts of fine clothing, aro-
matic sandalwood paste, flower garlands and 
excell ent jewelry. After thus worshiping the 
two Lords, he bowed his head to the floor. He 
then began to massage Lord K ṛṣṇa’s feet, plac-
ing them on his lap, and with his head bowed in 
humility he addressed K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma as 
follows. (15 -16) [Akrūra said:] It  is our good 
fortune that You two Lords have killed the evil 
Kaṁsa and his followers, thus delivering Your 
dynasty from endless suffering and causing it 
to flourish. (17) You both are the original Su-
preme Person, the cause of the universe and its 
very subs tance. Not the slightest subtle cause or 
manifest product of creation exists apart from 
You. (18) O Supreme Absolute Truth, with 
Your personal energies You create this uni-
verse and then enter into it. Thus one can per-
ceive You in many different forms by he aring 
from authorities and by direct experience. (19) 
Just as the primary elementsearth and so on-
manifest themselves in abundant variety among 
all the species of mobile and immobile life, so 
You, the one independent Supreme Soul, ap-
pear to be manifold amon g the variegated ob-
jects of Your creation. (20) You create, destroy 
and also maintain this universe with Your per-
sonal energiesthe modes of passion, ignorance 
and goodnessyet You are never entangled by these modes or the activities they generate. 
Since You  are the original source of all 
knowledge, what could ever cause You to be 
bound by illusion? (21) Since it has never been 
demonstrated that You are covered by material, 
bodily designations, it must be concluded that 
for You there is neither birth in a lit eral sense 
nor any duality. Therefore, You never undergo 
bondage or liberation, and if You appear to, it 
is only because of Your desire that we see You 
in that way, or simply because of our lack of 
discrimination. (22) You originally enunciated 
the ancient  religious path of the Vedas for the 
benefit of the whole universe. Whenever that 
path becomes obstructed by wicked persons 
following the path of atheism, You assume one 
of Your incarnations, which are all in the tran-
scendental mode of goodness. (23) You a re that 
very same Supreme Person, my Lord, and You 
have now appeared in the home of Vasudeva 
with Your plenary portion. You have done this 
to relieve the earth’s burden by killing hun-
dreds of armies led by kings who are expan-
sions of the demigods’ enemies,  and also to 
spread the fame of our dynasty. (24) Today, O 
Lord, my home has become most fortunate be-
cause You have entered it. As the Supreme 
Truth, You embody the forefathers, ordinary 
creatures, human beings and demigods, and the 
water that has washed Y our feet purifies the 
three worlds. Indeed, O transcendent one, You 
are the spiritual master of the universe. (25) 
What learned person would approach anyone 
but You for shelter, when You are the affec-
tionate, grateful and truthful well -wisher of 
Your devot ees? To those who worship You in 
sincere friendship You reward everything they 
desire, even Your own self, yet You never in-
crease or diminish. (26) It is by our great for-
tune, Janārdana, that You are now visible to us, 
for even the masters of yoga and the foremost 
demigods can achieve this goal only with great 
difficulty. Please quickly cut the ropes of our 
illusory attachment for children, wife, wealth, 
influential friends, home and body. All such at-
tachment is simply the effect of Your illusory 
material e nergy. (27)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

698 
 [Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  Thus 
worshiped and fully glorified by His devotee, 
the Supreme Lord Hari smilingly addressed 
Akrūra, completely charming him with His 
words. (28)  

The Supreme Lord said:  You are Our spir-
itual master, paternal uncl e and praiseworthy 
friend, and We are like your sons, always de-
pendent on your protection, sustenance and 
compassion. (29) Exalted souls like you are the 
true objects of service and the most worshipa-
ble authorities for those who desire the highest 
good in life. Demigods are generally concerned 
with their own interests, but saintly devotees 
never are. (30) No one can deny that there are 
holy places with sacred rivers, or that the dem-
igods appear in deity forms made of earth and 
stone. But these purify the so ul only after a long 
time, whereas saintly persons purify just by be-
ing seen. (31)  

You are indeed the best of Our friends, so 
please go to Hastināpura and, as the well -
wisher of the Pā ṇḍavas, find out how they are 
doing. (32) We have heard that when their  fa-
ther passed away, the young Pā ṇḍavas were 
brought with their anguished mother to the cap-
ital city by King Dh ṛtarāṣṭra, and that they are 
now living there. (33) Indeed, weak -minded 
Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the son of Ambikā, has come under 
the control of his wicked sons, and therefore 
that blind King is not treating his brother’s sons 
fairly. (34) Go and see whether Dh ṛtarāṣṭra is 
acting properly or not. When We find out, We 
will make the necessary arrangements to help 
Our dear friends. (35) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī con-
tinued:] Thus fully instructing Akrūra, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead Hari then re-
turned to His residence, accompanied by Lord 
Saṅkarṣaṇa and Uddhava. (36)  

SB 10.49: Akrūra’s Mission in 
Hastināpura  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Akrūra went to 
Hastināpura, the city distinguished by the glory 
of the Paurava rulers. There he saw Dh ṛtarāṣṭra, 
Bhīṣma, Vidura and Kuntī, along with Bāhlika and his son Somadatta. He also saw 
Droṇācārya, K ṛpācārya, Kar ṇa, Duryodhana, 
Aśvatthāmā, the Pā ṇḍavas and other close 
friends. (1 -2) After Akrūra, the son of Gāndinī, 
had appropriately greeted all his relatives and 
friends, they asked him for news of their family 
members, and he in turn asked about their wel-
fare. (3) He remained in Hastināpura for several 
months to scrutinize the con duct of the weak -
willed King, who had bad sons and who was 
inclined to give in to the whims of mischievous 
advisers. (4)  

Kuntī and Vidura described to Akrūra in de-
tail the evil intentions of Dh ṛtarāṣṭra’s sons, 
who could not tolerate the great qualities o f 
Kuntī’s sonssuch as their powerful influence, 
military skill, physical strength, bravery and 
humilityor the intense affection the citizens had 
for them. Kuntī and Vidura also told Akrūra 
about how the sons of Dh ṛtarāṣṭra had tried to 
poison the Pā ṇḍavas and carry out other such 
plots. (5 -6) 

Kuntīdevī, taking advantage of her brother 
Akrūra’s visit, approached him confidentially. 
While remembering her birthplace, she spoke 
with tears in her eyes. (7) [Queen Kuntī said:] 
O gentle one, do my parents, brothe rs, sisters, 
nephews, family women and girlhood friends 
still remember us? (8) Does my nephew K ṛṣṇa, 
the Supreme Personality and the compassionate 
shelter of His devotees, still remember His 
aunt’s sons? And does lotus -eyed Rāma re-
member them also? (9) Now  that I am suffering 
in the midst of my enemies like a doe in the 
midst of wolves, will K ṛṣṇa come to console 
me and my fatherless sons with His words? (10) 
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa! O great yogi! O Supreme Soul 
and protector of the universe! O Govinda! 
Please protect  me, who have surrendered to 
You. I and my sons are being overwhelmed by 
trouble. (11) For persons fearful of death and 
rebirth, I see no shelter other than Your liberat-
ing lotus feet, for You are the Supreme Lord. 
(12) I offer my obeisances unto You, K ṛṣṇa, the 
supreme pure, the Absolute Truth and the Su-
persoul, the Lord of pure devotional service and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

699 
 the source of all knowledge. I have come to 
You for shelter. (13)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus meditating 
on her family members and also on K ṛṣṇa, the 
Lord o f the universe, your great -grandmother 
Kuntīdevī began to cry out in grief, O King. 
(14) Both Akrūra, who shared Queen Kuntī’s 
distress and happiness, and the illustrious 
Vidura consoled the Queen by reminding her of 
the extraordinary way her sons had take n birth. 
(15) The ardent affection King Dh ṛtarāṣṭra felt 
for his sons had made him act unjustly toward 
the Pā ṇḍavas. Just before leaving, Akrūra ap-
proached the King, who was seated among his 
friends and supporters, and related to him the 
message that his r elativesLord K ṛṣṇa and Lord 
Balarāmahad sent out of friendship. (16)  

Akrūra said:  O my dear son of Vici-
travīrya, O enhancer of the Kurus’ glory, your 
brother Pā ṇḍu having passed away, you have 
now assumed the royal throne. (17) By reli-
giously protecting t he earth, delighting your 
subjects with your noble character, and treating 
all your relatives equally, you will surely 
achieve success and glory. (18) If you act oth-
erwise, however, people will condemn you in 
this world, and in the next life you will enter  the 
darkness of hell. Remain equally disposed, 
therefore, toward Pā ṇḍu’s sons and your own. 
(19) In this world no one has any permanent re-
lationship with anyone else, O King. We cannot 
stay forever even with our own body, what to 
speak of our wife, childr en and the rest. (20) 
Every creature is born alone and dies alone, and 
alone one experiences the just rewards of his 
good and evil deeds. (21) In the guise of dear 
dependents, strangers steal the sinfully ac-
quired wealth of a foolish man, just as the off-
spring of a fish drink up the water that sustains 
the fish. (22) A fool indulges in sin to maintain 
his life, wealth and children and other relatives, 
for he thinks, “These things are mine.” In the 
end, however, these very things all abandon 
him, leaving him  frustrated. (23) Abandoned 
by his so -called dependents, ignorant of the ac-
tual goal of life, indifferent to his real duty, and 
having failed to fulfill his purposes, the foolish soul enters the blindness of hell, taking his sin-
ful reactions with him. (24)  Therefore, O King, 
looking upon this world as a dream, a magi-
cian’s illusion or a flight of fancy, please con-
trol your mind with intelligence and become 
equipoised and peaceful, my lord. (25)  

Dhṛtarāṣṭra said:  O master of charity, I can 
never be satiated  while hearing your auspicious 
words. Indeed, I am like a mortal who has ob-
tained the nectar of the gods. (26) Even so, gen-
tle Akrūra, because my unsteady heart is preju-
diced by affection for my sons, these pleasing 
words of yours cannot remain fixed there , just 
as lightning cannot remain fixed in a cloud. 
(27) Who can defy the injunctions of the Su-
preme Lord, who has now descended in the 
Yadu dynasty to diminish the earth’s burden? 
(28) I offer my obeisances to Him, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who creates this uni-
verse by the inconceivable activity of His ma-
terial energy and then distributes the various 
modes of nature by entering within the creation. 
From Him, the meaning of whose pastimes is 
unfathomable, come both the entangling cycle 
of birth an d death and the process of deliver-
ance from it. (29)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having thus ap-
prised himself of the King’s attitude, Akrūra, 
the descendant of Yadu, took permission from 
his well -wishing relatives and friends and re-
turned to the capital of the  Yādavas. (30) 
Akrūra reported to Lord Balarāma and Lord 
Kṛṣṇa how Dh ṛtarāṣṭra was behaving toward 
the Pā ṇḍavas. Thus, O descendant of the Kurus, 
he fulfilled the purpose for which he had been 
sent. (31)  

SB 10.50: K ṛṣṇa Establishes the City of 
Dvārakā  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  When Ka ṁsa 
was killed, O heroic descendant of Bharata, his 
two queens, Asti and Prāpti, went to their fa-
ther’s house in great distress. (1) The sorrowful 
queens told their father, King Jarāsandha of 
Magadha, all about how they had beco me wid-
ows. (2) Hearing this odious news, O King, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

700 
 Jarāsandha was filled with sorrow and anger, 
and he began the greatest possible endeavor to 
rid the earth of the Yādavas. (3) With a force of 
twenty -three ak ṣauhiṇī divisions, he laid siege 
to the Yadu capit al, Mathurā, on all sides. (4)  

Although Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, is the original cause of this 
world, when He descended to the earth He 
played the role of a human being. Thus when 
He saw Jarāsandha’s assembled army sur-
rounding His c ity like a great ocean overflow-
ing its shores, and when He saw how this army 
was striking fear into His subjects, the Lord 
considered what His suitable response should 
be according to the time, place and specific pur-
pose of His current incarnation. (5 -6) [The Su-
preme Lord thought:] Since it is such a burden 
on the earth, I will destroy Jarāsandha’s army, 
consisting of ak ṣauhiṇīs of foot soldiers, 
horses, chariots and elephants, which the King 
of Magadha has assembled from all subservient 
kings and brought t ogether here. But 
Jarāsandha himself should not be killed, since 
in the future he will certainly assemble another 
army. (7 -8) This is the purpose of My present 
incarnationto relieve the earth of its burden, 
protect the pious and kill the impious. (9) I als o 
assume other bodies to protect religion and to 
end irreligion whenever it flourishes in the 
course of time. (10)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  As Lord 
Govinda was thinking in this way, two chariots 
as effulgent as the sun suddenly descended 
from the sky . They were complete with drivers 
and equipment. (11) The Lord’s eternal divine 
weapons also appeared before Him spontane-
ously. Seeing these, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, Lord of the 
senses, addressed Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa. (12) [The 
Supreme Lord said:] My respected elder 
brother , see this danger which has beset Your 
dependents, the Yadus! And see, dear master, 
how Your personal chariot and favorite weap-
ons have come before You. The purpose for 
which We have taken birth, My Lord, is to se-
cure the welfare of Our devotees. Please no w 
remove from the earth the burden of these 
twenty -three armies. (13 -14) After Lord K ṛṣṇa had thus invited His brother, the two Dāśārhas, 
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, wearing armor and dis-
playing Their resplendent weapons, drove out 
of the city in Their chariots. O nly a very small 
contingent of soldiers accompanied Them. (15) 
As Lord K ṛṣṇa came out of the city with 
Dāruka at the reins of His chariot, He blew His 
conchshell, and the enemy soldiers’ hearts be-
gan to tremble with fear. (16) Jarāsandha 
looked at the two of Them and said: O K ṛṣṇa, 
lowest of men! I do not wish to fight alone with 
You, since it would be a shame to fight with a 
mere boy. You fool who keep Yourself hidden, 
O murderer of Your relatives, go away! I will 
not fight with You. (17) You, Rāma, should  
gather Your courage and fight with me, if You 
think You can do it. You may either give up 
Your body when it is cut to pieces by my ar-
rows, and thus attain to heaven, or else kill me. 
(18) The Supreme Lord said: Real heroes do 
not simply boast but rather s how their prowess 
in action. We cannot take seriously the words 
of one who is full of anxiety and who wants to 
die. (19)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Just as the wind 
covers the sun with clouds or a fire with dust, 
the son of Jarā marched toward the two de-
scend ants of Madhu and with his huge assem-
blage of armies surrounded Them and Their 
soldiers, chariots, flags, horses and charioteers. 
(20) 

The women stood in the watchtowers, pal-
aces and high gates of the city. When they 
could no longer see K ṛṣṇa’s and Balarā ma’s 
chariots, identified by banners marked with the 
emblems of Garu ḍa and a palm tree, they were 
struck with grief and fainted. (21) Seeing His 
army tormented by the relentless and savage 
rain of arrows from the massive opposing 
forces gathered like cloud s about Him, Lord 
Hari twanged His excellent bow, Śār ṅga, which 
both gods and demons worship. (22) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa took arrows from His quiver, fixed them 
on the bowstring, pulled back, and released 
endless torrents of sharp shafts, which struck 
the enemy’s cha riots, elephants, horses and in-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

701 
 fantrymen. The Lord shooting His arrows re-
sembled a blazing circle of fire. (23) Elephants 
fell to the ground, their foreheads split open, 
cavalry horses fell with severed necks, chariots 
fell with their horses, flags, driver s and masters 
all shattered, and foot soldiers collapsed with 
severed arms, thighs and shoulders. (24) On the 
battlefield, hundreds of rivers of blood flowed 
from the limbs of the humans, elephants and 
horses who had been cut to pieces. In these riv-
ers arm s resembled snakes; human heads, tur-
tles; dead elephants, islands; and dead horses, 
crocodiles. Hands and thighs appeared like 
fish, human hair like waterweeds, bows like 
waves, and various weapons like clumps of 
bushes. The rivers of blood teemed with all  of 
these. (25 -28) For Him who orchestrates the 
creation, maintenance and destruction of the 
three worlds and who possesses unlimited spir-
itual qualities, it is hardly amazing that He sub-
dues an opposing party. Still, when the Lord 
does so, imitating human  behavior, sages glo-
rify His acts. (29) Jarāsandha, with his chariot 
lost and all his soldiers dead, was left with only 
his breath. At that point Lord Balarāma forcibly 
seized the powerful warrior, just as one lion 
takes hold of another. (30)  

With the div ine noose of Varu ṇa and other, 
mortal ropes, Balarāma began tying up 
Jarāsandha, who had killed so many foes. But 
Lord Govinda still had a purpose to fulfill 
through Jarāsandha, and thus He asked 
Balarāma to stop. (31) Jarāsandha, whom fight-
ers had highly honored, was ashamed after be-
ing released by the two Lords of the universe, 
and thus he decided to undergo penances. On 
the road, however, several kings convinced him 
with both spiritual wisdom and mundane argu-
ments that he should give up his idea of self -
abnegation. They told him, “Your defeat by the 
Yadus was simply the unavoidable reaction of 
your past karma.” (32 -33) All of his armies 
having been killed, and himself neglected by 
the Personality of Godhead, King Jarāsandha, 
son of B ṛhadratha, then sadly returned to the 
kingdom of the Magadhas. (34) Lord Mukunda 
had crossed the ocean of His enemy’s armies 
with His own military force completely intact. He received congratulations from the denizens 
of heaven, who showered Him with flowers. 
The people of Math urā, relieved of their fever-
ish anxiety and filled with joy, came out to meet 
Him as professional bards, heralds and pane-
gyrists sang in praise of His victory. (35 -36) 

As the Lord entered His city, conchshells 
and kettledrums sounded, and many drums, 
horns, vī ṇās, flutes and m ṛdaṅgas played in 
concert. The boulevards were sprinkled with 
water, there were banners everywhere, and the 
gateways were decorated for the celebration. 
The citizens were elated, and the city resounded 
with the chanting of Vedic hymns . (37 -38) As 
the women of the city affectionately looked at 
the Lord, their eyes wide open with love, they 
scattered flower garlands, yogurt, parched rice 
and newly grown sprouts upon Him. (39) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa then presented to the Yadu king all the 
wealth that  had fallen on the battlefieldnamely, 
the countless ornaments of the dead warriors. 
(40) Seventeen times the King of Magadha met 
defeat in this very way. And yet throughout 
these defeats he fought on with his ak ṣauhiṇī 
divisions against the forces of the Y adu dynasty 
who were protected by Śrī K ṛṣṇa. (41)  

By the power of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the V ṛṣṇis 
would invariably annihilate all of Jarāsandha’s 
forces, and when all his soldiers had been 
killed, the King, released by his enemies, would 
again go away. (42) Just a s the eighteenth battle 
was about to take place, a barbarian warrior 
named Kālayavana, sent by Nārada, appeared 
on the battlefield. (43)  

Arriving at Mathurā, this Yavana laid siege 
to the city with thirty million barbarian soldiers. 
He had never found a h uman rival worth 
fighting, but he had heard that the V ṛṣṇis were 
his equals. (44) When Lord K ṛṣṇa and Lord 
Saṅkarṣaṇa saw Kālayavana, K ṛṣṇa thought 
about the situation and said, “Ah, a great danger 
now threatens the Yadus from two sides. (45)  

“This Yavana  is besieging us already, and 
the mighty King of Magadha will soon arrive 
here, if not today then tomorrow or the next 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

702 
 day. (46) “If powerful Jarāsandha comes while 
We two are busy fighting Kālayavana, 
Jarāsandha may kill Our relatives or else take 
them aw ay to his capital. (47) “Therefore, We 
will immediately construct a fortress that no 
human force can penetrate. Let Us settle our 
family members there and then kill the barbar-
ian king.” (48) After thus discussing the matter 
with Balarāma, the Supreme Perso nality of 
Godhead had a fortress twelve yojanas in cir-
cumference built within the sea. Inside that fort 
He had a city built containing all kinds of won-
derful things. (49) In the construction of that 
city could be seen the full scientific knowledge 
and arch itectural skill of Viśvakarmā. There 
were wide avenues, commercial roads and 
courtyards laid out on ample plots of land; there 
were splendid parks, and also gardens stocked 
with trees and creepers from the heavenly plan-
ets. The gateway towers were topped w ith 
golden turrets touching the sky, and their upper 
levels were fashioned of crystal quartz. The 
gold-covered houses were adorned in front with 
golden pots and on top with jeweled roofs, and 
their floors were inlaid with precious emeralds. 
Beside the hous es stood treasury buildings, 
warehouses, and stables for fine horses, all built 
of silver and brass. Each residence had a watch-
tower, and also a temple for its household deity. 
Filled with citizens of all four social orders, the 
city was especially beautif ied by the palaces of 
Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Yadus. (50 -53) Lord 
Indra brought Śrī K ṛṣṇa the Sudharmā assem-
bly hall, standing within which a mortal man is 
not subject to the laws of mortality. Indra also 
gave the pārijāta tree. (54)  

Lord Varu ṇa offere d horses as swift as the 
mind, some of which were pure dark -blue, oth-
ers white. The treasurer of the demigods, Ku-
vera, gave his eight mystic treasures, and the 
rulers of various planets each presented their 
own opulences. (55) The Supreme Lord having 
come to the earth, O King, these demigods now 
offered Him whatever powers of control He 
had previously delegated to them for the exer-
cise of their particular authority. (56) After 
transporting all His subjects to the new city by 
the power of His mystic Yoga -māyā, Lord Kṛṣṇa consulted with Lord Balarāma, who had 
remained in Mathurā to protect it. Then, wear-
ing a garland of lotuses but bearing no weap-
ons, Lord K ṛṣṇa went out of Mathurā by its 
main gate. (57)  

SB 10.51: The Deliverance of Mucukunda  

Śukadeva Gosvām ī said:  Kālayavana saw 
the Lord come out from Mathurā like the rising 
moon. The Lord was most beautiful to behold, 
with His dark -blue complexion and yellow silk 
garment. Upon His chest He bore the mark of 
Śrīvatsa, and the Kaustubha gem adorned His 
neck. H is four arms were sturdy and long. He 
displayed His ever -joyful lotuslike face, with 
eyes pink like lotuses, beautifully effulgent 
cheeks, a pristine smile and glittering shark -
shaped earrings. The barbarian thought, “This 
person must indeed be Vāsudeva, s ince He pos-
sesses the characteristics Nārada mentioned: 
He is marked with Śrīvatsa, He has four arms, 
His eyes are like lotuses, He wears a garland of 
forest flowers, and He is extremely handsome. 
He cannot be anyone else. Since He goes on 
foot and unarmed , I will fight Him without 
weapons.” Resolving thus, he ran after the 
Lord, who turned His back and ran away. 
Kālayavana hoped to catch Lord K ṛṣṇa, though 
great mystic yogīs cannot attain Him. (1 -6) 

Appearing virtually within reach of Kālaya-
vana’s hands a t every moment, Lord Hari led 
the King of the Yavanas far away to a mountain 
cave. (7) While chasing the Lord, the Yavana 
cast insults at Him, saying “You took birth in 
the Yadu dynasty. It’s not proper for You to run 
away!” But still Kālayavana could not reach 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, because his sinful reactions had 
not been cleansed away. (8) Although insulted 
in this way, the Supreme Lord entered the 
mountain cave. Kālayavana also entered, and 
there he saw another man lying asleep. (9) “So, 
after leading me such a l ong distance, now He 
is lying here like some saint!” Thus thinking the 
sleeping man to be Lord K ṛṣṇa, the deluded 
fool kicked him with all his strength. (10) The 
man awoke after a long sleep and slowly 
opened his eyes. Looking all about, he saw 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

703 
 Kālayavana standing beside him. (11) The 
awakened man was angry and cast his glance at 
Kālayavana, whose body burst into flames. In a 
single moment, O King Parīk ṣit, Kālayavana 
was burnt to ashes. (12)  

King Parīk ṣit said:  Who was that person, O 
brāhma ṇa? To which fa mily did he belong, and 
what were his powers? Why did that destroyer 
of the barbarian lie down to sleep in the cave, 
and whose son was he? (13)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Mucukunda was 
the name of this great personality, who was 
born in the Ik ṣvāku dynasty as  the son of 
Māndhātā. He was devoted to brahminical cul-
ture and always true to his vow in battle. (14) 
Begged by Indra and the other demigods to help 
protect them when they were terrorized by the 
demons, Mucukunda defended them for a long 
time. (15) When t he demigods obtained Kārt-
tikeya as their general, they told Mucukunda, 
“O King, you may now give up your trouble-
some duty of guarding us. (16) “Abandoning an 
unopposed kingdom in the world of men, O 
valiant one, you neglected all your personal de-
sires whil e engaged in protecting us. (17) “The 
children, queens, relatives, ministers, advisers 
and subjects who were your contemporaries are 
no longer alive. They have all been swept away 
by time. (18) “Inexhaustible time, stronger than 
the strong, is the Supreme Personality of God-
head Himself. Like a herdsman moving his an-
imals along, He moves mortal creatures as His 
pastime. (19) “All good fortune to you! Now 
please choose a benediction from usanything 
but liberation, since only the infallible Supreme 
Lord, Vi ṣṇu, can bestow that.” (20) Addressed 
thus, King Mucukunda took his respectful 
leave of the demigods and went to a cave, 
where he lay down to enjoy the sleep they had 
granted him. (21) After the Yavana was burnt 
to ashes, the Supreme Lord, chief of the Sāt-
vatas, revealed Himself to the wise 
Mucukunda. (22)  

As he gazed at the Lord, King Mucukunda 
saw that He was dark blue like a cloud, had four 
arms, and wore a yellow silk garment. On His chest He bore the Śrīvatsa mark and on His 
neck the brilliantly glowing Kaustubha gem. 
Adorned with a Vaijayantī garland, the Lord 
displayed His handsome, peaceful face, which 
attracts the eyes of all mankind with its shark -
shaped earrings and affectionately smiling 
glance. The beauty of His youthful form was 
unexcelled, and H e moved with the nobility of 
an angry lion. The highly intelligent King was 
overwhelmed by the Lord’s effulgence, which 
showed Him to be invincible. Expressing his 
uncertainty, Mucukunda hesitantly questioned 
Lord K ṛṣṇa as follows. (23 -26) Śrī Mucukunda 
said: Who are You who have come to this 
mountain cave in the forest, having walked on 
the thorny ground with feet as soft as lotus pet-
als? (27)  

Perhaps You are the potency of all potent 
beings. Or maybe You are the powerful god of 
fire, or the sun -god, the moon -god, the King of 
heaven or the ruling demigod of some other 
planet. (28) I think You are the Supreme Per-
sonality among the three chief gods, since You 
drive away the darkness of this cave as a lamp 
dispels darkness with its light. (29) O best 
among me n, if You like, please truly describe 
Your birth, activities and lineage to us, who are 
eager to hear. (30) As for ourselves, O tiger 
among men, we belong to a family of fallen 
kṣatriyas, descendants of King Ik ṣvāku. My 
name is Mucukunda, my Lord, and I am  the son 
of Yauvanāśva. (31) I was fatigued after re-
maining awake for a long time, and my senses 
were overwhelmed by sleep. Thus I slept com-
fortably here in this solitary place until, just 
now, someone woke me. (32) The man who 
woke me was burned to ashes by the reaction 
of his sins. Just then I saw You, possessing a 
glorious appearance and the power to chastise 
Your enemies. (33)  

Your unbearably brilliant effulgence over-
whelms our strength, and thus we cannot fix 
our gaze upon You. O exalted one, You are to 
be honored by all embodied beings. (34) 
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus ad-
dressed by the King, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, origin of all creation, smiled and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

704 
 then replied to him in a voice as deep as the 
rumbling of clouds. (35) The Supreme L ord 
said: My dear friend, I have taken thousands of 
births, lived thousands of lives and accepted 
thousands of names. In fact My births, activi-
ties and names are limitless, and thus even I 
cannot count them. (36)  

After many lifetimes someone might count 
the dust particles on the earth, but no one can 
ever finish counting My qualities, activities, 
names and births. (37) O King, the greatest 
sages enumerate My births and activities, 
which take place throughout the three phases of 
time, but never do they reac h the end of them. 
(38) Nonetheless, O friend, I will tell you about 
My current birth, name and activities. Kindly 
hear. Some time ago, Lord Brahmā requested 
Me to protect religious principles and destroy 
the demons who were burdening the earth. 
Thus I des cended in the Yadu dynasty, in the 
home of Ānakadundubhi. Indeed, because I am 
the son of Vasudeva, people call Me Vāsudeva. 
(39-40) I have killed Kālanemi, reborn as 
Kaṁsa, as well as Pralamba and other enemies 
of the pious. And now, O King, this barbaria n 
has been burnt to ashes by your piercing glance. 
(41) Since in the past you repeatedly prayed to 
Me, I have personally come to this cave to show 
you mercy, for I am affectionately inclined to 
My devotees. (42) Now choose some benedic-
tions from Me, O sain tly King. I will fulfill all 
your desires. One who has satisfied Me need 
never again lament. (43)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Mucukunda 
bowed down to the Lord when he heard this. 
Remembering the words of the sage Garga, he 
joyfully recognized K ṛṣṇa to be the S upreme 
Lord, Nārāya ṇa. The King then addressed Him 
as follows. (44)  

Śrī Mucukunda said:  O Lord, the people of 
this world, both men and women, are bewil-
dered by Your illusory energy. Unaware of 
their real benefit, they do not worship You but 
instead seek h appiness by entangling them-
selves in family affairs, which are actually 
sources of misery. (45)   
That person has an impure mind who, de-
spite having somehow or other automatically 
obtained the rare and highly evolved human 
form of life, does not worship You r lotus feet. 
Like an animal that has fallen into a blind well, 
such a person has fallen into the darkness of a 
material home. (46) I have wasted all this time, 
O unconquerable one, becoming more and 
more intoxicated by my domain and opulence 
as an earthly  king. Misidentifying the mortal 
body as the self, becoming attached to children, 
wives, treasury and land, I suffered endless 
anxiety. (47) With deep arrogance I took my-
self to be the body, which is a material object 
like a pot or a wall. Thinking myself a god 
among men, I traveled the earth surrounded by 
my charioteers, elephants, cavalry, foot sol-
diers and generals, disregarding You in my de-
luding pride. (48) A man obsessed with 
thoughts of what he thinks needs to be done, 
intensely greedy, and delightin g in sense enjoy-
ment is suddenly confronted by You, who are 
ever alert. Like a hungry snake licking its fangs 
before a mouse, You appear before him as 
death. (49) The body that at first rides high on 
fierce elephants or chariots adorned with gold 
and is kn own by the name “king” is later, by 
Your invincible power of time, called “feces,” 
“worms,” or “ashes.” (50) Having conquered 
the entire circle of directions and being thus 
free of conflict, a man sits on a splendid throne, 
receiving praise from leaders wh o were once 
his equals. But when he enters the women’s 
chambers, where sex pleasure is found, he is led 
about like a pet animal, O Lord. (51) A king 
who desires even greater power than he already 
has strictly performs his duties, carefully prac-
ticing auste rity and forgoing sense enjoyment. 
But he whose urges are so rampant, thinking “I 
am independent and supreme,” cannot attain 
happiness. (52) When the material life of a 
wandering soul has ceased, O Acyuta, he may 
attain the association of Your devotees. An d 
when he associates with them, there awakens in 
him devotion unto You, who are the goal of the 
devotees and the Lord of all causes and their 
effects. (53) My Lord, I think You have shown 
me mercy, since my attachment to my kingdom 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

705 
 has spontaneously ceased . Such freedom is 
prayed for by saintly rulers of vast empires who 
desire to enter the forest for a life of solitude. 
(54) O all -powerful one, I desire no boon other 
than service to Your lotus feet, the boon most 
eagerly sought by those free of material de sire. 
O Hari, what enlightened person who worships 
You, the giver of liberation, would choose a 
boon that causes his own bondage? (55) There-
fore, O Lord, having put aside all objects of ma-
terial desire, which are bound to the modes of 
passion, ignorance an d goodness, I am ap-
proaching You, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, for shelter. You are not covered by 
mundane designations; rather, You are the Su-
preme Absolute Truth, full in pure knowledge 
and transcendental to the material modes. (56)  

For so long I  have been pained by troubles 
in this world and have been burning with 
lamentation. My six enemies are never satiated, 
and I can find no peace. Therefore, O giver of 
shelter, O Supreme Soul, please protect me. O 
Lord, in the midst of danger I have by good for-
tune approached Your lotus feet, which are the 
truth and which thus make one fearless and free 
of sorrow. (57) The Supreme Lord said: O em-
peror, great ruler, your mind is pure and potent. 
Though I enticed You with benedictions, your 
mind was not overcom e by material desires. 
(58) 

Understand that I enticed you with benedic-
tions just to prove that you would not be de-
ceived. The intelligence of My unalloyed dev-
otees is never diverted by material blessings. 
(59) The minds of nondevotees who engage in 
such p ractices as prā ṇāyama are not fully 
cleansed of material desires. Thus, O King, ma-
terial desires are again seen to arise in their 
minds. (60) Wander this earth at will, with your 
mind fixed on Me. May you always possess 
such unfailing devotion for Me. (61)  Because 
you followed the principles of a k ṣatriya, you 
killed living beings while hunting and perform-
ing other duties. You must vanquish the sins 
thus incurred by carefully executing penances 
while remaining surrendered to Me. (62) O 
King, in your very ne xt life you will become an excellent brāhma ṇa, the greatest well -wisher of 
all creatures, and certainly come to Me alone. 
(63) 

SB 10.52: Rukmi ṇī’s Message to Lord 
Kṛṣṇa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  My dear King, 
thus graced by Lord K ṛṣṇa, Mucukunda cir-
cumambul ated Him and bowed down to Him. 
Then Mucukunda, the beloved descendant of 
Ikṣvāku, exited through the mouth of the cave. 
(1) Seeing that the size of all the human beings, 
animals, trees and plants was severely reduced, 
and thus realizing that the Age of Ka li was at 
hand, Mucukunda left for the north. (2) The so-
ber King, beyond material association and free 
of doubt, was convinced of the value of auster-
ity. Absorbing his mind in Lord K ṛṣṇa, he came 
to Gandhamādana Mountain. (3) There he ar-
rived at Badarikāśr ama, the abode of Lord 
Nara -Nārāya ṇa, where, remaining tolerant of 
all dualities, he peacefully worshiped the Su-
preme Lord Hari by performing severe austeri-
ties. (4)  

The Lord returned to Mathurā, which was 
still surrounded by Yavanas. Then He de-
stroyed th e army of barbarians and began tak-
ing their valuables to Dvārakā. (5) As the 
wealth was being carried by oxen and men un-
der Lord K ṛṣṇa’s direction, Jarāsandha ap-
peared at the head of twenty -three armies. (6) 
O King, seeing the fierce waves of the enemy’s 
army, the two Mādhavas, imitating human be-
havior, ran swiftly away. (7) Abandoning the 
abundant riches, fearless but feigning fear, 
They went many yojanas on Their lotuslike 
feet. (8) When he saw Them fleeing, powerful 
Jarāsandha laughed loudly and then pur sued 
Them with charioteers and foot soldiers. He 
could not understand the exalted position of the 
two Lords. (9) Apparently exhausted after flee-
ing a long distance, the two Lords climbed a 
high mountain named Pravar ṣaṇa, upon which 
Lord Indra showers inces sant rain. (10) Alt-
hough he knew They were hiding on the moun-
tain, Jarāsandha could find no trace of Them. 
Therefore, O King, he placed firewood on all 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

706 
 sides and set the mountain ablaze. (11) The two 
of Them then suddenly jumped from the burn-
ing mountain, which was eleven yojanas high, 
and fell to the ground. (12) Unseen by Their op-
ponent or his followers, O King, those two most 
exalted Yadus returned to Their city of 
Dvārakā, which had the ocean as a protective 
moat. (13) Jarāsandha, moreover, mistakenly 
thought that Balarāma and Keśava had burned 
to death in the fire. Thus he withdrew his vast 
military force and returned to the Magadha 
kingdom. (14)  

As ordered by Lord Brahmā, Raivata, the 
opulent ruler of Ānarta, gave Lord Balarāma 
his daughter Raivatī in  marriage. This has al-
ready been discussed. (15) O hero among the 
Kurus, the Supreme Lord Himself, Govinda, 
married Bhī ṣmaka’s daughter, Vaidarbhī, who 
was a direct expansion of the goddess of for-
tune. The Lord did this by her desire, and in the 
process He  beat down Śālva and other kings 
who took Śiśupāla’s side. Indeed, as everyone 
watched, Śrī K ṛṣṇa took Rukmi ṇī just as 
Garu ḍa boldly stole nectar from the demigods. 
(16-17) 

King Parīk ṣit said:  The Supreme Lord 
married Rukmi ṇī, the beautiful -faced daughter  
of Bhī ṣmaka, in the Rāk ṣasa styleor so I have 
heard. (18) My lord, I wish to hear how the im-
measurably powerful Lord K ṛṣṇa took away 
His bride while defeating such kings as 
Māgadha and Sālva. (19)  

What experienced listener, O brāhma ṇa, 
could ever grow sa tiated while listening to the 
pious, charming and ever -fresh topics of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, which cleanse away the world’s con-
tamination? (20)  

Śrī Bādarāya ṇi said:  There was a king 
named Bhī ṣmaka, the powerful ruler of Vidar-
bha. He had five sons and one daughter o f 
lovely countenance. (21) Rukmī was the first -
born son, followed by Rukmaratha, 
Rukmabāhu, Rukmakeśa and Rukmamālī. 
Their sister was the exalted Rukmi ṇī. (22) 
Hearing of the beauty, prowess, transcendental character and opulence of Mukunda from visi-
tors t o the palace who sang His praises, 
Rukmi ṇī decided that He would be the perfect 
husband for her. (23) Lord K ṛṣṇa knew that 
Rukmi ṇī possessed intelligence, auspicious 
bodily markings, magnanimity, beauty, proper 
behavior and all other good qualities. Conclu d-
ing that she would be an ideal wife for Him, He 
made up His mind to marry her. (24) O King, 
because Rukmī envied the Lord, he forbade his 
family members to give his sister to K ṛṣṇa, alt-
hough they wanted to. Instead, Rukmī decided 
to give Rukmi ṇī to Śiśupā la. (25)  

Dark -eyed Vaidarbhī was aware of this plan, 
and it deeply upset her. Analyzing the situation, 
she quickly sent a trustworthy brāhma ṇa to 
Kṛṣṇa. (26) Upon reaching Dvārakā, the 
brāhma ṇa was brought inside by the gatekeep-
ers and saw the primeval Pe rsonality of God-
head sitting on a golden throne. (27) Seeing the 
brāhma ṇa, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, Lord of the brāhma ṇas, 
came down from His throne and seated him. 
Then the Lord worshiped him just as He Him-
self is worshiped by the demigods. (28) After 
the brāhma ṇa had eaten and rested, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, 
the goal of saintly devotees, came forward, and 
while massaging the brāhma ṇa’s feet with His 
own hands, He patiently questioned him as fol-
lows. (29)  

[The Supreme Lord said:] O best of ex-
alted brāhma ṇas, are your religious prac tices, 
sanctioned by senior authorities, proceeding 
without great difficulty? Is your mind always 
fully satisfied? (30) When a brāhma ṇa is satis-
fied with whatever comes his way and does not 
fall away from his religious duties, those very 
religious principl es become his desire cow, ful-
filling all his wishes. (31) An unsatisfied 
brāhma ṇa wanders restlessly from one planet to 
another, even if he becomes King of heaven. 
But a satisfied brāhma ṇa, though he may pos-
sess nothing, rests peacefully, all his limbs fre e 
of distress. (32) I repeatedly bow My head in 
respect to those brāhma ṇas who are satisfied 
with their lot. Saintly, prideless and peaceful, 
they are the best well -wishers of all living be-
ings. (33) O brāhma ṇa, is your King attending 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

707 
 to your welfare? Inde ed, that king in whose 
country the citizens are happy and protected is 
very dear to Me. (34) Whence have you come, 
crossing the impassable sea, and for what pur-
pose? Explain all this to Us if it is not a secret, 
and tell Us what We may do for you. (35) Thu s 
questioned by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who incarnates to perform His pastimes, 
the brāhma ṇa told Him everything. (36)  

Śrī Rukmi ṇī said [in her letter, as read by 
the brāhma ṇa]: O beauty of the worlds, hav-
ing heard of Your qualities, which ent er the 
ears of those who hear and remove their bodily 
distress, and having also heard of Your beauty, 
which fulfills all the visual desires of those who 
see, I have fixed my shameless mind upon You, 
O Kṛṣṇa. (37) O Mukunda, You are equal only 
to Yourself i n lineage, character, beauty, 
knowledge, youthfulness, wealth and influ-
ence. O lion among men, You delight the minds 
of all mankind. What aristocratic, sober -
minded and marriageable girl of a good family 
would not choose You as her husband when the 
proper time has come? (38) Therefore, my dear 
Lord, I have chosen You as my husband, and I 
surrender myself to You. Please come swiftly, 
O almighty one, and make me Your wife. My 
dear lotus -eyed Lord, let Śiśupāla never touch 
the hero’s portion like a jackal stea ling the 
property of a lion. (39) If I have sufficiently 
worshiped the Supreme Personality of God-
head by pious works, sacrifices, charity, rituals 
and vows, and also by worshiping the demi-
gods, brāhma ṇas and gurus, then may 
Gadāgraja come and take my hand,  and not 
Damagho ṣa’s son or anyone else. (40) O un-
conquerable one, tomorrow when my marriage 
ceremony is about to begin, You should arrive 
unseen in Vidarbha and surround Yourself with 
the leaders of Your army. Then crush the forces 
of Caidya and Magadhend ra and marry me in 
the Rāk ṣasa style, winning me with Your valor. 
(41) Since I will be staying within the inner 
chambers of the palace, You may wonder, 
“How can I carry you away without killing 
some of your relatives?” But I shall tell You a 
way: On the da y before the marriage there is a 
grand procession to honor the royal family’s deity, and in this procession the new bride goes 
outside the city to visit Goddess Girijā. (42) O 
lotus -eyed one, great souls like Lord Śiva 
hanker to bathe in the dust of Your l otus feet 
and thereby destroy their ignorance. If I cannot 
obtain Your mercy, I shall simply give up my 
vital force, which will have become weak from 
the severe penances I will perform. Then, after 
hundreds of lifetimes of endeavor, I may obtain 
Your mercy . (43)  

The brāhma ṇa said:  This is the confiden-
tial message I have brought with me, O Lord of 
the Yadus. Please consider what must be done 
in these circumstances, and do it at once. (44)  

SB 10.53: K ṛṣṇa Kidnaps Rukmi ṇī 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus hearing  the 
confidential message of Princess Vaidarbhī, 
Lord Yadunandana took the brāhma ṇa’s hand 
and, smiling, spoke to him as follows. (1)  

The Supreme Lord said:  Just as Rukmi ṇī’s 
mind is fixed on Me, My mind is fixed on her. 
I can’t even sleep at night. I kno w that Rukmī, 
out of envy, has forbidden our marriage. (2) 
She has dedicated herself exclusively to Me, 
and her beauty is flawless. I will bring her here 
after thrashing those worthless kings in battle, 
just as one brings a blazing flame out of fire-
wood. ( 3) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Lord 
Madhusūdana also understood the exact lunar 
time for Rukmi ṇī’s wedding. Thus He told His 
driver, “Dāruka, ready My chariot immedi-
ately.” (4) Dāruka brought the Lord’s chariot, 
yoked with the horses named Śaibya, Sugrīva, 
Meghapu ṣpa and Balāhaka. He then stood be-
fore Lord K ṛṣṇa with joined palms. (5) Lord 
Śauri mounted His chariot and had the 
brāhma ṇa do likewise. Then the Lord’s swift 
horses took them from the Ānarta district to 
Vidarbha in a single night. (6)  

King Bhī ṣmaka,  the master of Ku ṇḍina, hav-
ing succumbed to the sway of affection for his 
son, was about to give his daughter to Śiśupāla. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

708 
 The King saw to all the required preparations. 
(7) The king had the main avenues, commercial 
roads and intersections thoroughly clean ed and 
then sprinkled with water, and he also had the 
city decorated with triumphant archways and 
multicolored banners on poles. The men and 
women of the city, arrayed in spotless raiment 
and anointed with fragrant sandalwood paste, 
wore precious necklaces , flower garlands and 
jeweled ornaments, and their opulent homes 
were filled with the aroma of aguru. (8 -9) 

O King, in accordance with prescribed ritu-
als, Mahārāja Bhī ṣmaka worshiped the forefa-
thers, demigods and brāhma ṇas, feeding them 
all properly. Then  He had the traditional man-
tras chanted for the well -being of the bride. (10) 
The bride cleaned her teeth and bathed, after 
which she put on the auspicious wedding neck-
lace. Then she was dressed in brand -new upper 
and lower garments and adorned with most e x-
cellent jeweled ornaments. (11) The best of 
brāhma ṇas chanted mantras of the Ṛg, Sāma 
and Yajur Vedas for the bride’s protection, and 
the priest learned in the Atharva Veda offered 
oblations to pacify the controlling planets. (12) 
Outstanding in his knowl edge of regulative 
principles, the King rewarded the brāhma ṇas 
with gold, silver, clothing, cows and sesame 
seeds mixed with raw sugar. (13)  

Rājā Damagho ṣa, lord of Cedi, had also en-
gaged brāhma ṇas expert in chanting mantras to 
perform all rituals necessa ry to assure his son’s 
prosperity. (14) King Damagho ṣa traveled to 
Kuṇḍina accompanied by armies of elephants 
exuding mada, chariots hung with golden 
chains, and numerous cavalry and infantry sol-
diers. (15) Bhī ṣmaka, the lord of Vidarbha, 
came out of the c ity and met King Damagho ṣa, 
offering him tokens of respect. Bhī ṣmaka then 
settled Damagho ṣa in a residence especially 
constructed for the occasion. (16) Śiśupāla’s 
supportersŚālva, Jarāsandha, Dantavakra and 
Vidūrathaall came, along with Pau ṇḍraka and 
thousands of other kings. (17) To secure the 
bride for Śiśupāla, the kings who envied K ṛṣṇa 
and Balarāma came to the following decision 
among themselves: “If K ṛṣṇa comes here with Balarāma and the other Yadus to steal the bride, 
we shall band together and figh t Him.” Thus 
those envious kings went to the wedding with 
their entire armies and a full complement of 
military conveyances. (18 -19) 

When Lord Balarāma heard about these 
preparations of the inimical kings and how 
Lord K ṛṣṇa had set off alone to steal the bride, 
He feared that a fight would ensue. Immersed 
in affection for His brother, He hurried to 
Kuṇḍina with a mighty army consisting of in-
fantry and of soldiers riding on elephants, 
horses and chariots. (20 -21) 

The lovely daughter of Bhī ṣmaka anxiously 
awaited the arrival of K ṛṣṇa, but when she did 
not see the brāhma ṇa return she thought as fol-
lows. (22) [Princess Rukmi ṇī thought:] Alas, 
my wedding is to take place when the night 
ends! How unlucky I am! Lotus -eyed K ṛṣṇa 
does not come. I don’t know why. An d even the 
brāhma ṇa messenger has not yet returned. (23) 
Perhaps the faultless Lord, even while prepar-
ing to come here, saw something contemptible 
in me and therefore has not come to take my 
hand. (24) I am extremely unfortunate, for the 
creator is not fav orably disposed toward me, 
nor is the great Lord Śiva. Or perhaps Śiva’s 
wife, Devī, who is known as Gaurī, Rudrā ṇī, 
Girijā and Satī, has turned against me. (25) As 
she thought in this way, the young maiden, 
whose mind had been stolen by K ṛṣṇa, closed 
her tear-filled eyes, remembering that there was 
still time. (26) O King, as the bride thus awaited 
the arrival of Govinda, she felt a twitch in her 
left thigh, arm and eye. This was a sign that 
something desirable would happen. (27) Just 
then the purest of le arned brāhma ṇas, following 
Kṛṣṇa’s order, came to see the divine Princess 
Rukmi ṇī within the inner chambers of the pal-
ace. (28) Noting the brāhma ṇa’s joyful face and 
serene movements, saintly Rukmi ṇī, who could 
expertly interpret such symptoms, inquired 
from him with a pure smile. (29) The brāhma ṇa 
announced to her the arrival of Lord Yadunan-
dana and relayed the Lord’s promise to marry 
her. (30) Princess Vaidarbhī was overjoyed to 
learn of K ṛṣṇa’s arrival. Not finding anything 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

709 
 at hand suitable to offer the brāhma ṇa, she 
simply bowed down to him. (31)  

The King, upon hearing that K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma had come and were eager to witness 
his daughter’s wedding, went forth with abun-
dant offerings to greet Them as music re-
sounded. (32) Presenting Them with madhu -
parka, new clothing and other desirable gifts, 
he worshiped Them according to standard ritu-
als. (33) Generous King Bhī ṣmaka arranged 
opulent accommodations for the two Lords, 
and also for Their army and entourage. In this 
way he afforded Them proper hospitali ty. (34) 
Thus it was that Bhī ṣmaka gave all desirable 
things to the kings who had assembled for the 
occasion, honoring them as befitted their polit-
ical power, age, physical prowess and wealth. 
(35) When the residents of Vidarbha -pura 
heard that Lord K ṛṣṇa had come, they all went 
to see Him. With the cupped palms of their eyes 
they drank the honey of His lotus face. (36) 
[The people of the city said:] Rukmi ṇī, and no 
one else, deserves to become His wife, and He 
also, possessing such flawless beauty, is the 
only suitable husband for Princess Bhai ṣmī. 
(37) May Acyuta, the creator of the three 
worlds, be satisfied with whatever pious work 
we may have done and show His mercy by tak-
ing the hand of Vaidarbhī. (38)  

Bound by their swelling love, the city’s res-
ident s spoke in this way. Then the bride, pro-
tected by guards, left the inner palace to visit 
the temple of Ambikā. (39) Rukmi ṇī silently 
went out on foot to see the lotus feet of the deity 
Bhavānī. Accompanied by her mothers and 
girlfriends and protected by th e King’s valiant 
soldiers, who held their upraised weapons at the 
ready, she simply absorbed her mind in the lo-
tus feet of K ṛṣṇa. And all the while m ṛdaṅgas, 
conchshells, pa ṇavas, horns and other instru-
ments resounded. (40 -41) 

Behind the bride followed th ousands of 
prominent courtesans bearing various offerings 
and presents, along with well -adorned 
brāhma ṇas’ wives singing and reciting prayers 
and bearing gifts of garlands, scents, clothing and jewelry. There were also professional sing-
ers, musicians, bard s, chroniclers and heralds. 
(42-43) Upon reaching the goddess’s temple, 
Rukmi ṇī first washed her lotus feet and hands 
and then sipped water for purification. Thus 
sanctified and peaceful, she came into the pres-
ence of mother Ambikā. (44) The older wives 
of brāhma ṇas, expert in the knowledge of ritu-
als, led young Rukmi ṇī in offering respects to 
Bhavānī, who appeared with her consort, Lord 
Bhava. (45) [Princess Rukmi ṇī prayed:] O 
mother Ambikā, wife of Lord Siva, I repeatedly 
offer my obeisances unto you, tog ether with 
your children. May Lord K ṛṣṇa become my 
husband. Please grant this! (46) Rukmi ṇī wor-
shiped the goddess with water, scents, whole 
grains, incense, clothing, garlands, necklaces, 
jewelry and other prescribed offerings and 
gifts, and also with arra ys of lamps. The mar-
ried brāhma ṇa women each performed worship 
simultaneously with the same items, also offer-
ing savories and cakes, prepared betel nut, sa-
cred threads, fruit and sugarcane juice. (47 -48) 
The ladies gave the bride the remnants of the 
offeri ngs and then blessed her. She in turn 
bowed down to them and the deity and accepted 
the remnants as prasādam. (49) The princess 
then gave up her vow of silence and left the 
Ambikā temple, holding on to a maidservant 
with her hand, which was adorned with a jew-
eled ring. (50)  

Rukmi ṇī appeared as enchanting as the 
Lord’s illusory potency, who enchants even the 
sober and grave. Thus the kings gazed upon her 
virgin beauty, her shapely waist, and her lovely 
face adorned with earrings. Her hips were 
graced with a  jewel -studded belt, her breasts 
were just budding, and her eyes seemed appre-
hensive of her encroaching locks of hair. She 
smiled sweetly, her jasmine -bud teeth reflect-
ing the glow of her bimba -red lips. As she 
walked with the motions of a royal swan, the 
effulgence of her tinkling ankle bells beautified 
her feet. Seeing her, the assembled heroes were 
totally bewildered. Lust tore at their hearts. In-
deed, when the kings saw her broad smile and 
shy glance, they became stupefied, dropped 
their weapons and fel l unconscious to the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

710 
 ground from their elephants, chariots and 
horses. On the pretext of the procession, 
Rukmi ṇī displayed her beauty for K ṛṣṇa alone. 
Slowly she advanced the two moving lotus -
whorls of her feet, awaiting the arrival of the 
Supreme Lord. Wi th the fingernails of her left 
hand she pushed some strands of hair away 
from her face and shyly looked from the cor-
ners of her eyes at the kings standing before 
her. At that moment she saw K ṛṣṇa. Then, 
while His enemies looked on, the Lord seized 
the prin cess, who was eager to mount His char-
iot. (51 -55) Lifting the princess onto His char-
iot, whose flag bore the emblem of Garu ḍa, 
Lord Mādhava drove back the circle of kings. 
With Balarāma in the lead, He slowly exited, 
like a lion removing his prey from the midst of 
jackals. (56) The kings inimical to the Lord, 
headed by Jarāsandha, could not tolerate this 
humiliating defeat. They exclaimed, “Oh, 
damn us! Though we are mighty archers, mere 
cowherds have stolen our honor, just as puny 
animals might steal the h onor of lions!” (57)  

SB 10.54: The Marriage of K ṛṣṇa and 
Rukmi ṇī 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having thus spo-
ken, all those infuriated kings donned their ar-
mor and mounted their conveyances. Each 
king, bow in hand, was surrounded by his own 
army as he went aft er Lord K ṛṣṇa. (1) The com-
manders of the Yādava army, seeing the enemy 
racing to attack, turned to face them and stood 
firm, O King, twanging their bows. (2) 
Mounted on the backs of horses, the shoulders 
of elephants and the seats of chariots, the en-
emy ki ngs, expert with weapons, rained down 
arrows upon the Yadus like clouds pouring rain 
on mountains. (3) Slender -waisted Rukmi ṇī, 
seeing her Lord’s army covered by torrents of 
arrows, shyly looked at His face with fear -
stricken eyes. (4) In response the Lord  laughed 
and assured her, “Do not be afraid, beautiful -
eyed one. This enemy force is about to be de-
stroyed by your soldiers.” (5) The heroes of the 
Lord’s army, headed by Gada and Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, 
could not tolerate the aggression of the oppos-
ing kings. Thus wi th iron arrows they began to strike down the enemy’s horses, elephants and 
chariots. (6) The heads of soldiers fighting on 
chariots, horses and elephants fell to the ground 
by the millions; some heads wore earrings and 
helmets, others turbans. (7) Lying al l around 
were thighs, legs and fingerless hands, along 
with hands clutching swords, clubs and bows, 
and also the heads of horses, donkeys, ele-
phants, camels, wild asses and humans. (8) See-
ing their armies being struck down by the 
Vṛṣṇis, who were eager for  victory, the kings 
headed by Jarāsandha were discouraged and 
left the battlefield. (9)  

The kings approached Śiśupāla, who was 
disturbed like a man who has lost his wife. His 
complexion was drained of color, his enthusi-
asm was gone, and his face appeared dried up. 
The kings spoke to him as follows. (10) 
[Jarāsandha said:] Listen, Śiśupāla, O tiger 
among men, give up your depression. After all, 
embodied beings’ happiness and unhappiness 
is never seen to be permanent, O King. (11) Just 
as a puppet in the for m of a woman dances by 
the desire of the puppeteer, so this world, con-
trolled by the Supreme Lord, struggles in both 
happiness and misery. (12) In battle with K ṛṣṇa 
I and my twenty -three armies lost seventeen 
times; only once did I defeat Him. (13) But sti ll 
I never lament or rejoice, because I know this 
world is driven by time and fate. (14) And now 
all of us, great commanders of military leaders, 
have been defeated by the Yadus and their 
small entourage, who are protected by K ṛṣṇa. 
(15) Now our enemies ha ve conquered because 
time favors them, but in the future, when time 
is auspicious for us, we shall conquer. (16) 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus persuaded by his 
friends, Śiśupāla took his followers and went 
back to his capital. The surviving warriors also 
returned to their respective cities. (17)  

Powerful Rukmī, however, was especially 
envious of K ṛṣṇa. He could not bear the fact 
that K ṛṣṇa had carried off his sister to marry her 
in the Rāk ṣasa style. Thus he pursued the Lord 
with an entire military division.  (18) Frustrated 
and enraged, mighty -armed Rukmī, dressed in 
armor and wielding his bow, had sworn before 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

711 
 all the kings, “I shall not again enter Ku ṇḍina if 
I do not kill K ṛṣṇa in battle and bring Rukmi ṇī 
back with me. I swear this to you.” (19 -20) 
Having said this, he had mounted his chariot 
and told his charioteer, “Drive the horses 
quickly to where K ṛṣṇa is. He and I must fight. 
(21) “This wicked -minded cowherd boy, infat-
uated with His prowess, has violently abducted 
my sister. But today I will remove Hi s pride 
with my sharp arrows.” (22) Boasting thus, 
foolish Rukmī, ignorant of the true extent of the 
Supreme Lord’s power, approached Lord Go-
vinda in his lone chariot and challenged Him, 
“Just stand and fight!” (23) Rukmī drew his 
bow with great strength a nd struck Lord K ṛṣṇa 
with three arrows. Then he said, “Stand here for 
a moment, O defiler of the Yadu dynasty! (24) 
“Wherever You go, carrying off my sister like 
a crow stealing sacrificial butter, I will follow. 
This very day I shall relieve You of Your f alse 
pride, You fool, You deceiver, You cheater in 
battle! (25) “Release the girl before You are 
struck dead by my arrows and made to lie 
down!” In response to this, Lord K ṛṣṇa smiled, 
and with six arrows He struck Rukmī and broke 
his bow. (26) The Lord st ruck Rukmī’s four 
horses with eight arrows, his chariot driver with 
two, and the chariot’s flag with three. Rukmī 
grabbed another bow and struck Lord K ṛṣṇa 
with five arrows. (27) Although hit by these 
many arrows, Lord Acyuta again broke 
Rukmī’s bow. Rukmī  picked up yet another 
bow, but the infallible Lord broke that one to 
pieces as well. (28) Iron bludgeon, three -
pointed spear, sword and shield, pike, javelin-
whatever weapon Rukmī picked up, Lord Hari 
smashed it to bits. (29) Then Rukmī leaped 
down from hi s chariot and, sword in hand, 
rushed furiously toward K ṛṣṇa to kill Him, like 
a bird flying into the wind. (30) As Rukmī at-
tacked Him, the Lord shot arrows that broke 
Rukmī’s sword and shield into small pieces. 
Kṛṣṇa then took up His own sharp sword and 
prepared to kill Rukmī. (31) Seeing Lord K ṛṣṇa 
ready to kill her brother, saintly Rukmi ṇī was 
filled with alarm. She fell at her husband’s feet 
and piteously spoke as follows. (32) Śrī 
Rukmi ṇī said: O controller of all mystic power, 
immeasurable one, Lord of  lords, master of the universe! O all auspicious and mighty -armed 
one, please do not kill my brother! (33)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Rukmi ṇī’s utter 
fear caused her limbs to tremble and her mouth 
to dry up, while her throat choked up out of sor-
row. And in he r agitation her golden necklace 
scattered. She grasped K ṛṣṇa’s feet, and the 
Lord, feeling compassionate, desisted. (34) 
Lord K ṛṣṇa tied up the evil -doer with a strip of 
cloth. He then proceeded to disfigure Rukmī by 
comically shaving him, leaving parts of  his 
mustache and hair. By that time the Yadu he-
roes had crushed the extraordinary army of 
their opponents, just as elephants crush a lotus 
flower. (35) As the Yadus approached Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, they saw Rukmī in this sorry condition, 
practically dying of shame.  When the all -pow-
erful Lord Balarāma saw Rukmī, He compas-
sionately released him and spoke the following 
to Lord K ṛṣṇa. (36) [Lord Balarāma said:] My 
dear K ṛṣṇa, You have acted improperly! This 
deed will bring shame on Us, for to disfigure a 
close relative by shaving off his mustache and 
hair is as good as killing him. (37) Saintly lady, 
please do not be displeased with Us out of anx-
iety for your brother’s disfigurement. No one 
but oneself is responsible for one’s joy and 
grief, for a man experiences the res ult of his 
own deeds. (38) [Again addressing K ṛṣṇa, 
Balarāma said:] A relative should not be killed 
even if his wrongdoing warrants capital punish-
ment. Rather, he should be thrown out of the 
family. Since he has already been killed by his 
own sin, why kill  him again? (39) [Turning to 
Rukmi ṇī, Balarāma continued:] The code of sa-
cred duty for warriors established by Lord 
Brahmā enjoins that one may have to kill even 
his own brother. That is indeed a most dreadful 
law. (40) [Again Balarāma addressed K ṛṣṇa:] 
Blinded by conceit with their personal opu-
lences, proud men offend others for the sake of 
such things as kingdom, land, wealth, women, 
honor and power. (41)  

[To Rukmi ṇī, Balarāma said:]  Your atti-
tude is unfair, for like an ignorant person you 
wish good to t hose who are inimical to all liv-
ing beings and who have done evil to your true 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

712 
 well-wishers. (42) The Supreme Lord’s Māyā 
makes men forget their real selves, and thus, 
taking the body for the self, they consider oth-
ers to be friends, enemies or neutral par ties. 
(43) Those who are bewildered perceive the 
one Supreme Soul, who resides in all embodied 
beings, as many, just as one may perceive the 
light in the sky, or the sky itself, as many. (44) 
This material body, which has a beginning and 
an end, is compose d of the physical elements, 
the senses and the modes of nature. The body, 
imposed on the self by material ignorance, 
causes one to experience the cycle of birth and 
death. (45) O intelligent lady, the soul never un-
dergoes contact with or separation from in sub-
stantial, material objects, because the soul is 
their very origin and illuminator. Thus the soul 
resembles the sun, which neither comes in con-
tact with nor separates from the sense of sight 
and what is seen. (46) Birth and other transfor-
mations are unde rgone by the body but never 
by the self, just as change occurs for the moon’s 
phases but never for the moon, though the new -
moon day may be called the moon’s “death.” 
(47) As a sleeping person perceives himself, the 
objects of sense enjoyment and the fruit s of his 
acts within the illusion of a dream, so one who 
is unintelligent undergoes material existence. 
(48) Therefore, with transcendental knowledge 
dispel the grief that is weakening and con-
founding your mind. Please resume your natu-
ral mood, O princess of the pristine smile. (49)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus enlightened 
by Lord Balarāma, slender Rukmi ṇī forgot her 
depression and steadied her mind by spiritual 
intelligence. (50) Left with only his life air, cast 
out by his enemies and deprived of his stre ngth 
and bodily radiance, Rukmī could not forget 
how he had been disfigured. In frustration he 
constructed for his residence a large city, which 
he called Bhojaka ṭa. (51)  

Because he had promised “I will not reenter 
Kuṇḍina until I have killed wicked K ṛṣṇa and 
brought back my younger sister,” in a mood of 
angry frustration Rukmī took up residence at 
that very place. (52) Thus defeating all the op-posing kings, the Supreme Personality of God-
head brought the daughter of Bhī ṣmaka to His 
capital and married her according to the Vedic 
injunctions, O protector of the Kurus. (53) At 
that time, O King, there was great rejoicing in 
all the homes of Yadupurī, whose citizens 
loved only K ṛṣṇa, chief of the Yadus. (54) All 
the men and women, full of joy and adorned 
with s hining jewels and earrings, brought wed-
ding presents, which they reverently offered to 
the exquisitely dressed groom and bride. (55) 
The city of the V ṛṣṇis appeared most beautiful: 
there were tall, festive columns, and also arch-
ways decorated with flower g arlands, cloth 
banners and precious gems. Arrangements of 
auspicious, full waterpots, aguru -scented in-
cense, and lamps graced every doorway. (56) 
The city’s streets were cleansed by the intoxi-
cated elephants belonging to the beloved kings 
who were guests a t the wedding, and these ele-
phants further enhanced the beauty of the city 
by placing trunks of plantain and betel -nut trees 
in all the doorways. (57) Those who belonged 
to the royal families of the Kuru, S ṛñjaya, Kai-
keya, Vidarbha, Yadu and Kunti clans jo yfully 
met one another in the midst of the crowds of 
people excitedly running here and there. (58) 
The kings and their daughters were totally 
astonished to hear the story of Rukmi ṇī’s ab-
duction, which was being glorified in song eve-
rywhere. (59) Dvārakā’s citizens were over-
joyed to see K ṛṣṇa, the Lord of all opulence, 
united with Rukmi ṇī, the goddess of fortune. 
(60) 

SB 10.55: The History of Pradyumna  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Kāmadeva [Cu-
pid], an expansion of Vāsudeva, had previously 
been burned to ashes by  Rudra’s anger. Now, 
to obtain a new body, he merged back into the 
body of Lord Vāsudeva. (1) He took birth in the 
womb of Vaidarbhī from the seed of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa and received the name Pradyumna. In no 
respect was He inferior to His father. (2) The 
demon Śam bara, who could assume any form 
he desired, kidnapped the infant before He was 
even ten days old. Understanding Pradyumna 
to be his enemy, Śambara threw Him into the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

713 
 sea and then returned home. (3) A powerful fish 
swallowed Pradyumna, and this fish, along 
with others, was caught in a huge net and seized 
by fishermen. (4) The fishermen presented that 
extraordinary fish to Śambara, who had his 
cooks bring it to the kitchen, where they began 
cutting it up with a butcher knife. (5) Seeing a 
male child in the be lly of the fish, the cooks 
gave the infant to Māyāvatī, who was aston-
ished. Nārada Muni then appeared and ex-
plained to her everything about the child’s birth 
and His entering the fish’s abdomen. (6) 
Māyāvatī was in fact Cupid’s renowned wife, 
Rati. While w aiting for her husband to obtain a 
new bodyhis previous one having been burnt 
upshe had been assigned by Śambara to prepare 
vegetables and rice. Māyāvatī understood that 
this infant was actually Kāmadeva, and thus she 
began to feel love for Him. (7 -8) Afte r a short 
time, this son of K ṛṣṇaPradyumnaattained His 
full youth. He enchanted all women who gazed 
upon Him. (9)  

My dear King, with a bashful smile and 
raised eyebrows, Māyāvatīexhibited various 
gestures of conjugal attraction as she lovingly 
approached her husband, whose eyes were 
broad like the petals of a lotus, whose arms 
were very long and who was the most beautiful 
of men. (10) Lord Pradyumna told her, “O 
mother, your attitude has changed. You are 
overstepping the proper feelings of a mother 
and beh aving like a lover.” (11)  

Rati said:  You are the son of Lord Nārāya ṇa 
and were kidnapped from Your parents’ home 
by Śambara. I, Rati, am Your legitimate wife, 
O master, because You are Cupid. (12) That de-
mon, Śambara, threw You into the sea when 
You were not even ten days old, and a fish 
swallowed You. Then in this very place we re-
covered You from the fish’s abdomen, O mas-
ter. (13) Now kill this dreadful Śambara, Your 
formidable enemy. Although he knows hun-
dreds of magic spells, You can defeat him with 
bewildering magic and other techniques. (14) 
Your poor mother, having lost her son, cries for 
You like a kurarī bird. She is overwhelmed 
with love for her child, just like a cow that has lost its calf. (15) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī contin-
ued:] Speaking thus, Māyāvat ī gave to the great 
soul Pradyumna the mystic knowledge called 
Mahā -māyā, which vanquishes all other delud-
ing spells. (16) Pradyumna approached Śam-
bara and called him to battle, hurling intolera-
ble insults at him to foment a conflict. (17)  

Offended by the se harsh words, Śambara 
became as agitated as a kicked snake. He came 
out, club in hand, his eyes red with rage. (18) 
Śambara whirled his club swiftly about and 
then hurled it at the wise Pradyumna, producing 
a sound as sharp as a thunder crack. (19)  

As Śambara’s club came flying toward Him, 
Lord Pradyumna knocked it away with His 
own. Then, O King, Pradyumna angrily threw 
His club at the enemy. (20) Resorting to the 
black magic of the Daityas taught to him by 
Maya Dānava, Śambara suddenly appeared in 
the sky and released a downpour of weapons 
upon K ṛṣṇa’s son. (21) Harassed by this rain of 
weapons, Lord Raukmi ṇeya, the greatly pow-
erful warrior, made use of the mystic science 
called Mahā -māyā, which was created from the 
mode of goodness and which could defe at all 
other mystic power. (22) The demon then un-
leashed hundreds of mystic weapons belonging 
to the Guhyakas, Gandharvas, Piśācas, Uragas 
and Rāk ṣasas, but Lord Kār ṣṇi, Pradyumna, 
struck them all down. (23) Drawing His sharp -
edged sword, Pradyumna forcefu lly cut off 
Śambara’s head, complete with red mustache, 
helmet and earrings. (24) As the residents of the 
higher planets showered Pradyumna with flow-
ers and chanted His praises, His wife appeared 
in the sky and transported Him through the 
heavens, back to the city of Dvārakā. (25)  

O King, Lord Pradyumna and His wife re-
sembled a cloud accompanied by lightning as 
they descended from the sky into the inner 
quarters of K ṛṣṇa’s most excellent palace, 
which were crowded with lovely women. (26) 
The women of the p alace thought He was Lord 
Kṛṣṇa when they saw His dark -blue complex-
ion the color of a rain cloud, His yellow silk 
garments, His long arms and red -tinged eyes, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

714 
 His charming lotus face adorned with a pleas-
ing smile, His fine ornaments and His thick, 
curly bl ue hair. Thus the women became bash-
ful and hid themselves here and there. (27 -28) 
Gradually, from the slight differences between 
His appearance and K ṛṣṇa’s, the ladies realized 
He was not the Lord. Delighted and astonished, 
they approached Pradyumna and Hi s consort, 
who was a jewel among women. (29) Seeing 
Pradyumna, sweet -voiced, dark -eyed Rukmi ṇī 
remembered her lost son, and her breasts be-
came moist out of affection. (30)  

[Śrīmatī Rukmi ṇī-devī said:] Who is this 
lotus -eyed jewel among men? What man’s son  
is He, and what woman carried Him in her 
womb? And who is this woman He has taken 
as His wife? (31) If my lost son, who was kid-
napped from the maternity room, were still 
alive somewhere, He would be of the same age 
and appearance as this young man. (32) B ut 
how is it that this young man so much resem-
bles my own Lord, K ṛṣṇa, the wielder of 
Śārṅga, in His bodily form and His limbs, in 
His gait and the tone of His voice, and in His 
smiling glance? (33) Yes, He must be the same 
child I bore in my womb, since I  feel great af-
fection for Him and my left arm is quivering. 
(34) 

As Queen Rukmi ṇī conjectured in this way, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, arrived on the 
scene with Vasudeva and Devakī. (35) Alt-
hough Lord Janārdana knew perfectly well 
what had transpired, He remained silent. The 
sage Nārada, however, explained everything, 
beginning with Śambara’s kidnapping of the 
child. (36) When the women of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s 
palace heard this most amazing account, they 
joyfully greeted Pradyumna, who had been lost 
for many ye ars but who had now returned as if 
from the dead. (37) Devakī, Vasudeva, K ṛṣṇa, 
Balarāma and all the women of the palace, es-
pecially Queen Rukmi ṇī, embraced the young 
couple and rejoiced. (38) Hearing that lost Pra-
dyumna had come home, the residents of 
Dvārakā declared, “Ah, providence has al-
lowed this child to return as if from death!” (39) 
It is not astonishing that the palace women, who should have felt maternal affection for 
Pradyumna, privately felt ecstatic attraction for 
Him as if He were their own L ord. After all, the 
son exactly resembled His father. Indeed, Pra-
dyumna was a perfect reflection of the beauty 
of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the shelter of the goddess of for-
tune, and appeared before their eyes as Cupid 
Himself. Since even those on the level of His 
mothe r felt conjugal attraction for Him, then 
what to speak of how other women felt when 
they saw Him? (40)  

SB 10.56: The Syamantaka Jewel  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said : Having offended 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, Satrājit tried as best he could to 
atone by presenting Him with his d aughter and 
the Syamantaka jewel. (1)  

Mahārāja Parīk ṣit inquired:  O brāhma ṇa, 
what did King Satrājit do to offend Lord K ṛṣṇa? 
Where did he get the Syamantaka jewel, and 
why did he give his daughter to the Supreme 
Lord? (2)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Sūrya, t he sun -
god, felt great affection for his devotee Satrājit. 
Acting as his greatest friend, the demigod gave 
him the jewel called Syamantaka as a token of 
his satisfaction. (3) Wearing the jewel on his 
neck, Satrājit entered Dvārakā. He shone as 
brightly as the sun itself, O King, and thus he 
went unrecognized because of the jewel’s ef-
fulgence. (4) As the people looked at Satrājit 
from a distance, his brilliance blinded them. 
They presumed he was the sun -god, Sūrya, and 
went to tell Lord K ṛṣṇa, who was at tha t time 
playing at dice. (5) [The residents of Dvārakā 
said:] Obeisances unto You, O Nārāya ṇa, O 
holder of the conch, disc and club, O lotus -eyed 
Dāmodara, O Govinda, O cherished descendant 
of Yadu! (6) Lord Savitā has come to see You, 
O Lord of the univers e. He is blinding every-
one’s eyes with his intensely effulgent rays. (7) 
The most exalted demigods in the three worlds 
are certainly anxious to seek You out, O Lord, 
now that You have hidden Yourself among the 
Yadu dynasty. Thus the unborn sun -god has 
come  to see You here. (8)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

715 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Hearing 
these innocent words, the lotus -eyed Lord 
smiled broadly and said, “This is not the sun -
god, Ravi, but rather Satrājit, who is glowing 
because of his jewel.” (9) King Satrājit entered 
his opulent h ome, festively executing auspi-
cious rituals. He had qualified brāhma ṇas in-
stall the Syamantaka jewel in the house’s tem-
ple room. (10) Each day the gem would pro-
duce eight bhāras of gold, my dear Prabhu, and 
the place in which it was kept and properly 
worsh iped would be free of calamities such as 
famine or untimely death, and also of evils like 
snake bites, mental and physical disorders and 
the presence of deceitful persons. (11) On one 
occasion Lord K ṛṣṇa requested Satrājit to give 
the jewel to the Yadu kin g, Ugrasena, but Sa-
trājit was so greedy that he refused. He gave no 
thought to the seriousness of the offense he 
committed by denying the Lord’s request. (12)  

Once Satrājit’s brother, Prasena, having 
hung the brilliant jewel about his neck, 
mounted a hors e and went hunting in the forest. 
(13) A lion killed Prasena and his horse and 
took the jewel. But when the lion entered a 
mountain cave he was killed by Jāmbavān, who 
wanted the jewel. (14) Within the cave 
Jāmbavān let his young son have the Sya-
mantaka je wel as a toy to play with. Meanwhile 
Satrājit, not seeing his brother return, became 
deeply troubled. (15) He said, “K ṛṣṇa probably 
killed my brother, who went to the forest wear-
ing the jewel on his neck.” The general popu-
lace heard this accusation and beg an whisper-
ing it in one another’s ears. (16) When Lord 
Kṛṣṇa heard this rumor, He wanted to remove 
the stain on His reputation. So He took some of 
Dvārakā’s citizens with Him and set out to re-
trace Prasena’s path. (17) In the forest they 
found Prasena and his horse, both killed by the 
lion. Further on they found the lion dead on a 
mountainside, slain by Ṛkṣa [Jāmbavān]. (18)  

The Lord stationed His subjects outside the 
terrifying, pitch -dark cave of the king of the 
bears, and then He entered alone. (19) The re Lord K ṛṣṇa saw that the most precious of jew-
els had been made into a child’s plaything. De-
termined to take it away, He approached the 
child. (20) The child’s nurse cried out in fear 
upon seeing that extraordinary person standing 
before them. Jāmbavān, s trongest of the strong, 
heard her cries and angrily ran toward the Lord. 
(21) Unaware of His true position and thinking 
Him an ordinary man, Jāmbavān angrily began 
fighting with the Supreme Lord, his master. 
(22) The two fought furiously in single combat, 
each determined to win. Contending against 
each other with various weapons and then with 
stones, tree trunks and finally their bare arms, 
they struggled like two hawks battling over a 
piece of flesh. (23) The fight went on without 
rest for twenty -eight day s, the two opponents 
striking each other with their fists, which fell 
like the cracking blows of lightning. (24) His 
bulging muscles pummeled by the blows of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s fists, his strength faltering and his 
limbs perspiring, Jāmbavān, greatly astonished,  
finally spoke to the Lord. (25) [Jāmbavān said:] 
I know now that You are the life air and the 
sensory, mental and bodily strength of all living 
beings. You are Lord Vi ṣṇu, the original per-
son, the supreme, all -powerful controller. (26) 
You are the ultimat e creator of all creators of 
the universe, and of everything created You are 
the underlying substance. You are the subduer 
of all subduers, the Supreme Lord and Supreme 
Soul of all souls. (27) You are He who impelled 
the ocean to give way when His sidelong  
glances, slightly manifesting His anger, dis-
turbed the crocodiles and timi ṅgila fish within 
the watery depths. You are He who built a great 
bridge to establish His fame, who burned down 
the city of La ṅkā, and whose arrows severed 
the heads of Rāva ṇa, whic h then fell to the 
ground. (28) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] 
O King, Lord K ṛṣṇa then addressed the king of 
the bears, who had understood the truth. The lo-
tus-eyed Personality of Godhead, the son of 
Devakī, touched Jāmbavān with His hand, 
which bestows all  blessings, and spoke to His 
devotee with sublime compassion, His grave 
voice deeply resounding like a cloud. (29 -30) 
[Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] It is for this jewel, O lord of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

716 
 the bears, that we have come to your cave. I in-
tend to use the jewel to disprove the fa lse accu-
sations against Me. (31) Thus addressed, 
Jāmbavān happily honored Lord K ṛṣṇa by of-
fering Him his maiden daughter, Jāmbavatī, to-
gether with the jewel. (32)  

After Lord Śauri had entered the cave, the 
people of Dvārakā who had accompanied Him 
had wai ted twelve days without seeing Him 
come out again. Finally they had given up and 
returned to their city in great sorrow. (33) 
When Devakī, Rukmi ṇī-devī, Vasudeva and 
the Lord’s other relatives and friends heard that 
He had not come out of the cave, they al l la-
mented. (34) Cursing Satrājit, the sorrowful 
residents of Dvārakā approached the Durgā de-
ity named Candrabhāgā and prayed to her for 
Kṛṣṇa’s return. (35) When the citizens had fin-
ished worshiping the demigoddess, she spoke 
to them in response, promisin g to grant their re-
quest. Just then Lord K ṛṣṇa, who had achieved 
His purpose, appeared before them in the com-
pany of His new wife, filling them with joy. 
(36) Seeing Lord H ṛṣīkeśa return as if from 
death, accompanied by His new wife and wear-
ing the Syamant aka jewel on His neck, all the 
people were roused to jubilation. (37)  

Lord K ṛṣṇa summoned Satrājit to the royal 
assembly. There, in the presence of King 
Ugrasena, K ṛṣṇa announced the recovery of the 
jewel and then formally presented it to Satrājit. 
(38) H anging his head in great shame, Satrājit 
took the gem and returned home, all the while 
feeling remorse for his sinful behavior. (39) 
Pondering over his grievous offense and wor-
ried about the possibility of conflict with the 
Lord’s mighty devotees, King Sat rājit thought, 
“How can I cleanse myself of my contamina-
tion, and how may Lord Acyuta become satis-
fied with me? What can I do to regain my good 
fortune and avoid being cursed by the populace 
for being so short -sighted, miserly, foolish and 
avaricious? I sh all give my daughter, the jewel 
of all women, to the Lord, together with the 
Syamantaka jewel. That, indeed, is the only 
proper way to pacify Him.” (40 -42) Having thus intelligently made up his mind, King Sa-
trājit personally arranged to present Lord K ṛṣṇa 
with his fair daughter and the Syamantaka 
jewel. (43) The Lord married Satyabhāmā in 
proper religious fashion. Possessed of excellent 
behavior, along with beauty, broad -mindedness 
and all other good qualities, she had been 
sought by many men. (44) The Supr eme Per-
sonality of Godhead told Satrājit: We do not 
care to take this jewel back, O King. You are 
the sun -god’s devotee, so let it stay in your pos-
session. Thus We will also enjoy its benefits. 
(45) 

SB 10.57: Satrājit Murdered, the Jewel 
Returned  

Śrī Bād arāya ṇi said:  Although Lord Go-
vinda was fully aware of what had actually oc-
curred, when He heard reports that the Pā ṇḍa-
vas and Queen Kuntī had burned to death, He 
went with Lord Balarāma to the kingdom of the 
Kurus to fulfill the family obligations expecte d 
of Him. (1) The two Lords met with Bhī ṣma, 
Kṛpa, Vidura, Gāndhārī and Dro ṇa. Showing 
sorrow equal to theirs, They cried out, “Alas, 
how painful this is!” (2)  

Taking advantage of this opportunity, O 
King, Akrūra and K ṛtavarmā went to 
Śatadhanvā and said,  “Why not take the Sya-
mantaka jewel? (3) “Satrājit promised his jew-
ellike daughter to us but then gave her to K ṛṣṇa 
instead, contemptuously neglecting us. So why 
should Satrājit not follow his brother’s path?” 
(4) His mind thus influenced by their advice, 
wicked Śatadhanvā murdered Satrājit in his 
sleep simply out of greed. In this way the sinful 
Śatadhanvā shortened his own life span. (5) As 
the women of Satrājit’s palace screamed and 
helplessly wept, Śatadhanvā took the jewel and 
left, like a butcher afte r he has killed some ani-
mals. (6)  

When Satyabhāmā saw her dead father, she 
was plunged into grief. Lamenting “My father, 
my father! Oh, I am killed!” she fell uncon-
scious. (7) Queen Satyabhāmā put her father’s 
corpse in a large vat of oil and went to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

717 
 Hastināpura, where she sorrowfully told Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, who was already aware of the situation, 
about her father’s murder. (8) When Lord 
Kṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma heard this news, O 
King, They exclaimed, “Alas! This is the great-
est tragedy for Us!” Thus imitating th e ways of 
human society, They lamented, Their eyes 
brimming with tears. (9) The Supreme Lord re-
turned to His capital with His wife and elder 
brother. After arriving in Dvārakā, He readied 
Himself to kill Śatadhanvā and retrieve the 
jewel from him. (10)  

Upon learning that Lord K ṛṣṇa was prepar-
ing to kill him, Śatadhanvā was struck with 
fear. To save his life he approached K ṛtavarmā 
and begged him for help, but K ṛtavarmā replied 
as follows. (11) [K ṛtavarmā said:] I dare not of-
fend the Supreme Lords, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma. 
Indeed, how can one who troubles Them expect 
any good fortune? Ka ṁsa and all his followers 
lost both their wealth and their lives because of 
enmity toward Them, and after battling Them 
seventeen times Jarāsandha was left without 
even a chariot.  (12-13) His appeal refused, 
Śatadhanvā went to Akrūra and begged him for 
protection. But Akrūra similarly told him, 
“Who would oppose the two Personalities of 
Godhead if he knew Their strength? (14) “It is 
the Supreme Lord who creates, maintains and 
destr oys this universe simply as His pastime. 
The cosmic creators cannot even understand 
His purpose, bewildered as they are by His il-
lusory Māyā. (15) “As a child of seven, K ṛṣṇa 
uprooted an entire mountain and held it aloft as 
easily as a young boy picks up a  mushroom. 
(16) “I offer my obeisances to that Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, whose every 
deed is amazing. He is the Supreme Soul, the 
unlimited source and fixed center of all exist-
ence.” (17) His appeal thus rejected by Akrūra 
also, Śatadhanvā pla ced the precious jewel in 
Akrūra’s care and fled on a horse that could 
travel one hundred yojanas [eight hundred 
miles]. (18)  

My dear King, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
mounted K ṛṣṇa’s chariot, which flew the flag 
of Garu ḍa and was yoked with tremendously swift hor ses, and pursued Their elder’s mur-
derer. (19) In a garden on the outskirts of Mith-
ilā, the horse Śatadhanvā was riding collapsed. 
Terrified, he abandoned the horse and began to 
flee on foot, with K ṛṣṇa in angry pursuit. (20) 
As Śatadhanvā fled on foot, the  Supreme Lord, 
also going on foot, cut off his head with His 
sharp -edged disc. The Lord then searched 
Śatadhanvā’s upper and lower garments for the 
Syamantaka jewel. (21) Not finding the jewel, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa went to His elder brother and said, 
“We have killed  Śatadhanvā uselessly. The 
jewel isn’t here.” (22) To this Lord Balarāma 
replied, “Indeed, Śatadhanvā must have placed 
the jewel in the care of someone. You should 
return to Our city and find that person. (23) “I 
wish to visit King Videha, who is most dear  to 
Me.” O King, having said this, Lord Balarāma, 
the beloved descendant of Yadu, entered the 
city of Mithilā. (24) The King of Mithilā imme-
diately rose from his seat when he saw Lord 
Balarāma approaching. With great love the 
King honored the supremely wor shipable Lord 
by offering Him elaborate worship, as stipu-
lated by scriptural injunctions. (25) The al-
mighty Lord Balarāma stayed in Mithilā for 
several years, honored by His affectionate dev-
otee Janaka Mahārāja. During that time 
Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s son Duryodhan a learned from 
Balarāma the art of fighting with a club. (26) 
Lord Keśava arrived in Dvārakā and described 
the demise of Śatadhanvā and His own failure 
to find the Syamantaka jewel. He spoke in a 
way that would please His beloved, 
Satyabhāmā. (27) Lord K ṛṣṇa then had the var-
ious funeral rites performed for His deceased 
relative, Satrājit. The Lord attended the funeral 
along with well -wishers of the family. (28)  

When Akrūra and K ṛtavarmā, who had orig-
inally incited Śatadhanvā to commit his crime, 
heard that  he had been killed, they fled Dvārakā 
in terror and took up residence elsewhere. (29) 
In Akrūra’s absence ill omens arose in 
Dvārakā, and the citizens began to suffer con-
tinually from physical and mental distresses, as 
well as from disturbances caused by higher 
powers and by creatures of the earth. (30) Some 
men proposed [that the troubles were due to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

718 
 Akrūra’s absence], but they had forgotten the 
glories of the Supreme Lord, which they them-
selves had so often described. Indeed, how can 
calamities occur in a place where the Personal-
ity of Godhead, the residence of all the sages, 
resides? (31) [The elders said:] Previously, 
when Lord Indra had withheld rain from Kāsī 
[Benares], the king of that city gave his daugh-
ter Gāndinī to Śvaphalka, who was then visit-
ing him. It soon rained in the kingdom of Kāśī. 
(32) Wherever his equally powerful son Akrūra 
stays, Lord Indra will provide sufficient rain. 
Indeed, that place will be free of miseries and 
untimely deaths. (33) Hearing these words 
from the elders, Lord Janā rdana, though aware 
that the absence of Akrūra was not the only 
cause of the evil omens, had him summoned 
back to Dvārakā and spoke to him. (34) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa honored Akrūra, greeted him confiden-
tially and spoke pleasant words with him. Then 
the Lord, who was  fully aware of Akrūra’s 
heart by virtue of His being the knower of eve-
rything, smiled and addressed him: “O master 
of charity, surely the opulent Syamantaka jewel 
was left in your care by Śatadhanvā and is still 
with you. Indeed, We have known this all 
along. (35 -36) “Since Satrājit had no sons, his 
daughter’s sons should receive his inheritance. 
They should pay for memorial offerings of wa-
ter and pi ṇḍa, clear their grandfather’s out-
standing debts and keep the remainder of the 
inheritance for themselves. ( 37) “Nevertheless, 
the jewel should remain in your care, O trust-
worthy Akrūra, because no one else can keep it 
safely. But please show the jewel just once, 
since My elder brother does not fully believe 
what I have told Him about it. In this way, O 
most for tunate one, you will pacify My rela-
tives. [Everyone knows you have the jewel, for] 
you are now continually performing sacrifices 
on altars of gold.” (38 -39) Thus shamed by 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s conciliatory words, the son of 
Śvaphalka brought out the jewel from whe re he 
had concealed it in his clothing and gave it to 
the Lord. The brilliant gem shone like the sun. 
(40) After the almighty Lord had shown the 
Syamantaka jewel to His relatives, thus dispel-
ling the false accusations against Him, He re-
turned it to Akrūra.  (41)  
This narration, rich with descriptions of the 
prowess of Lord Śrī Vi ṣṇu, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, removes sinful reactions 
and bestows all auspiciousness. Anyone who 
recites, hears or remembers it will drive away 
his own infamy and sins a nd attain peace. (42)  

SB 10.58: K ṛṣṇa Marries Five Princesses  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Once, the su-
premely opulent Personality of Godhead went 
to Indraprastha to visit the Pā ṇḍavas, who had 
again appeared in public. Accompanying the 
Lord were Yuyudhāna and  other associates. (1) 
When the Pā ṇḍavas saw that Lord Mukunda 
had arrived, those heroic sons of P ṛthā all stood 
up at once, like the senses responding to the re-
turn of the life air. (2) The heroes embraced 
Lord Acyuta, and the touch of His body freed 
them  of sin. Looking at His affectionate, smil-
ing face, they were overwhelmed with joy. (3) 
After the Lord bowed down at the feet of 
Yudhi ṣṭhira and Bhīma and firmly embraced 
Arjuna, He accepted obeisances from the twin 
brothers, Nakula and Sahadeva. (4) Fault less 
Draupadī, the Pā ṇḍavas’ newly married wife, 
slowly and somewhat timidly approached Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, who sat on an exalted seat, and offered 
Him her obeisances. (5) Sātyaki also accepted 
a seat of honor after receiving worship and wel-
come from the Pā ṇḍavas,  and the Lord’s other 
companions, being duly honored, sat down in 
various places. (6) The Lord then went to see 
His aunt, Queen Kuntī. He bowed down to her 
and she embraced Him, her eyes moist with 
great affection. Lord K ṛṣṇa inquired from her 
and her daug hter-in-law, Draupadī, about their 
welfare, and they in turn questioned Him at 
length about His relatives [in Dvārakā]. (7) So 
overcome by love that her throat choked up and 
her eyes filled with tears, Queen Kuntī remem-
bered the many troubles she and her s ons had 
endured. Thus she addressed Lord K ṛṣṇa, who 
appears before His devotees to drive away their 
distress (8)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

719 
 [Queen Kuntī said:]  My dear K ṛṣṇa, our 
welfare was assured only when You remem-
bered us, Your relatives, and gave us Your pro-
tection by sending  my brother to visit us. (9) 
For You, the well -wishing friend and Supreme 
Soul of the universe, there is never any illusion 
of “us” and “them.” Yet even so, residing 
within the hearts of all, You eradicate the suf-
ferings of those who remember You constantl y. 
(10) 

King Yudhi ṣṭhira said:  O supreme control-
ler, I do not know what pious deeds we fools 
have done so that we can see You, whom the 
masters of yogic perfection rarely see. (11) Re-
quested by the King to stay with them, the al-
mighty Lord remained happil y in Indraprastha 
during the months of the rainy season, giving 
joy to the eyes of the city’s residents. (12) Once 
Arjuna, the slayer of powerful enemies, donned 
his armor, mounted his chariot flying the flag 
of Hanumān, took up his bow and his two inex-
haustible quivers, and went to sport with Lord 
Kṛṣṇa in a large forest filled with fierce ani-
mals. (13 -14) With his arrows Arjuna shot ti-
gers, boars and buffalo in that forest, along with 
rurus, śarabhas, gavayas, rhinoceroses, black 
deer, rabbits and porcupi nes. (15) A crew of 
servants carried to King Yudhi ṣṭhira the slain 
animals fit to be offered in sacrifice on some 
special occasion. Then, feeling thirsty and 
tired, Arjuna went to the bank of the Yamunā. 
(16) After the two K ṛṣṇas bathed there, they 
drank t he river’s clear water. The great warriors 
then saw an attractive young girl walking 
nearby. (17) Sent by his friend, Arjuna ap-
proached the exceptional young woman, who 
possessed beautiful hips, fine teeth and a lovely 
face, and inquired from her as follow s. (18) 
[Arjuna said:] Who are you, O fine -waisted 
lady? Whose daughter are you, and where do 
you come from? What are you doing here? I 
think you must be looking for a husband. Please 
explain everything, O beautiful one. (19)  

Śrī Kālindī said:  I am the da ughter of the 
sun-god. I desire to get as my husband the most 
excellent and munificent Lord Vi ṣṇu, and to 
that end I am performing severe penances. (20) I will accept no husband other than Him, the 
abode of the goddess of fortune. May that 
Mukunda, the Sup reme Personality, the shelter 
of the helpless, be pleased with me. (21) I am 
known as Kālindī, and I live in a mansion my 
father built for me within the water of the Ya-
munā. There I will stay until I meet Lord 
Acyuta. (22) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] 
Arjuna repeated all this to Lord Vāsudeva, who 
was already aware of it. The Lord then took 
Kālindī onto His chariot and went back to see 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira. (23)  

[Describing a previous incident, 
Śukadeva Gosvāmīsaid :] Upon the request of 
the Pā ṇḍavas, Lord K ṛṣṇa had Viśvakarmā 
build them a most wonderful and amazing city. 
(24) The Supreme Lord stayed in that city for 
some time to please His devotees. On one oc-
casion, Śrī K ṛṣṇa wanted to give the Khā ṇḍava 
forest as a gift to Agni, and so the Lord became 
Arjuna’s  charioteer. (25) Being pleased, O 
King, Lord Agni presented Arjuna with a bow, 
a set of white horses, a chariot, a pair of inex-
haustible quivers, and armor that no fighter 
could pierce with weapons. (26) When the de-
mon Maya was saved from the fire by his friend 
Arjuna, Maya presented him with an assembly 
hall, in which Duryodhana would later mistake 
water for a solid floor. (27)  

Then Lord K ṛṣṇa, given leave by Arjuna and 
other well -wishing relatives and friends, re-
turned to Dvārakā with Sātyaki and the re st of 
His entourage. (28) The supremely auspicious 
Lord then married Kālindī on a day when the 
season, the lunar asterism and the configura-
tions of the sun and other heavenly bodies were 
all propitious. In this way He brought the great-
est pleasure to His d evotees. (29)  

Vindya and Anuvindya, who shared the 
throne of Avantī, were followers of 
Duryodhana’s. When the time came for their 
sister [Mitravindā] to select her husband in the 
svaya ṁvara ceremony, they forbade her to 
choose K ṛṣṇa, although she was attr acted to 
Him. (30) My dear King, Lord K ṛṣṇa forcibly 
took away Princess Mitravindā, the daughter of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

720 
 His aunt Rājādhidevī, before the eyes of the ri-
val kings. (31)  

O King, Nagnajit, the very pious King of 
Kośala, had a lovely daughter named Satyā, or 
Nāgna jitī. (32) The kings who came as suitors 
were not allowed to marry her unless they could 
subdue seven sharp -horned bulls. These bulls 
were extremely vicious and uncontrollable, and 
they could not tolerate even the smell of warri-
ors. (33) When the Supreme P ersonality of 
Godhead, the master of the Vai ṣṇavas, heard of 
the princess who was to be won by the con-
queror of the bulls, He went to the capital of 
Kauśalya with a large army. (34) The King of 
Kośala, pleased to see Lord K ṛṣṇa, worshiped 
Him by rising fro m his throne and offering Him 
a seat of honor and substantial gifts. Lord K ṛṣṇa 
also greeted the King respectfully. (35) When 
the King’s daughter saw that most agreeable 
suitor arrive, she immediately desired to have 
Him, the Lord of Goddess Rāma. She pray ed, 
“May He become my husband. If I have kept 
my vows, may the sacred fire bring about the 
fulfillment of my hopes. (36) “Goddess 
Lakṣmī, Lord Brahma, Lord Śiva and the rulers 
of the various planets place the dust of His lotus 
feet on their heads, and to p rotect the codes of 
religion, which He has created, He assumes 
pastime incarnations at various times. How 
may that Supreme Personality of Godhead be-
come pleased with me?” (37) King Nagnajit 
first worshiped the Lord properly and then ad-
dressed Him: “O Nārāy aṇa, Lord of the uni-
verse, You are full in Your own spiritual pleas-
ure. Therefore, what can this insignificant per-
son do for You?” (38)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O beloved de-
scendant of Kuru, the Supreme Lord was 
pleased, and after accepting a comfortable se at 
He smiled and addressed the King in a voice as 
deep as the rumbling of a cloud. (39)  

The Supreme Lord said:  O ruler of men, 
learned authorities condemn begging for a per-
son in the royal order who is executing his reli-
gious duties. Even so, desiring you r friendship, 
I ask you for your daughter, though We offer no gifts in exchange. (40) The King said: My 
Lord, who could be a better husband for my 
daughter than You, the exclusive abode of all 
transcendental qualities? On Your body the 
goddess of fortune h erself resides, never leav-
ing You for any reason. (41) But to ascertain 
the proper husband for my daughter, O chief of 
the Sātvatas, we previously set a condition to 
test the prowess of her suitors. (42) These seven 
wild bulls are impossible to tame, O her o. They 
have defeated many princes, breaking their 
limbs. (43) If You can subdue them, O descend-
ant of Yadu, You will certainly be the appropri-
ate bridegroom for my daughter, O Lord of Śrī. 
(44) Upon hearing these terms, the Lord tight-
ened His clothing, ex panded Himself into 
seven forms and easily subdued the bulls. (45) 
Lord Śauri tied up the bulls, whose pride and 
strength were now broken, and pulled them 
with ropes just as a child playfully pulls 
wooden toy bulls. (46) Then King Nagnajit, 
pleased and ast onished, presented his daughter 
to Lord K ṛṣṇa. The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead accepted this suitable bride in the 
proper Vedic fashion. (47) The King’s wives 
felt the greatest ecstasy upon attaining Lord 
Kṛṣṇa as the dear husband of the royal princess,  
and a mood of great festivity arose. (48) 
Conchshells, horns and drums resounded, 
along with vocal and instrumental music and 
the sounds of brāhma ṇas, invoking blessings. 
The joyful men and women adorned them-
selves with fine clothing and garlands. (49) As  
the dowry, powerful King Nagnajit gave ten 
thousand cows, three thousand young maidser-
vants wearing golden ornaments on their necks 
and bedecked in fine clothing, nine thousand el-
ephants, a hundred times as many chariots as 
elephants, a hundred times as m any horses as 
chariots, and a hundred times as many manser-
vants as horses. (50 -51) The King of Kośala, 
his heart melting with affection, had the bride 
and groom seated on their chariot, and then he 
sent them on their way surrounded by a great 
army. (52)  

When the intolerant kings who had been ri-
val suitors heard what had happened, they tried 
to stop Lord K ṛṣṇa on the road as He took His 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

721 
 bride home. But just as the bulls had broken the 
kings’ strength before, the Yadu warriors broke 
it now. (53) Arjuna, wiel der of the Gā ṇḍīva 
bow, was always eager to please his friend 
Kṛṣṇa, and thus he drove back those opponents, 
who were shooting torrents of arrows at the 
Lord. He did this just as a lion drives away in-
significant animals. (54) Lord Devakī -suta, the 
chief of  the Yadus, then took His dowry and 
Satyā to Dvārakā and continued to live there 
happily. (55)  

Bhadrā was a princess of the Kaikeya king-
dom and the daughter of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s paternal 
aunt Śrutakīrti. The Lord married Bhadrā when 
her brothers, headed by San tardana, offered her 
to Him. (56) Then the Lord married Lak ṣmaṇā, 
the daughter of the King of Madra. K ṛṣṇa ap-
peared alone at her svaya ṁvara ceremony and 
took her away, just as Garu ḍa once stole the 
demigods’ nectar. (57)  

Lord K ṛṣṇa also acquired thousands  of other 
wives equal to these when He killed 
Bhaumāsura and freed the beautiful maidens 
the demon was holding captive. (58)  

SB 10.59: The Killing of the Demon 
Naraka  

[King Parīk ṣit said:]  How was 
Bhaumāsura, who kidnapped so many women, 
killed by the Su preme Lord? Please narrate this 
adventure of Lord Śār ṅgadhanvā’s. (1)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After Bhauma 
had stolen the earrings belonging to Indra’s 
mother, along with Varu ṇa’s umbrella and the 
demigods’ playground at the peak of Mandara 
mountain, Indra  went to Lord K ṛṣṇa and in-
formed Him of these misdeeds. The Lord, tak-
ing His wife Satyabhāmā with Him, then rode 
on Garu ḍa to Prāgyoti ṣa-pura, which was sur-
rounded on all sides by fortifications consisting 
of hills, unmanned weapons, water, fire and 
wind, and by obstructions of mura -pāśa wire. 
(2-3) With His club the Lord broke through the 
rock fortifications; with His arrows, the 
weapon fortifications; with His disc, the fire, water and wind fortifications; and with His 
sword, the mura -pāśa cables. (4) Wit h the 
sound of His conchshell Lord Gadādhara then 
shattered the magic seals of the fortress, along 
with the hearts of its brave defenders, and with 
His heavy club He demolished the surrounding 
earthen ramparts. (5)  

The five -headed demon Mura, who slept at  
the bottom of the city’s moat, awoke and rose 
up out of the water when he heard the vibration 
of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s Pāñcajanya conchshell, a 
sound as terrifying as the thunder at the end of 
the cosmic age. (6) Shining with the blinding, 
terrible effulgence of t he sun’s fire at the end of 
a millennium, Mura seemed to be swallowing 
up the three worlds with his five mouths. He 
lifted up his trident and fell upon Garu ḍa, the 
son of Tārk ṣya, like an attacking snake. (7) 
Mura whirled his trident and then hurled it 
fiercely at Garu ḍa, roaring from all five 
mouths. The sound filled the earth and sky, all 
directions and the limits of outer space, until it 
reverberated against the very shell of the uni-
verse. (8) Then with two arrows Lord Hari 
struck the trident flying towa rd Garu ḍa and 
broke it into three pieces. Next the Lord hit 
Mura’s faces with several arrows, and the de-
mon angrily hurled his club at the Lord. (9) As 
Mura’s club sped toward Him on the battle-
field, Lord Gadāgraja intercepted it with His 
own and broke it into thousands of pieces. 
Mura then raised his arms high and rushed at 
the unconquerable Lord, who easily sliced off 
his heads with His disc weapon. (10) Lifeless, 
Mura’s decapitated body fell into the water like 
a mountain whose peak has been severed by t he 
power of Lord Indra’s thunderbolt. The de-
mon’s seven sons, enraged by their father’s 
death, prepared to retaliate. (11) Ordered by 
Bhaumāsura, Mura’s seven sonsTāmra, 
Antarik ṣa, Śrava ṇa, Vibhāvasu, Vasu, 
Nabhasvān and Aru ṇafollowed their general, 
Pīṭha, onto the battlefield bearing their weap-
ons. (12) These fierce warriors furiously at-
tacked invincible Lord K ṛṣṇa with arrows, 
swords, clubs, spears, lances and tridents, but 
the Supreme Lord, with unfailing prowess, cut 
this mountain of weapons into tiny p ieces with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

722 
 His arrows. (13) The Lord severed the heads, 
thighs, arms, legs and armor of these opponents 
led by Pī ṭha and sent them all to the abode of 
Yamarāja. Narakāsura, the son of the earth, 
could not contain his fury when he saw the fate 
of his milita ry leaders. Thus he went out of the 
citadel with elephants born from the Milk 
Ocean who were exuding mada from their fore-
heads out of excitement. (14) Lord K ṛṣṇa and 
His wife, mounted upon Garu ḍa, looked like a 
cloud with lightning sitting above the sun. S ee-
ing the Lord, Bhauma released his Śataghnī 
weapon at Him, whereupon all of Bhauma’s 
soldiers simultaneously attacked with their 
weapons. (15) At that moment Lord Gadāgraja 
shot His sharp arrows at Bhaumāsura’s army. 
These arrows, displaying variegated fe athers, 
soon reduced that army to a mass of bodies with 
severed arms, thighs and necks. The Lord sim-
ilarly killed the opposing horses and elephants. 
(16) 

Lord Hari then struck down all the missiles 
and weapons the enemy soldiers threw at Him, 
O hero of th e Kurus, destroying each and every 
one with three sharp arrows. Meanwhile 
Garu ḍa, as he carried the Lord, struck the en-
emy’s elephants with his wings. Beaten by 
Garu ḍa’s wings, beak and talons, the elephants 
fled back into the city, leaving Narakāsura 
alone on the battlefield to oppose K ṛṣṇa. (17 -
19) Seeing his army driven back and tormented 
by Garu ḍa, Bhauma attacked him with his 
spear, which had once defeated Lord Indra’s 
thunderbolt. But though struck by that mighty 
weapon, Garu ḍa was not shaken. Indeed,  he 
was like an elephant hit with a flower garland. 
(20) Bhauma, frustrated in all his attempts, took 
up his trident to kill Lord K ṛṣṇa. But even be-
fore he could release it, the Lord cut off his 
head with His razor -sharp cakra as the demon 
sat atop his ele phant. (21) Fallen on the ground, 
Bhaumāsura’s head shone brilliantly, decorated 
as it was with earrings and an attractive helmet. 
As cries of “Alas, alas!” and “Well done!” 
arose, the sages and principal demigods wor-
shiped Lord Mukunda by showering Him wi th 
flower garlands. (22)  
 The goddess of the earth then approached 
Lord K ṛṣṇa and presented Him with Aditi’s 
earrings, which were made of glowing gold in-
laid with shining jewels. She also gave Him a 
Vaijayantī flower garland, Varu ṇa’s umbrella 
and the peak  of Mandara Mountain. (23) O 
King, after bowing down to Him and then 
standing with joined palms, the goddess, her 
mind filled with devotion, began to praise the 
Lord of the universe, whom the best of demi-
gods worship. (24)  

Goddess Bhūmi said:  Obeisances u nto 
You, O Lord of the chief demigods, O holder 
of the conchshell, disc and club. O Supreme 
Soul within the heart, You assume Your vari-
ous forms to fulfill Your devotees’ desires. 
Obeisances unto You. (25) My respectful obei-
sances are unto You, O Lord, who se abdomen 
is marked with a depression like a lotus flower, 
who are always decorated with garlands of lo-
tus flowers, whose glance is as cool as the lotus 
and whose feet are engraved with lotuses. (26) 
Obeisances unto You, the Supreme Lord 
Vāsudeva, Vi ṣṇu, the primeval person, the 
original seed. Obeisances unto You, the omnis-
cient one. (27) Obeisances unto You of unlim-
ited energies, the unborn progenitor of this uni-
verse, the Absolute. O Soul of the high and the 
low, O Soul of the created elements, O all -per-
vading Supreme Soul, obeisances unto You. 
(28) 

Desiring to create, O unborn master, You in-
crease and then assume the mode of passion. 
You do likewise with the mode of ignorance 
when You wish to annihilate the universe and 
with goodness when You wish to ma intain it. 
Nonetheless, You remain uncovered by these 
modes. You are time, the pradhāna, and the 
puruṣa, O Lord of the universe, yet still You are 
separate and distinct. (29) This is illusion: that 
earth, water, fire, air, ether, sense objects, dem-
igods, m ind, the senses, false ego and the total 
material energy exist independent of You. In 
fact, they are all within You, my Lord, who are 
one without a second. (30) Here is the son of 
Bhaumāsura. Frightened, he is approaching 
Your lotus feet, since You remove the distress 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

723 
 of all who seek refuge in You. Please protect 
him. Place Your lotus hand, which dispels all 
sins, upon his head. (31)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus entreated 
by Goddess Bhūmi in words of humble devo-
tion, the Supreme Lord bestowed fearlessness 
upon her grandson and then entered 
Bhaumāsura’s palace, which was filled with all 
manner of riches. (32) There Lord K ṛṣṇa saw 
sixteen thousand royal maidens, whom 
Bhauma had taken by force from various kings. 
(33) The women became enchanted when they 
saw th at most excellent of males enter. In their 
minds they each accepted Him, who had been 
brought there by destiny, as their chosen hus-
band. (34) With the thought “May providence 
grant that this man become my husband,” each 
and every princess absorbed her hear t in con-
templation of K ṛṣṇa. (35) The Lord had the 
princesses arrayed in clean, spotless garments 
and then sent them in palanquins to Dvārakā, 
together with great treasures of chariots, horses 
and other valuables. (36) Lord K ṛṣṇa also dis-
patched sixty -four swift white elephants, de-
scendants of Airāvata, who each sported four 
tusks. (37)  

The Lord then went to the abode of Indra, 
the demigods’ king, and gave mother Aditi her 
earrings; there Indra and his wife worshiped 
Kṛṣṇa and His beloved consort Satyabhām ā. 
Then, at Satyabhāmā’s behest the Lord up-
rooted the heavenly pārijāta tree and put it on 
the back of Garu ḍa. After defeating Indra and 
all the other demigods, K ṛṣṇa brought the 
pārijāta to His capital. (38 -39) Once planted, 
the pārijāta tree beautified t he garden of Queen 
Satyabhāmā’s palace. Bees followed the tree all 
the way from heaven, greedy for its fragrance 
and sweet sap. (40) Even after Indra had bowed 
down to Lord Acyuta, touched His feet with the 
tips of his crown and begged the Lord to fulfill 
his desire, that exalted demigod, having 
achieved his purpose, chose to fight with the 
Supreme Lord. What ignorance there is among 
the gods! To hell with their opulence! (41)  
 Then the imperishable Supreme Personality, 
assuming a separate form for each bri de, duly 
married all the princesses simultaneously, each 
in her own palace. (42) The Lord, performer of 
the inconceivable, constantly remained in each 
of His queens’ palaces, which were unequaled 
and unexcelled by any other residence. There, 
although fully  satisfied within Himself, He en-
joyed with His pleasing wives, and like an or-
dinary husband He carried out His household 
duties. (43) Thus those women obtained as their 
husband the husband of the goddess of fortune, 
although even great demigods like Brahmā  do 
not know how to approach Him. With ever -in-
creasing pleasure they experienced loving at-
traction for Him, exchanged smiling glances 
with Him and reciprocated with Him in ever -
fresh intimacy, replete with joking and femi-
nine shyness. (44) Although the Sup reme 
Lord’s queens each had hundreds of maidser-
vants, they chose to personally serve the Lord 
by approaching Him humbly, offering Him a 
seat, worshiping Him with excellent parapher-
nalia, bathing and massaging His feet, giving 
Him pān to chew, fanning Him, anointing Him 
with fragrant sandalwood paste, adorning Him 
with flower garlands, dressing His hair, arrang-
ing His bed, bathing Him, and presenting Him 
with various gifts. (45)  

SB 10.60: Lord K ṛṣṇa Teases Queen 
Rukmi ṇī. 

Śrī Bādarāya ṇi said:  Once, in the c ompany 
of her maidservants, Queen Rukmi ṇī was per-
sonally serving her husband, the spiritual mas-
ter of the universe, by fanning Him as He re-
laxed on her bed. (1) The unborn Personality of 
Godhead, the supreme controller, who creates, 
maintains and then devo urs this universe 
simply as His play, took birth among the Yadus 
to preserve His own laws. (2) Queen Rukmi ṇī’s 
quarters were extremely beautiful, boasting a 
canopy hung with brilliant strings of pearls, as 
well as effulgent jewels serving as lamps. Gar-
lands of jasmine and other flowers hung here 
and there, attracting swarms of humming bees, 
and the spotless rays of the moon shone through 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

724 
 the holes of the lattice windows. As aguru in-
cense drifted out of the window holes, my dear 
King, the breeze wafting the scent of the 
pārijāta grove carried the mood of a garden into 
the room. There the Queen served her husband, 
the Supreme Lord of all the worlds, as He re-
clined upon an opulent pillow on her bed, 
which was as soft and white as the foam of 
milk. (3 -6) From he r maidservant’s hand God-
dess Rukmi ṇī took a yak -hair fan with a jew-
eled handle, and then she began to worship her 
master by fanning Him. (7) Her hand adorned 
with rings, bangles and the cāmara fan, Queen 
Rukmi ṇī looked resplendent standing near 
Lord K ṛṣṇa. Her jeweled ankle -bells tinkled, 
and her necklace glittered, reddened by the 
kuṅkuma from her breasts, which were covered 
by the end of her sari. On her hips she wore a 
priceless belt. (8) As He contemplated her, the 
goddess of fortune herself, who desire s only 
Him, Lord K ṛṣṇa smiled. The Lord assumes 
various forms to enact His pastimes, and He 
was pleased that the form the goddess of for-
tune had assumed was just suitable for her to 
serve as His consort. Her charming face was 
adorned with curling hair, ear rings, a locket on 
her neck, and the nectar of her bright, happy 
smile. The Lord then spoke to her as follows. 
(9) 

The Supreme Lord said:  My dear princess, 
you were sought after by many kings as power-
ful as the rulers of planets. They were all abun-
dantly endowed with political influence, 
wealth, beauty, generosity and physical 
strength. (10) Since your brother and father of-
fered you to them, why did you reject the King 
of Cedi and all those other suitors, who stood 
before you, maddened by Cupid? Why, inste ad, 
did you choose Us, who are not at all your 
equal? (11) Terrified of these kings, O lovely -
browed one, We took shelter in the ocean. We 
have become enemies of powerful men, and 
We practically abandoned Our royal throne. 
(12) O fine -browed lady, women ar e usually 
destined to suffer when they stay with men 
whose behavior is uncertain and who pursue a 
path not approved by society. (13) We have no 
material possessions, and We are dear to those who similarly have nothing. Therefore, O slen-
der one, the wealthy  hardly ever worship Me. 
(14) Marriage and friendship are proper be-
tween two people who are equal in terms of 
their wealth, birth, influence, physical appear-
ance and capacity for good progeny, but never 
between a superior and an inferior. (15) O 
Vaidarbhī,  not being farsighted, you didn’t re-
alize this, and therefore you chose Us as your 
husband, even though We have no good quali-
ties and are glorified only by deluded beggars. 
(16) Now you should definitely accept a more 
suitable husband, a first -class man of  the royal 
order who can help you achieve everything you 
want, both in this life and the next. (17) Kings 
like Śiśupāla, Śālva, Jarāsandha and Danta-
vakra all hate Me, O beautiful -thighed one, and 
so does your elder brother Rukmī. (18) It was 
to dispel the arrogance of these kings that I car-
ried you away, My good woman, for they were 
blinded by the intoxication of power. My pur-
pose was to curb the strength of the wicked. 
(19) We care nothing for wives, children and 
wealth. Always satisfied within Ourselves, We 
do not work for body and home, but like a light, 
We merely witness. (20)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Rukmi ṇī had 
thought herself especially beloved by the Lord 
because He never left her company. By saying 
these things to her He vanquished her pride, 
and the n He stopped speaking. (21) Goddess 
Rukmi ṇī had never before heard such unpleas-
antries from her beloved, the Lord of universal 
rulers, and she became frightened. A tremor 
arose in her heart, and in terrible anxiety she 
began to cry. (22) With her tender fo ot, efful-
gent with the reddish glow of her nails, she 
scratched the ground, and tears darkened by her 
eye makeup sprinkled her ku ṅkuma -reddened 
breasts. There she stood, face downward, her 
voice choked up by extreme sorrow. (23) 
Rukmi ṇī’s mind was overwhel med with unhap-
piness, fear and grief. Her bangles slipped from 
her hand, and her fan fell to the ground. In her 
bewilderment she suddenly fainted, her hair 
scattering all about as her body fell to the 
ground like a plantain tree blown over by the 
wind. (24 ) Seeing that His beloved was so 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

725 
 bound to Him in love that she could not under-
stand the full meaning of His teasing, merciful 
Lord K ṛṣṇa felt compassion for her. (25) The 
Lord quickly got down from the bed. Manifest-
ing four arms, He picked her up, gathered  her 
hair and caressed her face with His lotus hand. 
(26) Wiping her tear -filled eyes and her breasts, 
which were stained by tears of grief, the Su-
preme Lord, the goal of His devotees, em-
braced His chaste wife, who desired nothing 
but Him, O King. Expert i n the art of pacifica-
tion, Śrī K ṛṣṇa tenderly consoled pitiable 
Rukmi ṇī, whose mind was bewildered by His 
clever joking and who did not deserve to suffer 
so. (27 -28) 

The Supreme Lord said:  O Vaidarbhī, do 
not be displeased with Me. I know that you are 
fully devoted to Me. I only spoke in jest, dear 
lady, because I wanted to hear what you would 
say. (29) I also wanted to see your face with lips 
trembling in loving anger, the reddish corners 
of your eyes throwing sidelong glances and the 
line of your beautif ul eyebrows knit in a frown. 
(30) The greatest pleasure worldly household-
ers can enjoy at home is to spend time joking 
with their beloved wives, My dear timid and 
temperamental one. (31)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, Queen 
Vaidarbhī was fully pacified by  the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead and understood that 
His words had been spoken in jest. Thus she 
gave up her fear that her beloved would reject 
her. (32) Smiling bashfully as she cast charm-
ing, affectionate glances upon the face of the 
Lord, the best of  males, Rukmi ṇī spoke the fol-
lowing, O descendant of Bharata. (33)  

Śrī Rukmi ṇī said:  Actually, what You have 
said is true, O lotus -eyed one. I am indeed un-
suitable for the almighty Personality of God-
head. What comparison is there between that 
Supreme Lord , who is master of the three pri-
mal deities and who delights in His own glory, 
and myself, a woman of mundane qualities 
whose feet are grasped by fools? (34) Yes, my 
Lord Urukrama, You lay down within the 
ocean as if afraid of the material modes, and thus in pure consciousness You appear within 
the heart as the Supersoul. You are always bat-
tling against the foolish material senses, and in-
deed even Your servants reject the privilege of 
royal dominion, which leads to the blindness of 
ignorance. (35) Your move ments, inscrutable 
even for sages who relish the honey of Your lo-
tus feet, are certainly incomprehensible for hu-
man beings who behave like animals. And just 
as Your activities are transcendental, O all -
powerful Lord, so too are those of Your follow-
ers. (36 ) You possess nothing because there is 
nothing beyond You. Even the great enjoyers 
of tributeBrahmā and other demigodspay trib-
ute to You. Those who are blinded by their 
wealth and absorbed in gratifying their senses 
do not recognize You in the form of deat h. But 
to the gods, the enjoyers of tribute, You are the 
most dear, as they are to You. (37) You are the 
embodiment of all human goals and are Your-
self the final aim of life. Desiring to attain You, 
O all -powerful Lord, intelligent persons aban-
don everythi ng else. It is they who are worthy 
of Your association, not men and women ab-
sorbed in the pleasure and grief resulting from 
their mutual lust. (38) Knowing that great sages 
who have renounced the sannyāsī’s da ṇḍa pro-
claim Your glories, that You are the Sup reme 
Soul of all the worlds, and that You are so gra-
cious that You give away even Your own self, 
I chose You as my husband, rejecting Lord 
Brahmā, Lord Śiva and the rulers of heaven, 
whose aspirations are all frustrated by the force 
of time, which is born from Your eyebrows. 
What interest, then, could I have in any other 
suitors? (39)  

My Lord, as a lion drives away lesser ani-
mals to claim his proper tribute, You drove off 
the assembled kings with the resounding twang 
of Your Śār ṅga bow and then claimed me,  Your 
fair share. Thus it is sheer foolishness, my dear 
Gadāgraja, for You to say You took shelter in 
the ocean out of fear of those kings. (40) Want-
ing Your association, the best of kingsA ṅga, 
Vainya, Jāyanta, Nāhu ṣa, Gaya and othersa-
bandoned their absolu te sovereignty and en-
tered the forest to seek You out. How could 
those kings suffer frustration in this world, O 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

726 
 lotus -eyed one? (41) The aroma of Your lotus 
feet, which is glorified by great saints, awards 
people liberation and is the abode of Goddess 
Lakṣmī. What woman would take shelter of any 
other man after savoring that aroma? Since You 
are the abode of transcendental qualities, what 
mortal woman with the insight to distinguish 
her own true interest would disregard that fra-
grance and depend instead on  someone who is 
always subject to terrible fear? (42) Because 
You are suitable for me, I have chosen You, the 
master and Supreme Soul of all the worlds, who 
fulfill our desires in this life and the next. May 
Your feet, which give freedom from illusion by 
approaching their worshiper, give shelter to me, 
who have been wandering from one material 
situation to another. (43) O infallible K ṛṣṇa, let 
each of the kings You named become the hus-
band of a woman whose ears have never heard 
Your glories, which are sung in the assemblies 
of Śiva and Brahmā. After all, in the house-
holds of such women these kings live like 
asses, oxen, dogs, cats and slaves. (44) A 
woman who fails to relish the fragrance of the 
honey of Your lotus feet becomes totally be-
fooled, and thus she  accepts as her husband or 
lover a living corpse covered with skin, whisk-
ers, nails, head -hair and body -hair and filled 
with flesh, bones, blood, parasites, feces, mu-
cus, bile and air. (45) O lotus -eyed one, though 
You are satisfied within Yourself and thu s 
rarely turn Your attention toward me, please 
bless me with steady love for Your feet. It is 
when You assume a predominance of passion 
in order to manifest the universe that You 
glance upon me, showing me what is indeed 
Your greatest mercy. (46) Actually,  I don’t 
consider Your words false, Madhūsudana. 
Quite often an unmarried girl is attracted to a 
man, as in the case of Ambā. (47) The mind of 
a promiscuous woman always hankers for new 
lovers, even if she is married. An intelligent 
man should not keep suc h an unchaste wife, for 
if he does he will lose his good fortune both in 
this life and the next. (48)  

The Supreme Lord said:  O saintly lady, O 
princess, We deceived you only because We wanted to hear you speak like this. Indeed, eve-
rything you said in rep ly to My words is most 
certainly true. (49) Whatever benedictions you 
hope for in order to become free of material de-
sires are ever yours, O fair and noble lady, for 
you are My unalloyed devotee. (50) O sinless 
one, I have now seen firsthand the pure love 
and chaste attachment you have for your hus-
band. Even though shaken by My words, your 
mind could not be pulled away from Me. (51) 
Although I have the power to award spiritual 
liberation, lusty persons worship Me with pen-
ance and vows in order to get My ble ssings for 
their mundane family life. Such persons are be-
wildered by My illusory energy. (52) O su-
preme reservoir of love, unfortunate are they 
who even after obtaining Me, the Lord of both 
liberation and material riches, hanker only for 
material treasures . These worldly gains can be 
found even in hell. Since such persons are ob-
sessed with sense gratification, hell is a fitting 
place for them. (53) Fortunately, O mistress of 
the house, you have always rendered Me faith-
ful devotional service, which liberates  one from 
material existence. This service is very difficult 
for the envious to perform, especially for a 
woman whose intentions are wicked, who lives 
only to gratify her bodily demands, and who in-
dulges in duplicity. (54) In all My palaces I can 
find no o ther wife as loving as you, O most re-
spectful one. When you were to be married, you 
disregarded all the kings who had assembled to 
seek your hand, and simply because you had 
heard authentic accounts concerning Me, you 
sent a brāhma ṇa to Me with your confid ential 
message. (55) When your brother, who had 
been defeated in battle and then disfigured, was 
later killed during a gambling match on 
Aniruddha’s wedding day, you felt unbearable 
grief, yet out of fear of losing Me you spoke not 
a word. By this silence you have conquered Me. 
(56) When you sent the messenger with your 
most confidential plan and yet I delayed going 
to you, you began to see the whole world as 
void and wanted to quit your body, which could 
never have been given to anyone but Me. May 
this gre atness of yours remain with you always; 
I can do nothing to reciprocate except joyfully 
thank you for your devotion. (57)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

727 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  And so the self -
satisfied Supreme Lord of the universe enjoyed 
with the goddess of fortune, engaging her in 
lovers’ talks and thus imitating the ways of hu-
man society. (58) The almighty Lord Hari, pre-
ceptor of all the worlds, similarly behaved like 
a conventional householder in the palaces of 
His other queens, performing the religious du-
ties of a family man. (59)  

SB 10.61: Lord Balarāma Slays Rukmī  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Each of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s wives gave birth to ten sons, who were 
not less than their father, having all His per-
sonal opulence. (1) Because each of these prin-
cesses saw that Lord Acyuta never left her pal-
ace, each thought herself the Lord’s favorite. 
These women did not understand the full truth 
about Him. (2) The Supreme Lord’s wives were 
fully enchanted by His lovely, lotuslike face, 
His long arms and large eyes, His loving 
glances imbued with laughte r, and His charm-
ing talks with them. But with all their charms 
these ladies could not conquer the mind of the 
all-powerful Lord. (3) The arched eyebrows of 
these sixteen thousand queens enchantingly ex-
pressed those ladies’ secret intentions through 
coyly s miling sidelong glances. Thus their eye-
brows boldly sent forth conjugal messages. Yet 
even with these arrows of Cupid, and with other 
means as well, they could not agitate Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s senses. (4)  

Thus these women obtained as their husband 
the master of t he goddess of fortune, although 
even great demigods like Brahmā do not know 
how to approach Him. With ever -increasing 
pleasure, they felt loving attraction for Him, ex-
changed smiling glances with Him, eagerly an-
ticipated associating with Him in ever -fresh in-
timacy and enjoyed in many other ways. (5) 
Although the Supreme Lord’s queens each had 
hundreds of maidservants, they chose to per-
sonally serve the Lord by approaching Him 
humbly, offering Him a seat, worshiping Him 
with excellent paraphernalia, bathing and mas-saging His feet, giving Him pān to chew, fan-
ning Him, anointing Him with fragrant sandal-
wood paste, adorning Him with flower gar-
lands, dressing His hair, arranging His bed, 
bathing Him and presenting Him with various 
gifts. (6)  

Among Lord K ṛṣṇa’s w ives, each of whom 
had ten sons, I previously mentioned eight prin-
cipal queens. I shall now recite for you the 
names of those eight queens’ sons, headed by 
Pradyumna. (7) The first son of Queen Rukmi ṇī 
was Pradyumna, and also born of her were 
Cārude ṣṇa, Su deṣṇa and the powerful 
Cārudeha, along with Sucāru, Cārugupta, 
Bhadracāru, Cārucandra, Vicāru and Cāru, the 
tenth. None of these sons of Lord Hari was less 
than his father. (8 -9) The ten sons of 
Satyabhāmā were Bhānu, Subhānu, Svarbhānu, 
Prabhānu, Bhānumān , Candrabhānu, B ṛhad-
bhānu, Atibhānu(the eighth), Śrībhānu and 
Pratibhānu. Sāmba, Sumitra, Purujit, Śatajit, 
Sahasrajit, Vijaya, Citraketu, Vasumān, Dra-
viḍa and Kratu were the sons of Jāmbavatī. 
These ten, headed by Sāmba, were their fa-
ther’s favorites. (10 -12) The sons of Nāgnajitī 
were Vīra, Candra, Aśvasena, Citragu, 
Vegavān, V ṛṣa, Āma, Śa ṅku, Vasu and the op-
ulent Kunti. (13) Śruta, Kavi, V ṛṣa, Vīra, 
Subāhu, Bhadra, Śānti, Darśa and Pūr ṇamāsa 
were sons of Kālindī. Her youngest son was 
Somaka. (14)  

Mādrā’ s sons were Pragho ṣa, Gātravān, 
Siṁha, Bala, Prabala, Ūrdhaga, Mahāśakti, 
Saha, Oja and Aparājita. (15) Mitravindā’s 
sons were V ṛka, Har ṣa, Anila, G ṛdhra, 
Vardhana, Unnāda, Mahā ṁsa, Pāvana, Vahni 
and K ṣudhi. (16) Sa ṅgrāmajit, B ṛhatsena, Śūra, 
Prahara ṇa, Ar ijit, Jaya and Subhadra were the 
sons of Bhadrā, together with Vāma, Āyur and 
Satyaka. (17) Dīptimān, Tāmratapta and others 
were the sons of Lord K ṛṣṇa and Rohi ṇī. Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s son Pradyumna fathered the greatly 
powerful Aniruddha in the womb of Rukma-
vatī, the daughter of Rukmī. O King, this took 
place while they were living in the city of Bho-
jakaṭa. (18) My dear King, the sons and grand-
sons of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s children numbered in the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

728 
 tens of millions. Sixteen thousand mothers 
gave rise to this dynasty. (19)  

King Parīk ṣit said:  How could Rukmī give 
his daughter to his enemy’s son? After all, 
Rukmī had been defeated by Lord K ṛṣṇa in bat-
tle and was waiting for an opportunity to kill 
Him. Please explain this to me, O learned 
onehow these two inimical parties beca me 
united through marriage. (20) Mystic yogīs can 
perfectly see that which has not yet happened, 
as well as things in the past or present, beyond 
the senses, remote or blocked by physical ob-
stacles. (21)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  At her 
svaya ṁvara ceremon y, Rukmavatī herself 
chose Pradyumna, who was the re -embodiment 
of Cupid. Then, although He fought alone on a 
single chariot, Pradyumna defeated the assem-
bled kings in battle and took her away. (22)  

Though Rukmī always remembered his en-
mity toward Lord K ṛṣṇa, who had insulted him, 
in order to please his sister he sanctioned his 
daughter’s marriage to his nephew. (23) O 
King, Balī, the son of K ṛtavarmā, married 
Rukmi ṇī’s young daughter, large -eyed Cāru-
matī. (24)  

Rukmī gave his granddaughter Rocanā to 
his daughter’s son, Aniruddha, despite Rukmī’s 
relentless feud with Lord Hari. Although 
Rukmī considered this marriage irreligious, he 
wanted to please his sister, bound as he was by 
the ropes of affection. (25) On the joyous occa-
sion of that marriage, O King, Queen Rukmi ṇī, 
Lord Balarāma, Lord K ṛṣṇa and several of the 
Lord’s sons, headed by Sāmba and Pradyumna, 
went to the city of Bhojaka ṭa. (26) After the 
wedding, a group of arrogant kings headed by 
the King of Kali ṅga told Rukmī, “You should 
defeat Balarāma a t dice. He’s not expert at dice, 
O King, but still He’s quite addicted to it.” Thus 
advised, Rukmī challenged Balarāma and be-
gan a gambling match with Him. (27 -28) In that 
match Lord Balarāma first accepted a wager of 
one hundred coins, then one thousand, then ten 
thousand. Rukmī won this first round, and the King of Kali ṅga laughed loudly at Lord 
Balarāma, showing all his teeth. Lord Balarāma 
could not tolerate this. (29) Next Rukmī ac-
cepted a bet of one hundred thousand coins, 
which Lord Balarāma won. But  Rukmī tried to 
cheat, declaring “I’m the winner!” (30) Shak-
ing with anger like the ocean on the full -moon 
day, handsome Lord Balarāma, His naturally 
reddish eyes even redder in His fury, accepted 
a wager of one hundred million gold coins. (31) 
Lord Balarā ma fairly won this wager also, but 
Rukmī again resorted to cheating and declared, 
“I have won! Let these witnesses here say what 
they saw.” (32)  

Just then a voice from the sky declared, 
“Balarāma has fairly won this wager. Rukmī is 
surely lying.” (33) Urg ed on by the wicked 
kings, Rukmī ignored the divine voice. In fact 
destiny itself was urging Rukmī on, and thus he 
ridiculed Lord Balarāma as follows. (34) 
[Rukmī said:] You cowherds who wander 
about the forests know nothing about dice. 
Playing with dice a nd sporting with arrows are 
only for kings, not for the likes of You. (35) 
Thus insulted by Rukmī and ridiculed by the 
kings, Lord Balarāma was provoked to anger. 
In the midst of the auspicious wedding assem-
bly, He raised His club and struck Rukmī dead. 
(36) The King of Kali ṅga, who had laughed at 
Lord Balarāma and shown his teeth, tried to run 
away, but the furious Lord quickly seized him 
on his tenth step and knocked out all his teeth. 
(37) Tormented by Lord Balarāma’s club, the 
other kings fled in fear, their arms, thighs and 
heads broken and their bodies drenched in 
blood. (38) When His brother -in-law Rukmī 
was slain, Lord K ṛṣṇa neither applauded nor 
protested, O King, for He feared jeopardizing 
His affectionate ties with either Rukmi ṇī or 
Balarāma. (39)  Then the descendants of 
Daśārha, headed by Lord Balarāma, seated 
Aniruddha and His bride on a fine chariot and 
set off from Bhojaka ṭa for Dvārakā. Having 
taken shelter of Lord Madhusūdana, they had 
fulfilled all their purposes. (40)  

SB 10.62: The Meeting  of Ū ṣā and 
Aniruddha  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

729 

King Parīk ṣit said:  The best of the Yadus 
married Bā ṇāsura’s daughter, Ū ṣā, and as a re-
sult a great, fearsome battle occurred between 
Lord Hari and Lord Śa ṅkara. Please explain 
everything about this incident, O most power-
ful of mysti cs. (1)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Bāṇa was the old-
est of the hundred sons fathered by the great 
saint Bali Mahārāja, who gave the whole earth 
in charity to Lord Hari when He appeared as 
Vāmanadeva. Bā ṇāsura, born from Bali’s se-
men, became a great devotee of Lord Śiva. His 
behavior was always respectable, and he was 
generous, intelligent, truthful and firm in his 
vows. The beautiful city of Śo ṇitapura was un-
der his dominion. Because Lord Śiva had fa-
vored him, the very demigods waited on 
Bāṇāsura like menial se rvants. Once, when 
Śiva was dancing his tā ṇḍava-nṛtya, Bā ṇa espe-
cially satisfied the lord by playing a musical ac-
companiment with his one thousand arms. (2) 
The lord and master of all created beings, the 
compassionate refuge of his devotees, glad-
dened Bā ṇāsura by offering him the benedic-
tion of his choice. Bā ṇa chose to have him, 
Lord Śiva, as the guardian of his city. (3)  

Bāṇāsura was intoxicated with his strength. 
One day, when Lord Śiva was standing beside 
him, Bā ṇāsura touched the lord’s lotus feet wit h 
his helmet, which shone like the sun, and spoke 
to him as follows. (4) [Bā ṇāsura said:] O Lord 
Mahādeva, I bow down to you, the spiritual 
master and controller of the worlds. You are 
like the heavenly tree that fulfills the desires of 
those whose desires  are unfulfilled. (5) These 
one thousand arms you bestowed upon me have 
become merely a heavy burden. Besides you, I 
find no one in the three worlds worthy to fight. 
(6) 

Eager to fight with the elephants who rule 
the directions, O primeval lord, I went fo rth, 
pulverizing mountains with my arms, which 
were itching for battle. But even those great el-
ephants fled in fear. (7) Hearing this, Lord Śiva 
became angry and replied, “Your flag will be broken, fool, when you have done battle with 
one who is my equal. That fight will vanquish 
your conceit.” (8) Thus advised, unintelligent 
Bāṇāsura was delighted. The fool then went 
home, O King, to wait for that which Lord Gi-
riśa had predicted: the destruction of his prow-
ess. (9)  

In a dream Bā ṇa’s daughter, the maiden Ū ṣā, 
had an amorous encounter with the son of Pra-
dyumna, though she had never before seen or 
heard of her lover. (10) Losing sight of Him in 
her dream, Ū ṣā suddenly sat up in the midst of 
her girlfriends, crying out “Where are You, my 
lover?” She was greatl y disturbed and embar-
rassed. (11) Bā ṇāsura had a minister named 
Kumbhā ṇḍa, whose daughter was Citralekhā. 
A companion of Ū ṣā’s, she was filled with cu-
riosity, and thus she inquired from her friend. 
(12) [Citralekhā said:] Who are you searching 
for, O fine -browed one? What is this hankering 
you’re feeling? Until now, O princess, I haven’t 
seen any man take your hand in marriage. (13)  

[Ūṣā said:]  In my dream I saw a certain man 
who had a darkblue complexion, lotus eyes, 
yellow garments and mighty arms. He wa s the 
kind who touches women’s hearts. (14) It is 
that lover I search for. After making me drink 
the honey of His lips, He has gone elsewhere, 
and thus He has thrown me, hankering fer-
vently for Him, into the ocean of distress. (15)  

Citralekhā said:  I will  remove your dis-
tress. If He is to be found anywhere in the three 
worlds, I will bring this future husband of yours 
who has stolen your heart. Please show me who 
He is. (16) Saying this, Citralekhā proceeded to 
draw accurate pictures of various demigods, 
Gandharvas, Siddhas, Cāra ṇas, Pannagas, 
Daityas, Vidyādharas, Yak ṣas and humans. 
(17) O King, among the humans, Citralekhā 
drew pictures of the V ṛṣṇis, including 
Śūrasena, Ānakadundubhi, Balarāma and 
Kṛṣṇa. When Ū ṣā saw the picture of Pra-
dyumna she became b ashful, and when she saw 
Aniruddha’s picture she bent her head down in 
embarrassment. Smiling, she exclaimed, “He’s 
the one! It’s Him!” (18 -19) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

730 

Citralekhā, endowed with mystic powers, 
recognized Him as K ṛṣṇa’s grandson 
[Aniruddha]. My dear King, she then traveled 
by the mystic skyway to Dvārakā, the city un-
der Lord K ṛṣṇa’s protection. (20) There she 
found Pradyumna’s son Aniruddha sleeping 
upon a fine bed. With her yogic power she took 
Him away to Śo ṇitapura, where she presented 
her girlfriend Ū ṣā with her  beloved. (21) When 
Ūṣā beheld Him, the most beautiful of men, her 
face lit up with joy. She took the son of Pra-
dyumna to her private quarters, which men 
were forbidden even to see, and there enjoyed 
with Him. (22) Ū ṣā worshiped Aniruddha with 
faithful ser vice, offering Him priceless gar-
ments, along with garlands, fragrances, in-
cense, lamps, sitting places and so on. She also 
offered Him beverages, all types of food, and 
sweet words. As He thus remained hidden in 
the young ladies’ quarters, Aniruddha did no t 
notice the passing of the days, for His senses 
were captivated by Ū ṣā, whose affection for 
Him ever increased. (23 -24) 

The female guards eventually noticed un-
mistakable symptoms of romantic involvement 
in Ūṣā, who, having broken her maiden vow, 
was bein g enjoyed by the Yadu hero and show-
ing signs of conjugal happiness. The guards 
went to Bā ṇāsura and told him, “O King, we 
have detected in your daughter the kind of im-
proper behavior that spoils the reputation of a 
young girl’s family. (25 -26) “We have bee n 
carefully watching over her, never leaving our 
posts, O master, so we cannot understand how 
this maiden, whom no man can even see, has 
been corrupted within the palace.” (27)  

Very agitated to hear of his daughter’s cor-
ruption, Bā ṇāsura rushed at once to  the maid-
ens’ quarters. There he saw the pride of the Ya-
dus, Aniruddha. (28) Bā ṇāsura saw before him 
Cupid’s own son, possessed of unrivaled 
beauty, with dark -blue complexion, yellow gar-
ments, lotus eyes and formidable arms. His face 
was adorned with efful gent earrings and hair, 
and also with smiling glances. As He sat oppo-
site His most auspicious lover, playing with her at dice, there hung between His arms a garland 
of spring jasmines that had been smeared with 
kuṅkuma powder from her breasts when He 
had e mbraced her. Bā ṇāsura was astonished to 
see all this. (29 -30) Seeing Bā ṇāsura enter with 
many armed guards, Aniruddha raised His iron 
club and stood resolute, ready to strike anyone 
who attacked Him. He resembled death person-
ified holding his rod of punish ment. (31) As the 
guards converged on Him from all sides, trying 
to capture Him, Aniruddha struck them just as 
the leader of a pack of boars strikes back at 
dogs. Hit by His blows, the guards fled the pal-
ace, running for their lives with shattered 
heads, t highs and arms. (32) But even as 
Aniruddha was striking down the army of 
Bāṇa, that powerful son of Bali angrily caught 
Him with the mystic nāga -pāśa ropes. When 
Ūṣā heard of Aniruddha’s capture, she was 
overwhelmed with grief and depression; her 
eyes fill ed with tears, and she wept. (33)  

SB 10.63: Lord K ṛṣṇa Fights with 
Bāṇāsura  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O descendant of 
Bharata, the relatives of Aniruddha, not seeing 
Him return, continued to lament as the four 
rainy months passed. (1) After hearing from 
Nārada the news of Aniruddha’s deeds and His 
capture, the V ṛṣṇis, who worshiped Lord K ṛṣṇa 
as their personal Deity, went to Śo ṇitapura. (2) 
With Lord Balarāma and Lord K ṛṣṇa in the 
lead, the chiefs of the Sātvata clanPradyumna, 
Sātyaki, Gada, Sāmba, Sāra ṇa, N anda, 
Upananda, Bhadra and othersconverged with 
an army of twelve divisions and laid siege to 
Bāṇasura’s capital, completely surrounding the 
city on all sides. (3 -4) Bā ṇāsura became filled 
with anger upon seeing them destroy his city’s 
suburban gardens, ra mparts, watchtowers and 
gateways, and thus he went out to confront 
them with an army of equal size. (5) Lord Ru-
dra, accompanied by his son Kārtikeya and the 
Pramathas, came riding on Nandi, his bull car-
rier, to fight Balarāma and K ṛṣṇa on Bā ṇa’s be-
half. (6 ) A most astonishing, tumultuous and 
hair-raising battle then commenced, with Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

731 
 Kṛṣṇa matched against Lord Śa ṅkara, and Pra-
dyumna against Kārtikeya. (7) Lord Balarāma 
fought with Kumbhā ṇḍa and Kūpakar ṇa, 
Sāmba with Bā ṇa’s son, and Sātyaki with Bā ṇa. 
(8) Brahmā and the other ruling demigods, 
along with Siddhas, Cāra ṇas and great sages, as 
well as Gandharvas, Apsarās and Yak ṣas, all 
came in their celestial airplanes to watch. (9) 
With sharp -pointed arrows discharged from 
His bow Śār ṅga, Lord K ṛṣṇa drove aw ay the 
various followers of Lord ŚivaBhūtas, Pra-
mathas, Guhyakas, Ḍākinīs, Yātudhānas, 
Vetālas, Vināyakas, Pretas, Mātās, Piśācas, 
Kuṣmāṇḍas and Brahma -rākṣasas. (10 -11) 
Lord Śiva, wielder of the trident, shot various 
weapons at Lord K ṛṣṇa, wielder of Śār ṅga. But 
Lord K ṛṣṇa was not in the least perplexed: He 
neutralized all these weapons with appropriate 
counterweapons. (12) Lord K ṛṣṇa counteracted 
a brahmāstra with another brahmāstra, a wind 
weapon with a mountain weapon, a fire weapon 
with a rain weapon, and Lord Śiva’s personal 
pāśupatāstra weapon with His own personal 
weapon, the nārāya ṇāstra. (13) After bewilder-
ing Lord Śiva by making him yawn with a 
yawning weapon, Lord K ṛṣṇa proceeded to 
strike down Bā ṇāsura’s army with His sword, 
club and arrows. (14 ) Lord Kārtikeya was dis-
tressed by the flood of Pradyumna’s arrows 
raining down from all sides, and thus he fled 
the battlefield on his peacock as blood poured 
from his limbs. (15) Kumbhā ṇḍa and Kūpa-
karṇa, tormented by Lord Balarāma’s club, fell 
down dead.  When the soldiers of these two de-
mons saw that their leaders had been killed, 
they scattered in all directions. (16)  

Bāṇāsura was furious to see his entire mili-
tary force being torn apart. Leaving his fight 
with Sātyaki, he charged across the battlefield  
on his chariot and attacked Lord K ṛṣṇa. (17) 
Excited to a frenzy by the fighting, Bā ṇa sim-
ultaneously pulled taut all the strings of his five 
hundred bows and fixed two arrows on each 
string. (18) Lord Śrī Hari split every one of 
Bāṇāsura’s bows simultane ously, and also 
struck down his chariot driver, chariot and 
horses. The Lord then sounded His conchshell. (19) Just then Bā ṇāsura’s mother, Ko ṭarā, de-
siring to save her son’s life, appeared before 
Lord K ṛṣṇa naked and with her hair undone. 
(20) Lord Gadāgr aja turned His face away to 
avoid seeing the naked woman, and 
Bāṇāsuradeprived of his chariot, his bow shat-
teredtook the opportunity to flee into his city. 
(21) 

After Lord Śiva’s followers had been driven 
away, the Śiva -jvara, who had three heads and 
three feet, pressed forward to attack Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. As the Śiva -jvara approached, he 
seemed to burn everything in the ten directions. 
(22) Seeing this personified weapon approach, 
Lord Nārāya ṇa then released His own personi-
fied fever weapon, the Vi ṣṇu-jvara. The  Śiva-
jvara and Vi ṣṇu-jvara thus battled each other. 
(23) The Śiva -jvara, overwhelmed by the 
strength of the Vi ṣṇu-jvara, cried out in pain. 
But finding no refuge, the frightened Śiva -jvara 
approached Lord K ṛṣṇa, the master of the 
senses, hoping to attain His shelter. Thus with 
joined palms he began to praise the Lord. (24)  

The Śiva -jvara said:  I bow down to You of 
unlimited potencies, the Supreme Lord, the Su-
persoul of all beings. You possess pure and 
complete consciousness and are the cause of 
cosmic cre ation, maintenance and dissolution. 
Perfectly peaceful, You are the Absolute Truth 
to whom the Vedas indirectly refer. (25) Time; 
fate; karma; the jīva and his propensities; the 
subtle material elements; the material body; the 
life air; false ego; the vari ous senses; and the 
totality of these as reflected in the living be-
ing’s subtle bodyall this constitutes your mate-
rial illusory energy, māyā, an endless cycle like 
that of seed and plant. I take shelter of You, the 
negation of this māyā. (26) With various inten-
tions, You perform pastimes to maintain the 
demigods, the saintly persons and the codes of 
religion for this world. By these pastimes You 
also kill those who stray from the right path and 
live by violence. Indeed, your present incarna-
tion is meant to relieve the earth’s burden. (27) 
I am tortured by the fierce power of Your terri-
ble fever weapon, which is cold yet burning. 
All embodied souls must suffer as long as they 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

732 
 remain bound to material ambitions and thus 
averse to serving Your feet. (28)  

The S upreme Lord said:  O three -headed 
one, I am pleased with you. May your fear of 
My fever weapon be dispelled, and may who-
ever remembers our conversation here have no 
reason to fear you. (29) Thus addressed, the 
Māheśvara -jvara bowed down to the infallible 
Lord and went away. But Bā ṇāsura then ap-
peared, riding forth on his chariot to fight Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. (30) Carrying numerous weapons in his 
thousand hands, O King, the terribly infuriated 
demon shot many arrows at Lord K ṛṣṇa, the 
carrier of the disc weapon. (31) As Bā ṇa con-
tinued hurling weapons at Him, the Supreme 
Lord began using His razor -sharp cakra to cut 
off Bā ṇāsura’s arms as if they were tree 
branches. (32) Lord Śiva felt compassion for 
his devotee Bā ṇāsura, whose arms were being 
cut off, and thus he appro ached Lord 
Cakrāyudha [K ṛṣṇa] and spoke to Him as fol-
lows. (33)  

Śrī Rudra said:  You alone are the Absolute 
Truth, the supreme light, the mystery hidden 
within the verbal manifestation of the Absolute. 
Those whose hearts are spotless can see You, 
for You a re uncontaminated, like the sky. (34) 
The sky is Your navel, fire Your face, water 
Your semen, and heaven Your head. The cardi-
nal directions are Your sense of hearing, herbal 
plants the hairs on Your body, and water -bear-
ing clouds the hair on Your head. Th e earth is 
Your foot, the moon Your mind, and the sun 
Your vision, while I am Your ego. The ocean is 
Your abdomen, Indra Your arm, Lord Brahmā 
Your intelligence, the progenitor of mankind 
Your genitals, and religion Your heart. You are 
indeed the original puruṣa, creator of the 
worlds. (35 -36) Your current descent into the 
material realm, O Lord of unrestricted power, 
is meant for upholding the principles of justice 
and benefiting the entire universe. We demi-
gods, each depending on Your grace and au-
thority,  develop the seven planetary systems. 
(37) You are the original person, one without a 
second, transcendental and self -manifesting. 
Uncaused, you are the cause of all, and You are the ultimate controller. You are nonetheless 
perceived in terms of the transf ormations of 
matter effected by Your illusory energytrans-
formations You sanction so that the various 
material qualities can fully manifest. (38) O al-
mighty one, just as the sun, though hidden by a 
cloud, illuminates the cloud and all other visi-
ble forms as  well, so You, although hidden by 
the material qualities, remain self -luminous 
and thus reveal all those qualities, along with 
the living entities who possess them. (39)  

Their intelligence bewildered by Your 
māyā, fully attached to children, wife, home 
and so on, persons immersed in the ocean of 
material misery sometimes rise to the surface 
and sometimes sink down. (40) One who has 
attained this human form of life as a gift from 
God, yet who fails to control his senses and 
honor Your feet, is surely to be pitied, for he is 
only cheating himself. (41) That mortal who re-
jects Youhis true Self, dearmost friend, and 
Lordfor the sake of sense objects, whose nature 
is just the opposite, refuses nectar and instead 
consumes poison. (42) I, Lord Brahmā, the 
other de migods and the pure -minded sages 
have all surrendered wholeheartedly unto You, 
our dearmost Self and Lord. (43) Let us wor-
ship You, the Supreme Lord, to be freed from 
material life. You are the maintainer of the uni-
verse and the cause of its creation and d emise. 
Equipoised and perfectly at peace, You are the 
true friend, Self and worshipable Lord. You are 
one without a second, the shelter of all the 
worlds and all souls. (44)  

This Bā ṇāsura is my dear and faithful fol-
lower, and I have awarded him freedom fr om 
fear. Therefore, my Lord, please grant him 
Your mercy, just as You showed mercy to 
Prahlāda, the lord of the demons. (45)  

The Supreme Lord said:  My dear lord, for 
your pleasure We must certainly do what you 
have requested of Us. I fully agree with your  
conclusion. (46) I will not kill this demonic son 
of Vairocani, for I gave Prahlāda Mahārāja the 
benediction that I would not kill any of his de-
scendants. (47) It was to subdue Bā ṇāsura’s 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

733 
 false pride that I severed his arms. And I slew 
his mighty army bec ause it had become a bur-
den upon the earth. (48) This demon, who still 
has four arms, will be immune to old age and 
death, and he will serve as one of your principal 
attendants. Thus he will have nothing to fear on 
any account. (49)  

Thus attaining freedom  from fear, Bā ṇāsura 
offered obeisances to Lord K ṛṣṇa by touching 
his head to the ground. Bā ṇa then seated 
Aniruddha and His bride on their chariot and 
brought them before the Lord. (50) At the front 
of the party Lord K ṛṣṇa then placed Aniruddha 
and His br ide, both beautifully adorned with 
fine clothes and ornaments, and surrounded 
them with a full military division. Thus Lord 
Kṛṣṇa took His leave of Lord Śiva and de-
parted. (51) The Lord then entered His capital. 
The city was lavishly decorated with flags a nd 
victory arches, and its avenues and crossways 
were all sprinkled with water. As conchshells, 
ānakas and dundubhi drums resounded, the 
Lord’s relatives, the brāhma ṇas and the general 
populace all came forward to greet Him re-
spectfully. (52)  

Whoever rise s early in the morning and re-
members Lord K ṛṣṇa’s victory in His battle 
with Lord Śiva will never experience defeat. 
(53) 

SB 10.64: The Deliverance of King N ṛga 

Śrī Bādarāya ṇi said:  O King, one day 
Sāmba, Pradyumna, Cāru, Bhānu, Gada and 
other young boys  of the Yadu dynasty went to 
a small forest to play. (1) After playing for a 
long time, they became thirsty. As they 
searched for water, they looked inside a dry 
well and saw a peculiar creature. (2) The boys 
were astonished to behold this creature, a liza rd 
who looked like a hill. They felt sorry for it and 
tried to lift it out of the well. (3) They caught 
on to the trapped lizard with leather thongs and 
then with woven ropes, but still they could not 
lift it out. So they went to Lord K ṛṣṇa and ex-
citedly t old Him about the creature. (4) The lo-tus-eyed Supreme Lord, maintainer of the uni-
verse, went to the well and saw the lizard. Then 
with His left hand He easily lifted it out. (5) 
Touched by the hand of the glorious Supreme 
Lord, the being at once gave up i ts lizard form 
and assumed that of a resident of heaven. His 
complexion was beautifully colored like mol-
ten gold, and he was adorned with wonderful 
ornaments, clothes and garlands. (6) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa understood the situation, but to inform 
people in general He  inquired as follows: “Who 
are you, O greatly fortunate one? Seeing your 
excellent form, I think you must surely be an 
exalted demigod. (7) “By what past activity 
were you brought to this condition? It seems 
you did not deserve such a fate, O good soul. 
We are eager to know about you, so please in-
form us about yourselfif, that is, you think this 
the proper time and place to tell us.” (8)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus questioned 
by K ṛṣṇa, whose forms are unlimited, the King, 
his helmet as dazzling as the sun,  bowed down 
to Lord Mādhava and replied as follows. (9)  

King N ṛga said:  I am a king known as 
Nṛga, the son of Ik ṣvāku. Perhaps, Lord, You 
have heard of me when lists of charitable men 
were recited. (10) What could possibly be un-
known to You, O master? Wit h vision undis-
turbed by time, You witness the minds of all 
living beings. Nevertheless, on Your order I 
will speak. (11) I gave in charity as many cows 
as there are grains of sand on the earth, stars in 
the heavens, or drops in a rain shower. (12) 
Young, b rown, milk -laden cows, who were 
well-behaved, beautiful and endowed with 
good qualities, who were all acquired honestly, 
and who had gilded horns, silver -plated hooves 
and decorations of fine ornamental cloths and 
garlandssuch were the cows, along with the ir 
calves, that I gave in charity. (13) I first hon-
ored the brāhma ṇas who were recipients of my 
charity by decorating them with fine orna-
ments. Those most exalted brāhma ṇas, whose 
families were in need, were young and pos-
sessed of excellent character and q ualities. 
They were dedicated to truth, famous for their 
austerity, vastly learned in the Vedic scriptures 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

734 
 and saintly in their behavior. I gave them cows, 
land, gold and houses, along with horses, ele-
phants and marriageable girls with maidser-
vants, as wel l as sesame, silver, fine beds, 
clothing, jewels, furniture and chariots. In ad-
dition, I performed Vedic sacrifices and exe-
cuted various pious welfare activities. (14 -15) 

Once a cow belonging to a certain first -class 
brāhma ṇa wandered away and entered my herd. 
Unaware of this, I gave that cow in charity to a 
different brāhma ṇa. (16) When the cow’s first 
owner saw her being led away, he said, “She is 
mine!” The second brāhma ṇa, who had ac-
cepted her as a gift, replied, “No, she’s mine! 
Nṛga gave her to me.” (17) As the two 
brāhma ṇas argued, each trying to fulfill his own 
purpose, they came to me. One of them said, 
“You gave me this cow,” and the other said, 
“But you stole her from me.” Hearing this, I 
was bewildered. (18) Finding myself in a terri-
ble dilemma concerning my duty in the situa-
tion, I humbly entreated both the brāhma ṇas: “I 
will give one hundred thousand of the best 
cows in exchange for this one. Please give her 
back to me. Your good selves should be merci-
ful to me, your servant. I did not know wha t I 
was doing. Please save me from this difficult 
situation, or I’ll surely fall into a filthy hell.” 
(19-20) The present owner of the cow said, “I 
don’t want anything in exchange for this cow, 
O King,” and went away. The other brāhma ṇa 
declared, “I don’t want even ten thousand more 
cows [than you are offering],” and he too went 
away. (21) O Lord of lords, O master of the uni-
verse, the agents of Yamarāja, taking advantage 
of the opportunity thus created, later carried me 
to his abode. There Yamarāja himself  ques-
tioned me. (22) [Yamarāja said:] My dear King, 
do you wish to experience the results of your 
sins first, or those of your piety? Indeed, I see 
no end to the dutiful charity you have per-
formed, or to your consequent enjoyment in the 
radiant heavenly pl anets. (23) I replied, “First, 
my lord, let me suffer my sinful reactions,” and 
Yamarāja said, “Then fall!” At once I fell, and 
while falling I saw myself becoming a lizard, O 
master. (24) O Keśava, as Your servant I was 
devoted to the brāhma ṇas and genero us to them, and I always hankered for Your audi-
ence. Therefore, even till now I have never for-
gotten [my past life]. (25) O almighty one, how 
is it that my eyes see You here before me? You 
are the Supreme Soul, whom the greatest mas-
ters of mystic yoga can meditate upon within 
their pure hearts only by employing the spir-
itual eye of the Vedas. Then how, O transcen-
dental Lord, are You directly visible to me, 
since my intelligence has been blinded by the 
severe tribulations of material life? Only one 
who has f inished his material entanglement in 
this world should be able to see You. (26) O 
Devadeva, Jagannātha, Govinda, Puru ṣottama, 
Nārāya ṇa, H ṛṣīkeśa, Pu ṇyaśloka, Acyuta, 
Avyaya! O K ṛṣṇa, please permit me to depart 
for the world of the demigods. Wherever I live , 
O master, may my mind always take shelter of 
Your feet. (27 -28) I offer my repeated obei-
sances unto You, K ṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva. 
You are the source of all beings, the Supreme 
Absolute Truth, the possessor of unlimited po-
tencies, the master of all spi ritual disciplines. 
(29) 

Having spoken thus, Mahārāja N ṛga circum-
ambulated Lord K ṛṣṇa and touched his crown 
to the Lord’s feet. Granted permission to de-
part, King N ṛga then boarded a wonderful ce-
lestial airplane as all the people present looked 
on. (30)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī who is especially de-
voted to the brāhma ṇas and who embodies the 
essence of religion, then spoke to His personal 
associates and thus instructed the royal class in 
general. (31) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] How indigest-
ible is the property of a brāhma ṇa, even when 
enjoyed just slightly and by one more potent 
than fire! What then to speak of kings who try 
to enjoy it, presuming themselves lords. (32) I 
do not consider hālāhala to be real poison, be-
cause i t has an antidote. But a brāhma ṇa’s prop-
erty, when stolen, can truly be called poison, 
for it has no antidote in this world. (33) Poison 
kills only the person who ingests it, and an or-
dinary fire may be extinguished with water. But 
the fire generated from the kindling wood of a 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

735 
 brāhma ṇa’s property burns the thief’s entire 
family down to the root. (34) If a person enjoys 
a brāhma ṇa’s property without receiving due 
permission, that property destroys three gener-
ations of his family. But if he takes it by force  
or gets the government or other outsiders to 
help him usurp it, then ten generations of his 
ancestors and ten generations of his descend-
ants are all destroyed. (35) Members of the 
royal order, blinded by royal opulence, fail to 
foresee their own downfall.  Childishly hanker-
ing to enjoy a brāhma ṇa’s property, they are ac-
tually hankering to go to hell. (36) For as many 
years as there are particles of dust touched by 
the tears of generous brāhma ṇas who have de-
pendent families and whose property is stolen, 
unco ntrolled kings who usurp a brāhma ṇa’s 
property are cooked, along with their royal 
families, in the hell known as Kumbhīpāka. 
(37-38) Whether it be his own gift or someone 
else’s, a person who steals a brāhma ṇa’s prop-
erty will take birth as a worm in feces for sixty 
thousand years. (39) I do not desire brāhma ṇas’ 
wealth. Those who lust after it become short -
lived and are defeated. They lose their king-
doms and become snakes, who trouble others. 
(40) My dear followers, never treat a learned 
brāhma ṇa harshly, e ven if he has sinned. Even 
if he attacks you physically or repeatedly curses 
you, always continue to offer him obeisances. 
(41) Just us I always carefully bow down to 
brāhma ṇas, so all of you should likewise bow 
down to them. I will punish anyone who acts 
otherwise. (42) When a brāhma ṇa’s property is 
stolen, even unknowingly, it certainly causes 
the person who takes it to fall down, just as the 
brāhma ṇa’s cow did to N ṛga. (43) Having thus 
instructed the residents of Dvārakā, Lord 
Mukunda, purifier of all th e worlds, entered His 
palace. (44)  

SB 10.65: Lord Balarāma Visits 
Vṛndāvana  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O best of the Ku-
rus, once Lord Balarāma, eager to visit His 
well-wishing friends, mounted His chariot and 
traveled to Nanda Gokula. (1) Having long suf-
fered the anxiety of separation, the cowherd men and their wives embraced Lord Balarāma. 
The Lord then offered respects to His parents, 
and they joyfully greeted Him with prayers. (2) 
[Nanda and Yaśodā prayed,] “O descendant of 
Daśārha, O Lord of the universe,  may You and 
Your younger brother K ṛṣṇa ever protect us.” 
Saying this, they raised Śrī Balarāma onto their 
laps, embraced Him and moistened Him with 
tears from their eyes. (3) Lord Balarāma then 
paid proper respects to the elder cowherd men, 
and the younge r ones all greeted Him respect-
fully. He met them all with smiles, handshakes 
and so on, dealing personally with each one ac-
cording to age, degree of friendship, and family 
relationship. Then, after resting, the Lord ac-
cepted a comfortable seat, and they al l gathered 
around Him. With voices faltering out of love 
for Him, those cowherds, who had dedicated 
everything to lotus -eyed K ṛṣṇa, asked about the 
health of their dear ones [in Dvārakā], and 
Balarāma in turn asked about the cowherds’ 
welfare. (4 -6) [The c owherds said:] O Rāma, 
are all our relatives doing well? And Rāma, do 
all of you, with your wives and children, still 
remember us? (7) It is our great fortune that sin-
ful Ka ṁsa has been killed and our dear relatives 
have been freed. And it is also our good  fortune 
that our relatives have killed and defeated their 
enemies and found complete security in a great 
fortress. (8)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  Honored 
to have the personal audience of Lord 
Balarāma, the young gopīs smiled and asked 
Him, “Is K ṛṣṇa, the darling of the city women, 
living happily? (9) “Does He remember His 
family members, especially His father and 
mother? Do you think He will ever come back 
even once to see His mother? And does mighty -
armed K ṛṣṇa remember the service we always 
did for H im? (10) “For K ṛṣṇa’s sake, O de-
scendant of Dāśārha, we abandoned our moth-
ers, fathers, brothers, husbands, children and 
sisters, even though these family relations are 
difficult to give up. But now, O Lord, that same 
Kṛṣṇa has suddenly abandoned us and go ne 
away, breaking off all affectionate ties with us. 
And yet how could any woman fail to trust His 
promises? (11 -12) “How can intelligent city 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

736 
 women possibly trust the words of one whose 
heart is so unsteady and who is so ungrateful? 
They must believe Him because He speaks so 
wonderfully, and also because His beautiful 
smiling glances arouse their lust. (13) “Why 
bother talking about Him, dear gopī? Please 
talk of something else. If He passes His time 
without us, then we shall similarly pass ours 
[without H im].” (14) While speaking these 
words, the young cowherd women remembered 
Lord Śauri’s laughter, His pleasing conversa-
tions with them, His attractive glances, His 
style of walking and His loving embraces. Thus 
they began to cry. (15)  

The Supreme Lord Bala rāma, the attractor 
of all, being expert at various kinds of concili-
ation, consoled the gopīs by relaying to them 
the confidential messages Lord K ṛṣṇa had sent 
with Him. These messages deeply touched the 
gopīs’ hearts. (16) Lord Balarāma, the Person-
ality o f Godhead, resided there for the two 
months of Madhu and Mādhava, and during the 
nights He gave His cowherd girlfriends conju-
gal pleasure. (17)  

In the company of numerous women, Lord 
Balarāma enjoyed in a garden by the Yamunā 
River. This garden was bathed  in the rays of the 
full moon and caressed by breezes bearing the 
fragrance of night -blooming lotuses. (18) Sent 
by the demigod Varu ṇa, the divine vāru ṇī liq-
uor flowed from a tree hollow and made the en-
tire forest even more fragrant with its sweet 
aroma. ( 19) The wind carried to Balarāma the 
fragrance of that flood of sweet liquor, and 
when He smelled it He went [to the tree]. There 
He and His female companions drank. (20) As 
the Gandharvas sang His glories, Lord 
Balarāma enjoyed within the brilliant circle  of 
young women. He appeared just like Indra’s el-
ephant, the lordly Airāvata, enjoying in the 
company of she -elephants. (21) At that time 
kettledrums resounded in the sky, the Gandhar-
vas joyfully rained down flowers, and the great 
sages praised Lord Balarā ma’s heroic deeds. 
(22) As His deeds were sung, Lord Halāyudha 
wandered as if inebriated among the various 
forests with His girlfriends. His eyes rolled from the effects of the liquor. (23) Intoxicated 
with joy, Lord Balarāma sported flower gar-
lands, inclu ding the famous Vaijayantī. He 
wore a single earring, and beads of perspiration 
decorated His smiling lotus face like snow-
flakes. The Lord then summoned the Yamunā 
River so that He could play in her waters, but 
she disregarded His command, thinking He was 
drunk. This angered Balarāma, and He began 
dragging the river with the tip of His plow. (24 -
25) [Lord Balarāma said:] O sinful one disre-
specting Me, you do not come when I call you 
but rather move only by your own whim. 
Therefore, with the tip of My plow I  shall bring 
you here in a hundred streams! (26) [Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī continued:] Thus scolded by the Lord, 
O King, the frightened river -goddess Yamunā 
came and fell at the feet of Śrī Balarāma, the 
beloved descendant of Yadu. Trembling, she 
spoke to Him the following words. (27) [God-
dess Yamunā said:] Rāma, Rāma, O mighty -
armed one! I know nothing of Your prowess. 
With a single portion of Yourself You hold up 
the earth, O Lord of the universe. (28) My Lord, 
please release me. O soul of the universe, I 
didn’t understand Your position as the Su-
preme Godhead, but now I have surrendered 
unto You, and You are always kind to Your 
devotees. (29)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  There-
upon Lord Balarāma released the Yamunā and, 
like the king of the elephants with his ent ourage 
of she -elephants, entered the river’s water with 
His female companions. (30) The Lord played 
in the water to His full satisfaction, and when 
He came out Goddess Kānti presented Him 
with blue garments, precious ornaments and a 
brilliant necklace. (31 ) Lord Balarāma dressed 
Himself in the blue garments and put on the 
gold necklace. Anointed with fragrances and 
beautifully adorned, He appeared as re-
splendent as Indra’s royal elephant. (32) Even 
today, O King, one can see how the Yamunā 
flows through the  many channels created when 
it was dragged by the unlimitedly powerful 
Lord Balarāma. Thus she demonstrates His 
prowess. (33) Thus for Lord Balarāma all the 
nights passed like a single night as He enjoyed 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

737 
 in Vraja, His mind enchanted by the exquisite 
charm  and beauty of Vraja’s young ladies. (34)  

SB 10.66: Pau ṇḍraka, the False Vāsudeva  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, while 
Lord Balarāma was away visiting Nanda’s vil-
lage of Vraja, the ruler of Karū ṣa, foolishly 
thinking “I am the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva,” 
sent a messenger to Lord K ṛṣṇa. (1) Pau ṇḍraka 
was emboldened by the flattery of childish 
men, who told him, “You are Vāsudeva, the Su-
preme Lord and master of the universe, who 
have now descended to the earth.” Thus he im-
agined himself to be the infallible Pe rsonality 
of Godhead. (2) Thus slow -witted King 
Pauṇḍraka sent a messenger to the inscrutable 
Lord K ṛṣṇa at Dvārakā. Pau ṇḍraka was acting 
just like an unintelligent child whom other chil-
dren are pretending is a king. (3) Arriving in 
Dvārakā, the messenger found lotus -eyed 
Kṛṣṇa in His royal assembly and relayed the 
King’s message to that almighty Lord. (4)  

[On Pau ṇḍraka’s behalf, the messenger 
said:]  I am the one and only Lord Vāsudeva, 
and there is no other. It is I who have descended 
to this world to sho w mercy to the living be-
ings. Therefore, give up Your false name. (5) O 
Sātvata, give up my personal symbols, which 
out of foolishness You now carry, and come to 
me for shelter. If You do not, then You must 
give me battle. (6)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  King Ugrasena 
and the other members of the assembly laughed 
loudly when they heard this vain boasting of 
unintelligent Pau ṇḍraka. (7) The Personality of 
Godhead, after enjoying the jokes of the assem-
bly, told the messenger [to relay a message to 
his master:] “Y ou fool, I will indeed let loose 
the weapons you boast of in this way. (8) 
“When you lie dead, O fool, your face covered 
by vultures, herons and va ṭa birds, you will be-
come the shelter of dogs.” (9) When the Lord 
had thus spoken, the messenger conveyed His  
insulting reply to his master in its entirety. Lord 
Kṛṣṇa then mounted His chariot and went to the 
vicinity of Kāśī. (10)   
Upon observing Lord K ṛṣṇa’s preparations 
for battle, the mighty warrior Pau ṇḍraka 
quickly went out of the city with two full mili-
tary divisions. (11) Pau ṇḍraka’s friend, the 
King of Kāśī, followed behind, O King, leading 
the rear guard with three ak ṣauhiṇī divisions. 
Lord K ṛṣṇa saw that Pau ṇḍraka was carrying 
the Lord’s own insignia, such as the conchshell, 
disc, sword and club, and al so an imitation 
Śārṅga bow and Śrīvatsa mark. He wore a 
mock Kaustubha gem, was decorated with a 
garland of forest flowers and was dressed in up-
per and lower garments of fine yellow silk. His 
banner bore the image of Garu ḍa, and he wore 
a valuable crown an d gleaming, shark -shaped 
earrings. (12 -14) Lord Hari laughed heartily 
when He saw how the King had dressed up in 
exact imitation of His own appearance, just like 
an actor onstage. (15) The enemies of Lord 
Hari attacked Him with tridents, clubs, bludg-
eons, pikes, ṛṣtis, barbed darts, lances, swords, 
axes and arrows. (16) But Lord K ṛṣṇa fiercely 
struck back at the army of Pau ṇḍraka and 
Kāśirāja, which consisted of elephants, chari-
ots, cavalry and infantry. The Lord tormented 
His enemies with His club, sword, Sudarśana 
disc and arrows, just as the fire of annihilation 
torments the various kinds of creatures at the 
end of a cosmic age. (17) The battlefield, 
strewn with the dismembered chariots, horses, 
elephants, humans, mules and camels that had 
been cut to pie ces by the Lord’s disc weapon, 
shone like the gruesome playground of Lord 
Bhūtapati, giving pleasure to the wise. (18)  

Lord K ṛṣṇa then addressed Pau ṇḍraka:  
My dear Pau ṇḍraka, the very weapons you 
spoke of through your messenger, I now release 
unto you. (1 9) O fool, now I shall make you re-
nounce My name, which you have falsely as-
sumed. And I will certainly take shelter of you 
if I do not wish to fight you. (20) Having thus 
derided Pau ṇḍraka, Lord K ṛṣṇa destroyed his 
chariot with His sharp arrows. The Lord t hen 
cut off his head with the Sudarśana disc, just as 
Lord Indra lops off a mountain peak with his 
thunderbolt weapon. (21) With His arrows, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa similarly severed Kāśirāja’s head 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

738 
 from his body, sending it flying into Kāśī city 
like a lotus flower th rown by the wind. (22) 
Having thus killed envious Pau ṇḍraka and his 
ally, Lord K ṛṣṇa returned to Dvārakā. As He 
entered the city, the Siddhas of heaven chanted 
His immortal, nectarean glories. (23) By con-
stantly meditating upon the Supreme Lord, 
Pauṇḍraka shattered all his material bonds. In-
deed, by imitating Lord K ṛṣṇa’s appearance, O 
King, he ultimately became K ṛṣṇa conscious. 
(24) 

Seeing a head decorated with earrings lying 
at the gate of the royal palace, the people pre-
sent were puzzled. Some of them a sked, “What 
is this?” and others said, “It is a head, but whose 
is it?” (25) My dear King, when they recog-
nized it as the head of their Kingthe lord of 
Kāśihis queens, sons and other relatives, along 
with all the citizens of the city, began to cry pit-
ifully: “Alas, we are killed! O my lord, my 
lord!” (26) After the King’s son Sudak ṣiṇa had 
performed the obligatory funeral rituals for his 
father, he resolved within his mind: “Only by 
killing my father’s murderer can I avenge his 
death.” Thus the charitable S udak ṣiṇa, together 
with his priests, began worshiping Lord Mahe-
śvara with great attention. (27 -28) Satisfied by 
the worship, the powerful Lord Śiva appeared 
in the sacred precinct of Avimukta and offered 
Sudak ṣiṇa his choice of benedictions. The 
prince cho se as his benediction a means to slay 
his father’s killer. (29) Lord Śiva told him, “Ac-
companied by brāhma ṇas, serve the 
Dakṣiṇāgni firethe original priestfollowing the 
injunctions of the abhicāra ritual. Then the 
Dakṣiṇāgni fire, together with many Pra-
mathas, will fulfill your desire if you direct it 
against someone inimical to the brāhma ṇas.” 
So instructed, Sudak ṣiṇa strictly observed the 
ritualistic vows and invoked the abhicāra 
against Lord K ṛṣṇa. (30 -31) Thereupon the fire 
rose up out of the altar pit,  assuming the form 
of an extremely fearsome, naked person. The 
fiery creature’s beard and tuft of hair were like 
molten copper, and his eyes emitted blazing hot 
cinders. His face looked most frightful with its 
fangs and terrible arched and furrowed brows. 
As he licked the corners of his mouth with his tongue, the demon shook his flaming trident. 
(32-33) On legs as tall as palm trees, the mon-
ster raced toward Dvārakā in the company of 
ghostly spirits, shaking the ground and burning 
the world in all direction s. (34) Seeing the ap-
proac ḥ of the fiery demon created by the ab-
hicāra ritual, the residents of Dvārakā were all 
struck with fear, like animals terrified by a for-
est fire. (35) Distraught with fear, the people 
cried out to the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who was then playing at dice in the royal 
court: “Save us! Save us, O Lord of the three 
worlds, from this fire burning up the city!” (36) 
When Lord K ṛṣṇa heard the people’s agitation 
and saw that even His own men were disturbed, 
that most worthy giver o f shelter simply 
laughed and told them, “Do not fear; I shall pro-
tect you.” (37)  

The almighty Lord, the internal and external 
witness of all, understood that the monster had 
been produced by Lord Śiva from the sacrificial 
fire. To defeat the demon, K ṛṣṇa dispatched His 
disc weapon, who was waiting at His side. (38) 
That Sudarśana, the disc weapon of Lord 
Mukunda, blazed forth like millions of suns. 
His effulgence blazed like the fire of universal 
annihilation, and with his heat he pained the 
sky, all the d irections, heaven and earth, and 
also the fiery demon. (39) Frustrated by the 
power of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s weapon, O King, the 
fiery creature produced by black magic turned 
his face away and retreated. Created for vio-
lence, the demon then returned to Vārā ṇasī, 
where he surrounded the city and then burned 
Sudak ṣiṇa and his priests to death, even though 
Sudak ṣiṇa was his creator. (40) Lord Vi ṣṇu’s 
disc also entered Vārā ṇasī, in pursuit of the 
fiery demon, and proceeded to burn the city to 
the ground, including all i ts assembly halls and 
residential palaces with raised porches, its nu-
merous marketplaces, gateways, watchtowers, 
warehouses and treasuries, and all the buildings 
housing elephants, horses, chariots and grains. 
(41) After burning down the entire city of 
Vārāṇasī, Lord Vi ṣṇu’s Sudarśana cakra re-
turned to the side of Śrī K ṛṣṇa, whose actions 
are effortless. (42)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

739 
 Any mortal who recounts this heroic pas-
time of Lord Uttama ḥ-śloka’s, or who simply 
hears it attentively, will become freed from all 
sins. (43)  

SB 10 .67: Lord Balarāma Slays Dvivida 
Gorilla  

The glorious King Parīk ṣit said:  I wish to 
hear further about Śrī Balarāma, the unlimited 
and immeasurable Supreme Lord, whose activ-
ities are all astounding. What else did He do? 
(1) 

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Ther e was an 
ape named Dvivida who was a friend of Na-
rakāsura’s. This powerful Dvivida, the brother 
of Mainda, had been instructed by King 
Sugrīva. (2) To avenge the death of his friend 
[Naraka], the ape Dvivida ravaged the land, set-
ting fires that burned citi es, villages, mines and 
cowherd dwellings. (3) Once Dvivida tore up a 
number of mountains and used them to devas-
tate all the neighboring kingdoms, especially 
the province of Ānarta, wherein dwelt his 
friend’s killer, Lord Hari. (4) Another time he 
entered the ocean and, with the strength of ten 
thousand elephants, churned up its water with 
his arms and thus submerged the coastal re-
gions. (5) The wicked ape tore down the trees 
in the hermitages of exalted sages and contam-
inated their sacrificial fires with h is feces and 
urine. (6) Just as a wasp imprisons smaller in-
sects, he arrogantly threw both men and women 
into caves in a mountain valley and sealed the 
caves shut with boulders. (7) Once, while Dvi-
vida was thus engaged in harassing the neigh-
boring kingdoms  and polluting women of re-
spectable families, he heard very sweet singing 
coming from Raivataka Mountain. So he went 
there. (8)  

There he saw Śrī Balarāma, the Lord of the 
Yadus, adorned with a garland of lotuses and 
appearing most attractive in every limb . He was 
singing amidst a crowd of young women, and 
since He had drunk vāru ṇī liquor, His eyes 
rolled as if He were intoxicated. His body shone brilliantly as He behaved like an elephant 
in rut. (9 -10) 

The mischievous ape climbed a tree branch 
and then re vealed his presence by shaking the 
trees and making the sound kilakilā. (11) When 
Lord Baladeva’s consorts saw the ape’s impu-
dence, they began to laugh. They were, after all, 
young girls who were fond of joking and prone 
to silliness. (12) Even as Lord Bal arāma looked 
on, Dvivida insulted the girls by making odd 
gestures with his eyebrows, coming right in 
front of them, and showing them his anus. (13) 
Angered, Lord Balarāma, the best of fighters, 
hurled a rock at him, but the cunning ape 
dodged the rock and  grabbed the Lord’s pot of 
liquor. Further infuriating Lord Balarāma by 
laughing and by ridiculing Him, wicked Dvi-
vida then broke the pot and offended the Lord 
even more by pulling at the girls’ clothing. 
Thus the powerful ape, puffed up with false 
pride, continued to insult Śrī Balarāma. (14 -15) 
Lord Balarāma saw the ape’s rude behavior and 
thought of the disruptions he had created in the 
surrounding kingdoms. Thus the Lord angrily 
took up His club and His plow weapon, having 
decided to put His enemy to de ath. (16) Mighty 
Dvivida also came forward to do battle. Up-
rooting a śāla tree with one hand, he rushed to-
ward Balarāma and struck Him on the head 
with the tree trunk. (17) But Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa 
remained as motionless as a mountain and 
simply grabbed the log  as it fell upon His head. 
He then struck Dvivida with His club, named 
Sunanda. (18) Struck on the skull by the Lord’s 
club, Dvivida became brilliantly decorated by 
the outpour of blood, like a mountain beautified 
by red oxide. Ignoring the wound, Dvivida up-
rooted another tree, stripped it of leaves by 
brute force and struck the Lord again. Now en-
raged, Lord Balarāma shattered the tree into 
hundreds of pieces, upon which Dvivida 
grabbed yet another tree and furiously hit the 
Lord again. This tree, too, the Lord smashed 
into hundreds of pieces. (19 -21) Thus fighting 
the Lord, who again and again demolished the 
trees He was attacked with, Dvivida kept on up-
rooting trees from all sides until the forest was 
left treeless. (22) The angry ape then released a 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

740 
 rain of stones upon Lord Balarāma, but the 
wielder of the club easily pulverized them all. 
(23) Dvivida, the most powerful of apes, now 
clenched his fists at the end of his palm -tree-
sized arms, came before Lord Balarāma and 
beat his fists against the Lord’s bo dy. (24) The 
furious Lord of the Yādavas then threw aside 
His club and plow and with His bare hands 
hammered a blow upon Dvivida’s collarbone. 
The ape collapsed, vomiting blood. (25) When 
he fell, O tiger among the Kurus, Raivataka 
Mountain shook, along wi th its cliffs and trees, 
like a wind -tossed boat at sea. (26) In the heav-
ens the demigods, perfect mystics and great 
sages cried out, “Victory to You! Obeisances to 
You! Excellent! Well done!” and showered 
flowers upon the Lord. (27) Having thus killed 
Dvivida, who had disturbed the whole world, 
the Supreme Lord returned to His capital as the 
people along the way chanted His glories. (28)  

SB 10.68: The Marriage of Sāmba  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, Jāmba-
vatī’s son Sāmba, ever victorious in battle, kid-
napped Duryodhana’s daughter Lak ṣmaṇā 
from her svaya ṁvara ceremony. (1) The angry 
Kurus said: This ill -behaved boy has offended 
us, forcibly kidnapping our unmarried daughter 
against her will. (2) Arrest this ill -behaved 
Sāmba! What will the V ṛṣṇis do? By ou r grace 
they are ruling land that we have granted them. 
(3) If the V ṛṣṇis come here when they learn that 
their son has been captured, we will break their 
pride. Thus they’ll become subdued, like bod-
ily senses brought under strict control. (4) After 
saying this and having their plan sanctioned by 
the senior member of the Kuru dynasty, Kar ṇa, 
Śala, Bhūri, Yajñaketu and Suyodhana set out 
to attack Sāmba. (5)  

Seeing Duryodhana and his companions 
rushing toward him, Sāmba, the great chariot -
fighter, took up his  splendid bow and stood 
alone like a lion. (6) Determined to capture 
him, the angry bowmen led by Kar ṇa shouted 
at Sāmba, ‘Stand and fight! Stand and fight!’ 
They came straight for him and showered him 
with arrows. (7) O best of the Kurus, as K ṛṣṇa’s son S āmba was being unjustly harassed by the 
Kurus, that darling of the Yadu dynasty did not 
tolerate their attack, any more than a lion would 
tolerate an attack by puny animals. (8) Twang-
ing his wonderful bow, heroic Sāmba struck 
with arrows the six warriors h eaded by Kar ṇa. 
He pierced the six chariots with as many ar-
rows, each team of four horses with four ar-
rows, and each chariot driver with a single ar-
row, and he similarly struck the great bowmen 
who commanded the chariots. The enemy war-
riors congratulated S āmba for this display of 
prowess. (9 -10) 

But they forced him down from his chariot, 
and thereupon four of them struck his four 
horses, one of them struck down his chariot 
driver, and another broke his bow. (11) Having 
deprived Sāmba of his chariot during the fight, 
the Kuru warriors tied him up with great diffi-
culty and then returned victorious to their city, 
taking the young boy and their princess. (12)  

O King, when the Yādavas heard news of 
this from Śrī Nārada, they became angry. 
Urged on by King Ugras ena, they prepared for 
war against the Kurus. (13) Lord Balarāma, 
however, cooled the tempers of the V ṛṣṇi he-
roes, who had already put on their armor. He 
who purifies the age of quarrel did not want a 
quarrel between the Kurus and V ṛṣṇis. Thus, 
accompanied  by brāhma ṇas and family elders, 
He went to Hastināpura on His chariot, which 
was as effulgent as the sun. As He went, He ap-
peared like the moon surrounded by the ruling 
planets. (14 -15) Upon arriving at Hastināpura, 
Lord Balarāma remained in a garden outs ide 
the city and sent Uddhava ahead to probe King 
Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s intentions. (16)  

After he had offered proper respects to the 
son of Ambikā [Dh ṛtarāṣṭra] and to Bhī ṣma, 
Droṇa, Bāhlika and Duryodhana, Uddhava in-
formed them that Lord Balarāma had arrived. 
(17) Overjoyed to hear that Balarāma, their 
dearmost friend, had come, they first honored 
Uddhava and then went forth to meet the Lord, 
carrying auspicious offerings in their hands. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

741 
 (18) They approached Lord Balarāma and wor-
shiped Him with gifts of cows and arghya, as 
was fitting. Those among the Kurus who under-
stood His true power bowed down to Him, 
touching their heads to the ground. (19) After 
both parties had heard that their relatives were 
doing well and both had inquired into each 
other’s welfare and he alth, Lord Balarāma 
forthrightly spoke to the Kurus as follows. (20)  

[Lord Balarāma said:]  King Ugrasena is 
our master and the ruler of kings. With undi-
vided attention you should hear what he has or-
dered you to do, and then you should do it at 
once. (21) [King Ugrasena has said:] Even 
though by irreligious means several of you de-
feated a single opponent who follows the reli-
gious codes, still I am tolerating this for the 
sake of unity among family members. (22)  

Upon hearing these words of Lord 
Baladeva’s, which were full of potency, cour-
age and strength and were appropriate to His 
transcendental power, the Kauravas became fu-
rious and spoke as follows. (23) [The Kuru no-
bles said:] Oh, how amazing this is! The force 
of time is indeed insurmountable: a lowly s hoe 
now wants to climb on the head that bears the 
royal crown. (24) It is because these V ṛṣṇis are 
bound to us by marital ties that we have granted 
them equality, allowing them to share our beds, 
seats and meals. Indeed, it is we who have 
given them their royal thrones. (25) Only be-
cause we looked the other way could they enjoy 
the pair of yak -tail fans and the conchshell, 
white umbrella, throne, and royal bed. (26) No 
longer should the Yadus be allowed to use these 
royal symbols, which now cause trouble fo r 
those who gave them, like milk fed to poison-
ous snakes. Having prospered by our grace, 
these Yādavas have now lost all shame and are 
daring to command us! (27) How would even 
Indra dare usurp anything that Bhī ṣma, Dro ṇa, 
Arjuna or the other Kurus have no t given him? 
It would be like a lamb claiming the lion’s kill. 
(28) 

Śrī Bādarāya ṇi said:  O best of the Bhāra-
tas, after the arrogant Kurus, thoroughly puffed up by the opulence of their high birth and rela-
tions, had spoken these harsh words to Lord 
Balarām a, they turned and went back to their 
city. (29) Seeing the bad character of the Kurus 
and hearing their nasty words, the infallible 
Lord Balarāma became filled with rage. His 
countenance frightful to behold, He laughed re-
peatedly and spoke as follows. (30 ) [Lord 
Balarāma said:] “Clearly the many passions of 
these scoundrels have made them so proud that 
they do not want peace. Then let them be paci-
fied by physical punishment, as animals are 
with a stick. (31) “Ah, only gradually was I able 
to calm the furio us Yadus and Lord K ṛṣṇa, who 
was also enraged. Desiring peace for these 
Kauravas, I came here. But they are so dull -
headed, fond of quarrel and mischievous by na-
ture that they have repeatedly disrespected Me. 
Out of conceit they dared to address Me with 
harsh words! (32 -33) “King Ugrasena, the lord 
of the Bhojas, V ṛṣṇis and Andhakas, is not fit 
to command, when Indra and other planetary 
rulers obey his orders? (34) “That same K ṛṣṇa 
who occupies the Sudharmā assembly hall and 
for His enjoyment took the pārij āta tree from 
the immortal demigodsthat very K ṛṣṇa is in-
deed not fit to sit on a royal throne? (35) “The 
goddess of fortune herself, ruler of the entire 
universe, worships His feet. And the master of 
the goddess of fortune does not deserve the par-
aphernali a of a mortal king? (36) “The dust of 
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, which is the source of holi-
ness for all places of pilgrimage, is worshiped 
by all the great demigods. The principal deities 
of all planets are engaged in His service, and 
they consider themselves mo st fortunate to take 
the dust of the lotus feet of K ṛṣṇa on their 
crowns. Great demigods like Lord Brahmā and 
Lord Śiva, and even the goddess of fortune and 
I, are simply parts of His spiritual identity, and 
we also carefully carry that dust on our heads. 
And still K ṛṣṇa is not fit to use the royal insig-
nia or even sit on the royal throne? (37) “We 
Vṛṣṇis enjoy only whatever small parcel of land 
the Kurus allow us? And we are indeed shoes, 
whereas the Kurus are the head? (38) “Just see 
how these puffed -up K urus are intoxicated with 
their so -called power, like ordinary drunken 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

742 
 men! What actual ruler, with the power to com-
mand, would tolerate their foolish, nasty 
words? (39) “Today I shall rid the earth of the 
Kauravas!” declared the furious Balarāma. 
Thus He took His plow weapon and rose up as 
if to set the three worlds ablaze. (40) The Lord 
angrily dug up Hastināpura with the tip of His 
plow and began to drag it, intending to cast the 
entire city into the Ganges. (41)  

Seeing that their city was tumbling abou t 
like a raft at sea as it was being dragged away, 
and that it was about to fall into the Ganges, the 
Kauravas became terrified. To save their lives 
they approached the Lord for shelter, taking 
their families with them. Placing Sāmba and 
Lakṣmaṇā in front,  they joined their palms in 
supplication. (42 -43) [The Kauravas said:] O 
Rāma, Rāma, foundation of everything! We 
know nothing of Your power. Please excuse 
our offense, for we are ignorant and misguided. 
(44) You alone cause the creation, maintenance 
and a nnihilation of the cosmos, and of You 
there is no prior cause. Indeed, O Lord, author-
ities say that the worlds are mere playthings for 
You as You perform Your pastimes. (45) O un-
limited one of a thousand heads, as Your pas-
time You carry this earthly globe upon one of 
Your heads. At the time of annihilation You 
withdraw the entire universe within Your body 
and, remaining all alone, lie down to rest. (46) 
Your anger is meant for instructing everyone; it 
is not a manifestation of hatred or envy. O Su-
preme Lord , You sustain the pure mode of 
goodness, and You become angry only to main-
tain and protect this world. (47) We bow down 
to You, O Soul of all beings, O wielder of all 
potencies, O tireless maker of the universe! Of-
fering You obeisances, we take shelter of You. 
(48) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus propitiated 
by the Kurus, whose city was trembling and 
who were surrendering to Him in great distress, 
Lord Balarāma became very calm and kindly 
disposed toward them. “Do not be afraid,” He 
said, and took away their f ear. (49) 
Duryodhana, being very affectionate to his 
daughter, gave as her dowry 1,200 sixty -year-old elephants, 120,000 horses, 6,000 golden 
chariots shining like the sun, and 1,000 maid-
servants with jeweled lockets on their necks. 
(50-51) The Supreme Lor d, chief of the Yāda-
vas, accepted all these gifts and then departed 
with His son and daughter -in-law as His well -
wishers bid Him farewell. (52) Then Lord 
Halāyudha entered His city [Dvārakā] and met 
His relatives, whose hearts were all bound to 
Him in lovi ng attachment. In the assembly hall 
He reported to the Yadu leaders everything 
about His dealings with the Kurus. (53) Even 
today the city of Hastināpura is visibly elevated 
on its southern side along the Ganges, thus 
showing the signs of Lord Balarāma’s p rowess. 
(54) 

SB 10.69: Nārada Muni Visits Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s Palaces in Dvārakā  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Hearing that 
Lord K ṛṣṇa had killed Narakāsura and had 
alone married many brides, Nārada Muni de-
sired to see the Lord in this situation. He 
thought, “It is qu ite amazing that in a single 
body Lord K ṛṣṇa simultaneously married six-
teen thousand women, each in a separate pal-
ace.” Thus the sage of the demigods eagerly 
went to Dvārakā. (1 -6) 

In the city of Dvārakā was a beautiful pri-
vate quarter worshiped by the pl anetary rulers. 
This district, where the demigod Viśvakarmā 
had shown all his divine skill, was the residen-
tial area of Lord Hari, and thus it was gor-
geously decorated by the sixteen thousand pal-
aces of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s queens. Nārada Muni en-
tered one of these  immense palaces. (7 -8) Sup-
porting the palace were coral pillars decora-
tively inlaid with vaidūrya gems. Sapphires be-
decked the walls, and the floors glowed with 
perpetual brilliance. In that palace Tva ṣṭā had 
arranged canopies with hanging strands of 
pearls; there were also seats and beds fashioned 
of ivory and precious jewels. In attendance 
were many well -dressed maidservants bearing 
lockets on their necks, and also armor -clad 
guards with turbans, fine uniforms and jeweled 
earrings. The glow of numerous j ewel -studded 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

743 
 lamps dispelled all darkness in the palace. My 
dear King, on the ornate ridges of the roof 
danced loudly crying peacocks, who saw the 
fragrant aguru incense escaping through the 
holes of the latticed windows and mistook it for 
a cloud. (9 -12) In that palace the learned 
brāhma ṇa saw the Lord of the Sātvatas, Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, together with His wife, who fanned Him 
with a gold -handled yak -tail fan. She person-
ally served Him in this way, even though she 
was constantly attended by a thousand maidser-
vants equal to her in personal character, beauty, 
youth and fine dress. (13)  

The Supreme Lord is the greatest upholder 
of religious principles. Thus when He noticed 
Nārada, He rose at once from Goddess Śrī’s 
bed, bowed His crowned head at Nārada’s feet 
and, joi ning His palms, had the sage sit in His 
own seat. (14) The Lord bathed Nārada’s feet 
and then put the water on His own head. Alt-
hough Lord K ṛṣṇa is the supreme spiritual au-
thority of the universe and the master of His 
devotees, it was proper for Him to beh ave in 
this way, for His name is Brahma ṇya-deva, 
“the Lord who favors the b ṛāhma ṇas.” Thus Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa honored the sage Nārada by bathing his 
feet, even though the water that bathes the 
Lord’s own feet becomes the Ganges, the ulti-
mate holy shrine. (15) After  fully worshiping 
the great sage of the demigods according to Ve-
dic injunctions, Lord K ṛṣṇa, who is Himself the 
original sageNārāya ṇa, the friend of Naracon-
versed with Nārada, and the Lord’s measured 
speech was as sweet as nectar. Finally the Lord 
asked Nā rada, “What may We do for you, Our 
lord and master?” (16)  

Śrī Nārada said:  O almighty Lord, it is no 
surprise that You, the ruler of all worlds, show 
friendship for all people and yet subdue the en-
vious. As we well know, You descend by Your 
sweet will in order to bestow the highest good 
on this universe by maintaining and protecting 
it. Thus Your glories are widely sung. (17) Now 
I have seen Your feet, which grant liberation to 
Your devotees, which even Lord Brahmā and 
other great personalities of unfathom able intel-
ligence can only meditate upon within their hearts, and which those who have fallen into 
the well of material existence resort to for de-
liverance. Please favor me so that I may con-
stantly think of You as I travel about. Please 
grant Me the power to remember You. (18)  

Nārada then entered the palace of another of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s wives, my dear King. He was ea-
ger to witness the spiritual potency possessed 
by the master of all masters of mystic power. 
(19) There he saw the Lord playing at dice with 
His beloved consort and His friend Uddhava. 
Lord K ṛṣṇa worshiped Nārada by standing up, 
offering him a seat, and so on, and then, as if 
He did not know, asked him, “When did you 
arrive? What can needy persons like Us do for 
those who are full in themselves? In  any case, 
My dear brāhma ṇa, please make My life auspi-
cious.” Thus addressed, Nārada was aston-
ished. He simply stood up silently and went to 
another palace. (20 -22) This time Nāradajī saw 
that Lord K ṛṣṇa was engaged as an affectionate 
father petting His sm all children. From there he 
entered another palace and saw Lord K ṛṣṇa pre-
paring to take His bath. (23) In one place the 
Lord was offering oblations into the sacrificial 
fires; in another, worshiping through the five 
mahā -yajñas; in another, feeding brāhma ṇas; 
and in yet another, eating the remnants of food 
left by brāhma ṇas. (24) Somewhere Lord K ṛṣṇa 
was observing the rituals for worship at sunset 
by refraining from speech and quietly chanting 
the Gāyatrī mantra, and elsewhere He was 
moving about with sword  and shield in the ar-
eas set aside for sword practice. (25) In one 
place Lord Gadāgraja was riding on horses, el-
ephants and chariots, and in another place He 
was resting on His bed while bards recited His 
glories. (26) Somewhere He was consulting 
with roya l ministers like Uddhava, and some-
where else He was enjoying in the water, sur-
rounded by many society girls and other young 
women. (27) Somewhere He was giving well -
decorated cows to exalted brāhma ṇas, and else-
where he was listening to the auspicious narra-
tion of epic histories and Purā ṇas. (28) Some-
where Lord K ṛṣṇa was found enjoying the com-
pany of a particular wife by exchanging joking 
words with her. Somewhere else He was found 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

744 
 engaged, along with His wife, in religious ritu-
alistic functions. Somewhere K ṛṣṇa was found 
engaged in matters of economic development, 
and somewhere else He was found enjoying 
family life according to the regulative princi-
ples of the śāstras. (29) Somewhere He was sit-
ting alone, meditating on the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, wh o is transcendental to ma-
terial nature, and somewhere He was rendering 
menial service to His elders, offering them de-
sirable things and reverential worship. (30)  

In one place He was planning battles in con-
sultation with some of His advisers, and in an-
other place He was making peace. Somewhere 
Lord Keśava and Lord Balarāma were together 
pondering the welfare of the pious. (31) Nārada 
saw Lord K ṛṣṇa engaged in getting His sons 
and daughters married to suitable brides and 
bridegrooms at the appropriate time, and the 
marriage ceremonies were being performed 
with great pomp. (32) Nārada observed how Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, the master of all yoga masters, arranged 
to send away His daughters and sons -in-law, 
and also to receive them home again, at the time 
of great holiday cel ebrations. All the citizens 
were astonished to see these celebrations. (33) 
Somewhere He was worshiping all the demi-
gods with elaborate sacrifices, and elsewhere 
He was fulfilling His religious obligations by 
doing public welfare work, such as the con-
struc tion of wells, public parks and monaster-
ies. (34) In another place He was on a hunting 
expedition. Mounted on His Sindhī horse and 
accompanied by the most heroic of the Yadus, 
He was killing animals meant for offering in 
sacrifice. (35) Somewhere K ṛṣṇa, the Lord of 
mystic power, was moving about in disguise 
among the homes of ministers and other citi-
zens in order to understand what each of them 
was thinking. (36)  

Having thus seen this display of the Lord’s 
Yoga -māyā, Nārada mildly laughed and then 
addresse d Lord H ṛṣīkeśa, who was adopting the 
behavior of a human being. (37) [Nārada said:] 
Now we understand Your mystic potencies, 
which are difficult to comprehend, even for 
great mystics, O Supreme Soul, master of all mystic power. Only by serving Your feet h ave 
I been able to perceive Your powers. (38) O 
Lord, please give me Your leave. I will wander 
about the worlds, which are flooded with Your 
fame, loudly singing about Your pastimes, 
which purify the universe. (39)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  O brāhma ṇa, I am the speaker of religion, 
its performer and sanctioner. I observe reli-
gious principles to teach them to the world, My 
child, so do not be disturbed. (40)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus in every 
palace Nārada saw the Lord in His same per-
sonal  form, executing the transcendental prin-
ciples of religion that purify those engaged in 
household affairs. (41)  

Having repeatedly seen the vast mystic dis-
play of Lord K ṛṣṇa, whose power is unlimited, 
the sage was amazed and filled with wonder. 
(42) Lord K ṛṣṇa greatly honored Nārada, faith-
fully presenting him with gifts related to eco-
nomic prosperity, sense gratification and reli-
gious duties. Thus fully satisfied, the sage de-
parted, constantly remembering the Lord. (43) 
In this way Lord Nārāya ṇa imitated th e ways of 
ordinary humans, manifesting His divine po-
tencies for the benefit of all beings. Thus He 
enjoyed, dear King, in the company of His six-
teen thousand exalted consorts, who served the 
Lord with their shy, affectionate glances and 
laughter. (44) Lord  Hari is the ultimate cause of 
universal creation, maintenance and destruc-
tion. My dear King, anyone who chants about, 
hears about or simply appreciates the extraor-
dinary activities He performed in this world, 
which are impossible to imitate, will surely d e-
velop devotion for the Supreme Lord, the be-
stower of liberation. (45)  

SB 10.70: Lord K ṛṣṇa’s Daily Activities  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  As dawn ap-
proached, the wives of Lord Mādhava, each 
embraced around the neck by her husband, 
cursed the crowing roosters . The ladies were 
disturbed that now they would be separated 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

745 
 from Him. (1) The bees’ buzzing, caused by the 
fragrant breeze from the pārijāta garden, roused 
the birds from sleep. And when the birds began 
to sing loudly, they woke Lord K ṛṣṇa like court 
poets reciting His glories. (2) Lying in her be-
loved’s arms, Queen Vaidarbhī did not like this 
most auspicious hour, for it meant she would 
lose His embrace. (3) Lord Mādhava would rise 
during the brāhma -muhūrta period and touch 
water. With a clear mind He wou ld then medi-
tate upon Himself, the single, self -luminous, 
unequaled and infallible Supreme Truth, 
known as Brahman, who by His very nature 
ever dispels all contamination, and who 
through His personal energies, which cause the 
creation and destruction of th is universe, mani-
fests His own pure and blissful existence. (4 -5) 
That most saintly of personalities would then 
bathe in sanctified water, dress Himself in 
lower and upper garments and perform the en-
tire sequence of prescribed rituals, beginning 
with worsh ip at dawn. After offering oblations 
into the sacred fire, Lord K ṛṣṇa would silently 
chant the Gāyatrī mantra. (6) Each day the Lord 
worshiped the rising sun and propitiated the 
demigods, sages and forefathers, who are all 
His expansions. The self -possesse d Lord would 
then carefully worship His elders and the 
brāhma ṇas. To those well -attired brāhma ṇas 
He would offer herds of tame and peaceful 
cows with gold -plated horns and pearl neck-
laces. These cows were also dressed in fine 
cloth, and the fronts of their  hooves were plated 
with silver. Providers of abundant milk, they 
had each given birth only once and were ac-
companied by their calves. Daily the Lord gave 
many groups of 13,084 cows to the learned 
brāhma ṇas, together with linen, deerskins and 
sesame seeds.  (7-9) Lord K ṛṣṇa would offer 
obeisances to the cows, brāhma ṇas and demi-
gods, His elders and spiritual masters, and all 
living beingsall of whom are expansions of His 
supreme personality. Then He would touch 
auspicious things. (10) He would decorate His 
body, the very ornament of human society, with 
His own special clothes and jewelry and with 
divine flower garlands and ointments. (11) He 
would then look at ghee, a mirror, the cows and 
bulls, the brāhma ṇas and the demigods and see to it that the members of all the social classes 
living in the palace and throughout the city 
were satisfied with gifts. After this He would 
greet His ministers, gratifying them by ful-
filling all their desires. (12) After first distrib-
uting flower garlands, pān and sandalwood 
paste  to the brāhma ṇas, He would give these 
gifts to His friends, ministers and wives, and fi-
nally He would partake of them Himself. (13) 
By then the Lord’s driver would have brought 
His supremely wonderful chariot, yoked with 
Sugrīva and His other horses. His charioteer 
would bow down to the Lord and then stand be-
fore Him. (14) Holding on to His charioteer’s 
hands, Lord K ṛṣṇa would mount the chariot, to-
gether with Sātyaki and Uddhava, just like the 
sun rising over the easternmost mountain. (15) 
The palace women  would look upon Lord 
Kṛṣṇa with shy, loving glances, and thus He 
would get free from them only with difficulty. 
He would then set off, His smiling face capti-
vating their minds. (16)  

The Lord, attended by all the V ṛṣṇis, would 
enter the Sudharmā assembly hall, which pro-
tects those who enter it from the six waves of 
material life, dear King. (17) As the almighty 
Supreme Lord would seat Himself upon His ex-
alted throne there in the assembly hall, He 
shone with His unique effulgence, illuminating 
all the quart ers of space. Surrounded by the Ya-
dus, lions among men, that best of the Yadus 
appeared like the moon amidst many stars. (18) 
And there, O King, jesters would entertain the 
Lord by displaying various comic moods, ex-
pert entertainers would perform for Him, and 
female dancers would dance energetically. (19) 
These performers would dance and sing to the 
sounds of m ṛdaṅgas, vī ṇās, murajas, flutes, 
cymbals and conchshells, while professional 
poets, chroniclers and panegyrists would recite 
the Lord’s glories. (20)  Some brāhma ṇas sitting 
in that assembly hall would fluently chant Ve-
dic mantras, while others recounted stories of 
past kings of pious renown. (21)  

Once a certain person arrived in the assem-
bly, O King, who had never been seen there be-
fore. The doorkeepe rs announced him to the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

746 
 Lord and then escorted him inside. (22) That 
person bowed down to K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, and with joined palms he 
described to the Lord how a number of kings 
were suffering because Jarāsandha had impris-
oned them.  (23) Twenty thousand kings who 
had refused to submit absolutely to Jarāsandha 
during his world conquest had been forcibly 
imprisoned by him in the fortress named Gi-
rivraja. (24) The kings said [as related through 
their messenger]: O K ṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, O immeas-
urable Soul, destroyer of fear for those surren-
dered to You! Despite our separatist attitude, 
we have come to You for shelter out of fear of 
material existence. (25) People in this world are 
always engaged in sinful activities and are thus 
bewildered about  their real duty, which is to 
worship You according to Your command-
ments. This activity would truly bring them 
good fortune. Let us offer our obeisances unto 
the all -powerful Lord, who appears as time and 
suddenly cuts down one’s stubborn hope for a 
long l ife in this world. (26) You are the pre-
dominating Lord of the universe and have de-
scended into this world with Your personal 
power to protect the saintly and suppress the 
wicked. We cannot understand, O Lord, how 
anyone can transgress Your law and still co n-
tinue to enjoy the fruits of his work. (27) O 
Lord, with this corpselike body, always full of 
fear, we bear the burden of the relative happi-
ness of kings, which is just like a dream. Thus 
we have rejected the real happiness of the soul, 
which comes by ren dering selfless service to 
You. Being so very wretched, we simply suffer 
in this life under the spell of Your illusory en-
ergy. (28) Therefore, since Your feet relieve the 
sorrow of those who surrender to them, please 
release us prisoners from the shackles of karma, 
manifest as the King of Magadha. Wielding 
alone the prowess of ten thousand maddened 
elephants, he has locked us up in his house just 
as a lion captures sheep. (29) O wielder of the 
disc! Your strength is unlimited, and thus sev-
enteen times You c rushed Jarāsandha in battle. 
But then, absorbed in human affairs, You al-
lowed him to defeat You once. Now he is so 
filled with pride that he dares to torment us, Your subjects. O unconquerable one, please 
rectify this situation. (30)  

The messenger continu ed: This is the mes-
sage of the kings imprisoned by Jarāsandha, 
who all hanker for Your audience, having sur-
rendered to Your feet. Please bestow good for-
tune on these poor souls. (31)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  When the kings’ 
messenger had thus spoken, the sa ge of the 
demigods, Nārada, suddenly appeared. Bearing 
a mass of golden matted locks on his head, the 
supremely effulgent sage entered like the bril-
liant sun. (32) Lord K ṛṣṇa is the worshipable 
master of even planetary rulers like Lord 
Brahmā and Lord Śiva , yet as soon as He saw 
that Nārada Muni had arrived, He joyfully 
stood up along with His ministers and secretar-
ies to receive the great sage and offer His re-
spectful obeisances by bowing His head. (33) 
After Nārada had accepted the seat offered to 
him, Lo rd Kṛṣṇa honored the sage according to 
scriptural injunctions and, gratifying him with 
His reverence, spoke the following truthful and 
pleasing words. (34) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] It is 
certain that today the three worlds have attained 
freedom from all fear, fo r that is the influence 
of such a great personality as you, who travel at 
will throughout all the worlds. (35) There is 
nothing unknown to you within God’s creation. 
Therefore, please tell Us what the Pā ṇḍavas in-
tend to do. (36)  

Śrī Nārada said:  I have se en many times 
the insurmountable power of Your Māyā, O al-
mighty one, by which You bewilder even the 
creator of the universe, Brahmā. O all -encom-
passing Lord, it does not surprise me that You 
disguise Yourself by Your own energies while 
moving among the cre ated beings, as a fire co-
vers its own light with smoke. (37) Who can 
properly understand Your purpose? With Your 
material energy You expand and also withdraw 
this creation, which thus appears to have sub-
stantial existence. Obeisances to You, whose 
transcen dental position is inconceivable. (38) 
The living being caught in the cycle of birth and 
death does not know how he can be delivered 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

747 
 from the material body, which brings him so 
much trouble. But You, the Supreme Lord, de-
scend to this world in various perso nal forms, 
and by performing Your pastimes You illumine 
the soul’s path with the blazing torch of Your 
fame. Therefore, I surrender unto You. (39) 
Nonetheless, O Supreme Truth playing the part 
of a human being, I shall tell You what Your 
devotee Yudhi ṣṭhira Mahārāja, the son of Your 
father’s sister, intends to do. (40) Desiring un-
rivaled sovereignty, King Yudhi ṣṭhira intends 
to worship You with the greatest fire sacrifice, 
the Rājasūya. Please bless his endeavor. (41) O 
Lord, exalted demigods and glorious k ings, ea-
ger to see You, will all come to that best of sac-
rifices. (42) O Lord, even outcastes are purified 
by hearing and chanting Your glories and med-
itating upon You, the Absolute Truth. What 
then to speak of those who see and touch You? 
(43) My dear Lor d, You are the symbol of eve-
rything auspicious. Your transcendental name 
and fame is spread like a canopy all over the 
universe, including the higher, middle and 
lower planetary systems. The transcendental 
water that washes Your lotus feet is known in 
the higher planetary systems as the Mandākinī 
River, in the lower planetary systems as the 
Bhogavatī and in this earthly planetary system 
as the Ganges. This sacred, transcendental wa-
ter flows throughout the entire universe, puri-
fying wherever it goes. (44)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  When His sup-
porters, the Yādavas, objected to this proposal 
out of eagerness to defeat Jarāsandha, Lord 
Keśava turned to His servant Uddhava and, 
smiling, addressed him with fine words. (45)  

The Personality of Godhead said:  You are 
indeed Our best eye and closest friend, for you 
know perfectly the relative value of various 
kinds of counsel. Therefore, please tell Us what 
should be done in this situation. We trust your 
judgment and shall do as you say. (46) 
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: ] Thus re-
quested by his master, who, though omniscient, 
acted as if perplexed, Uddhava took this order 
upon his head and replied as follows. (47)  
 SB 10.71: The Lord Travels to In-
draprastha  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having thus 
heard the statements of Devar ṣi Nārada, and 
understanding the opinions of both the assem-
bly and Lord K ṛṣṇa, the great -minded Uddhava 
began to speak. (1)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  O Lord, as the sage ad-
vised, You should help Your cousin fulfill his 
plan for performing the Rājasūya sacrifice, a nd 
You should also protect the kings who are beg-
ging for Your shelter. (2) Only one who has 
conquered all opponents in every direction can 
perform the Rājasūya sacrifice, O almighty 
one. Thus, in my opinion, conquering 
Jarāsandha will serve both purposes. (3) By this 
decision there will be great gain for us, and You 
will save the kings. Thus, Govinda, You will be 
glorified. (4) The invincible King Jarāsandha is 
as strong as ten thousand elephants. Indeed, 
other powerful warriors cannot defeat him. 
Only Bhīm a is equal to him in strength. (5) He 
will be defeated in a match of single chariots, 
not when he is with his hundred military divi-
sions. Now, Jarāsandha is so devoted to brah-
minical culture that he never refuses requests 
from brāhma ṇas. (6) Bhīma should g o to him 
disguised as a brāhma ṇa and beg charity. Thus 
he will obtain single combat with Jarāsandha, 
and in Your presence Bhīma will no doubt kill 
him. (7) Even Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva act 
only as Your instruments in cosmic creation 
and annihilation, whi ch are ultimately done by 
You, the Supreme Lord, in Your invisible as-
pect of time. (8) In their homes, the godly wives 
of the imprisoned kings sing of Your noble 
deedsabout how You will kill their husbands’ 
enemy and deliver them. The gopīs also sing 
Your glorieshow You killed the enemy of the 
elephant king, Gajendra; the enemy of Sīta, 
daughter of Janaka; and the enemies of Your 
own parents as well. So also do the sages who 
have obtained Your shelter glorify You, as do 
we ourselves. (9) O K ṛṣṇa, the killin g of 
Jarāsandha, which is certainly a reaction of his 
past sins, will bring immense benefit. Indeed, it 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

748 
 will make possible the sacrificial ceremony 
You desire. (10)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, Devar ṣi 
Nārada, the Yadu elders and Lord K ṛṣṇa all 
welcomed  Uddhava’s proposal, which was en-
tirely auspicious and infallible. (11) The al-
mighty Personality of Godhead, the son of 
Devakī, begged His superiors for permission to 
leave. Then He ordered His servants, headed by 
Dāruka and Jaitra, to prepare for departur e. (12) 
O slayer of enemies, after He had arranged for 
the departure of His wives, children and bag-
gage and taken leave of Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa and 
King Ugrasena, Lord K ṛṣṇa mounted His char-
iot, which had been brought by His driver. It 
flew a flag marked with t he emblem of Garu ḍa. 
(13) As the vibrations resounding from 
mṛdaṅgas, bherīs, kettledrums, conchshells and 
gomukhas filled the sky in all directions, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa set out on His journey. He was accompa-
nied by the chief officers of His corps of chari-
ots, elep hants, infantry and cavalry and sur-
rounded on all sides by His fierce personal 
guard. (14) Lord Acyuta’s faithful wives, along 
with their children, followed the Lord on 
golden palanquins carried by powerful men. 
The queens were adorned with fine clothing, 
ornaments, fragrant oils and flower garlands, 
and they were surrounded on all sides by sol-
diers carrying swords and shields in their 
hands. (15) On all sides proceeded finely 
adorned women -attendants of the royal house-
hold, as well as courtesans. They rode  on pal-
anquins and camels, bulls and buffalo, don-
keys, mules, bullock carts and elephants. Their 
conveyances were fully loaded with grass tents, 
blankets, clothes and other items for the trip. 
(16) The Lord’s army boasted royal umbrellas, 
cāmara fans and h uge flagpoles with waving 
banners. During the day the sun’s rays reflected 
brightly from the soldiers’ fine weapons, jew-
elry, helmets and armor. Thus Lord K ṛṣṇa’s 
army, noisy with shouts and clatter, appeared 
like an ocean stirring with agitated waves and 
timiṅgila fish. (17) Honored by Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the 
chief of the Yadus, Nārada Muni bowed down 
to the Lord. All of Nārada’s senses were satis-
fied by his meeting with Lord K ṛṣṇa. Thus, having heard the decision of the Lord and hav-
ing been worshiped by Him, Nārad a placed 
Him firmly within his heart and departed 
through the sky. (18) With pleasing words the 
Lord addressed the messenger sent by the 
kings: “My dear messenger, I wish all good for-
tune to you. I shall arrange for the killing of 
King Magadha. Do not fear .” (19) Thus ad-
dressed, the messenger departed and accurately 
relayed the Lord’s message to the kings. Eager 
for freedom, they then waited expectantly for 
their meeting with Lord K ṛṣṇa. (20)  

As He traveled through the provinces of 
Ānarta, Sauvīra, Marudeś a and Vinaśana, Lord 
Hari crossed rivers and passed mountains, cit-
ies, villages, cow pastures and quarries. (21)  

After crossing the rivers D ṛṣadvatī and Sar-
asvatī, He passed through Pañcāla and Matsya 
and finally came to Indraprastha. (22) King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira was delighted to hear that the Lord, 
whom human beings rarely see, had now ar-
rived. Accompanied by his priests and dear as-
sociates, the King came out to meet Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. (23) As songs and musical instruments 
resounded along with the loud vibration of Ve-
dic hymns, the King went forth with great rev-
erence to meet Lord H ṛṣīkeśa, just as the senses 
go forth to meet the consciousness of life. (24) 
The heart of King Yudhi ṣṭhira melted with af-
fection when he saw his dearmost friend, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, after such a long  separation, and he em-
braced the Lord again and again. (25) The eter-
nal form of Lord K ṛṣṇa is the everlasting resi-
dence of the goddess of fortune. As soon as 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira embraced Him, the King be-
came free of all the contamination of material 
existence . He immediately felt transcendental 
bliss and merged in an ocean of happiness. 
There were tears in his eyes, and his body 
shook due to ecstasy. He completely forgot that 
he was living in this material world. (26) Then 
Bhīma, his eyes brimming with tears, laughed 
with joy as he embraced his maternal cousin, 
Kṛṣṇa. Arjuna and the twinsNakula and Sa-
hadevaalso joyfully embraced their dearmost 
friend, the infallible Lord, and they cried pro-
fusely. (27) After Arjuna had embraced Him 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

749 
 once more and Nakula and Saha deva had of-
fered Him their obeisances, Lord K ṛṣṇa bowed 
down to the brāhma ṇas and elders present, thus 
properly honoring the respectable members of 
the Kuru, S ṛñjaya and Kaikaya clans. (28) 
Sūtas, Māgadhas, Gandharvas, Vandīs, jesters 
and brāhma ṇas all glo rified the lotus -eyed 
Lordsome reciting prayers, some dancing and 
singingas m ṛdaṅgas, conchshells, kettledrums, 
vīṇās, pa ṇavas and gomukhas resounded. (29) 
Thus surrounded by His well -wishing relatives 
and praised on all sides, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the crest 
jewel of the justly renowned, entered the deco-
rated city. (30)  

The roads of Indraprastha were sprinkled 
with water perfumed by the liquid from ele-
phants’ foreheads, and colorful flags, golden 
gateways and full waterpots enhanced the city’s 
splendor. Men and you ng girls were beautifully 
arrayed in fine, new garments, adorned with 
flower garlands and ornaments, and anointed 
with aromatic sandalwood paste. Every home 
displayed glowing lamps and respectful offer-
ings, and from the holes of the latticed windows 
drifte d incense, further beautifying the city. 
Banners waved, and the roofs were decorated 
with golden domes on broad silver bases. Thus 
Lord K ṛṣṇa saw the royal city of the King of the 
Kurus. (31 -32) When the young women of the 
city heard that Lord K ṛṣṇa, the r eservoir of 
pleasure for human eyes, had arrived, they hur-
riedly went onto the royal road to see Him. 
They abandoned their household duties and 
even left their husbands in bed, and in their ea-
gerness the knots of their hair and garments 
came loose. (33) Th e royal road being quite 
crowded with elephants, horses, chariots and 
foot soldiers, the women climbed to the top of 
their houses, where they caught sight of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa and His queens. The city ladies scattered 
flowers upon the Lord, embraced Him in their 
minds and expressed their heartfelt welcome 
with broadly smiling glances. (34) Observing 
Lord Mukunda’s wives passing on the road like 
stars accompanying the moon, the women ex-
claimed, “What have these ladies done so that 
the best of men bestows upon their  eyes the joy 
of His generous smiles and playful sidelong glances?” (35) In various places citizens of the 
city came forward holding auspicious offerings 
for Lord K ṛṣṇa, and sinless leaders of occupa-
tional guilds came forward to worship the Lord. 
(36) 

With wide -open eyes, the members of the 
royal household came forward in a flurry to 
lovingly greet Lord Mukunda, and thus the 
Lord entered the royal palace. (37)  

When Queen P ṛthā saw her nephew K ṛṣṇa, 
the master of the three worlds, her heart became 
filled w ith love. Rising from her couch with her 
daughter -in-law, she embraced the Lord. (38) 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira respectfully brought Lord 
Govinda, the Supreme God of gods, to his per-
sonal quarters. The King was so overcome with 
joy that he could not remember all th e rituals of 
worship. (39) Lord K ṛṣṇa bowed down to His 
aunt and the wives of His elders, O King, and 
then Draupadī and the Lord’s sister bowed 
down to Him. (40) Encouraged by her mother -
in-law, Draupadī worshiped all of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s 
wives, including Rukmi ṇī; Satyabhāmā; 
Bhadrā; Jāmbavatī; Kālindī; Mitravindā, the 
descendant of Śibi; the chaste Nāgnajitī; and 
the other queens of the Lord who were present. 
Draupadī honored them all with such gifts as 
clothing, flower garlands and jewelry. (41 -42) 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira arranged for K ṛṣṇa’s rest and 
saw to it that all who came along with 
Himnamely His queens, soldiers, ministers and 
secretarieswere comfortably situated. He ar-
ranged that they would experience a new fea-
ture of reception every day while staying as 
guests of the Pā ṇḍavas. (43) Desiring to please 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira, the Lord resided at In-
draprastha for several months. During His stay, 
He and Arjuna satisfied the fire -god by offering 
him the Khā ṇḍava forest, and they saved Maya 
Dānava, who then built King Yu dhiṣṭhira a ce-
lestial assembly hall. The Lord also took the 
opportunity to go riding in His chariot in the 
company of Arjuna, surrounded by a retinue of 
soldiers. (44 -45) 

SB 10.72: The Slaying of the Demon 
Jarāsandha  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

750 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  One day, as Ki ng 
Yudhi ṣṭhira sat in the royal assembly sur-
rounded by eminent sages, brāhma ṇas, k ṣatri-
yas and vaiśyas, and also by his brothers, spir-
itual masters, family elders, blood relations, in -
laws and friends, he addressed Lord K ṛṣṇa as 
everyone listened. (1 -2) 

Śrī Yudhi ṣṭhira said:  O Govinda, I desire 
to worship Your auspicious, opulent expan-
sions by the Rājasūya sacrifice, the king of Ve-
dic ceremonies. Please make our endeavor a 
success, my Lord. (3) Purified persons who 
constantly serve, meditate upon and glori fy 
Your shoes, which destroy everything inauspi-
cious, are sure to obtain freedom from material 
existence, O lotus -naveled one. Even if they de-
sire something in this world, they obtain it, 
whereas othersthose who do not take shelter of 
Youare never satisfie d, O Lord. (4) Therefore, 
O Lord of lords, let the people of this world see 
the power of devotional service rendered to 
Your lotus feet. Please show them, O almighty 
one, the position of those Kurus and S ṛñjayas 
who worship You, and the position of those 
who do not. (5) Within Your mind there can be 
no such differentiation as “This one is mine, 
and that is another’s,” because You are the Su-
preme Absolute Truth, the Soul of all beings, 
always equipoised and enjoying transcendental 
happiness within Yourself. Just like the heav-
enly desire tree, You bless all who properly 
worship You, granting their desired fruits in 
proportion to the service they render You. 
There is nothing wrong in this. (6)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  Your decision is perfect, O King, and thus 
your noble fame will spread to all the worlds, 
O tormentor of your enemies. (7)  

Indeed, My lord, for the great sages, the 
forefathers and the demigods, for Our well -
wishing friends and, indeed, for all living be-
ings, the performance of th is king of Vedic sac-
rifices is desirable. (8) First conquer all kings, 
bring the earth under your control and collect 
all the required paraphernalia; then execute this great sacrifice. (9) These brothers of yours, O 
King, have taken birth as partial expans ions of 
the demigods ruling various planets. And you 
are so self -controlled that you have conquered 
even Me, who am unconquerable for those who 
cannot control their senses. (10) No one in this 
world, even a demigodwhat to speak of an 
earthly kingcan defeat  My devotee with his 
strength, beauty, fame or riches. (11)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Upon hearing 
these words sung by the Supreme Lord, King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira became joyful, and his face blos-
somed like a lotus. Thus he sent forth his broth-
ers, who were empowered with Lord Vi ṣṇu’s 
potency, to conquer all directions. (12) He sent 
Sahadeva to the south with the S ṛñjayas, 
Nakula to the west with the Matsyas, Arjuna to 
the north with the Kekayas, and Bhīma to the 
east with the Madrakas. (13) After defeating 
many kings with their prowess, these heroic 
brothers brought back abundant wealth for 
Yudhi ṣṭhira Mahārāja, who was intent on per-
forming the sacrifice, O King. (14) When King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira heard that Jarāsandha remained 
undefeated, he set to pondering, and then the 
primeval Lord, Hari, told him the means Ud-
dhava had described for defeating Jarāsandha. 
(15) Thus Bhīmasena, Arjuna and K ṛṣṇa dis-
guised themselves as brāhma ṇas and went to 
Girivraja, my dear King, where the son of 
Bṛhadratha was to be found. (16) Disguised as  
brāhma ṇas, the royal warriors approached 
Jarāsandha at home during the appointed hour 
for receiving guests. They submitted their en-
treaty to that dutiful householder, who was es-
pecially respectful to the brahminical class. 
(17) 

[Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna and Bhīma s aid:] O King, 
know us to be needy guests who have come to 
you from afar. We wish all good unto you. 
Please grant us whatever we desire. (18) What 
can the tolerant not bear? What will the wicked 
not do? What will the generous not give in 
charity? And who wi ll those of equal vision see 
as an outsider? (19) He indeed is to be censured 
and pitied who, though able to do so, fails to 
achieve with his temporary body the lasting 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

751 
 fame glorified by great saints. (20) Hariścan-
dra, Rantideva, Uñchav ṛtti Mudgala, Śibi, Bali, 
the legendary hunter and pigeon, and many oth-
ers have attained the permanent by means of the 
impermanent. (21)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  From the sound 
of their voices, their physical stature and the 
marks of bowstrings on their forearms, 
Jarāsandha co uld tell that his guests were of the 
royal order. He began to think he had seen them 
somewhere before. (22) [Jarāsandha thought:] 
These are surely members of the royal order 
dressed as brāhma ṇas, but still I must grant 
their request for charity, even if th ey beg me for 
my own body. (23) Indeed, the spotless glories 
of Bali Mahārāja are heard throughout the 
world. Lord Vi ṣṇu, wishing to recover Indra’s 
opulence from Bali, appeared before him in the 
guise of a brāhma ṇa and made him fall from his 
powerful posi tion. Though aware of the ruse 
and forbidden by his guru, Bali, king of the de-
mons, still gave Vi ṣṇu the whole earth in char-
ity. (24 -25) What is the use of an unqualified 
kṣatriya who goes on living but fails to gain ev-
erlasting glory by working with his p erishable 
body for the benefit of brāhma ṇas? (26)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  Thus 
making up his mind, the generous Jarāsandha 
addressed K ṛṣṇa, Arjuna and Bhīma: “O 
learned brāhma ṇas, choose whatever you wish. 
I will give it to you, even if it is my own  head.” 
(27) 

The Supreme Lord said:  O exalted King, 
give us battle in the form of a duel, if you think 
it fitting. We are princes and have come to beg 
a fight. We have no other request to make of 
you. (28) Over there is Bhīma, son of P ṛthā, and 
this is hi s brother Arjuna. Know Me to be their 
maternal cousin, K ṛṣṇa, your enemy. (29) 
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus chal-
lenged, Magadharāja laughed out loud and con-
temptuously said, “All right, you fools, I’ll give 
you a fight! (30) “But I will not fight wit h You, 
Kṛṣṇa, for You are a coward. Your strength 
abandoned You in the midst of battle, and You fled Your own capital of Mathurā to take shel-
ter in the sea. (31) “As for this one, Arjuna, he 
is not as old as I, nor is he very strong. Since he 
is no match f or me, he should not be the con-
tender. Bhīma, however, is as strong as I am.” 
(32) Having said this, Jarāsandha offered 
Bhīmasena a huge club, took up another him-
self and went outside the city. (33) The two he-
roes thus began battling each other on the leve l 
fighting grounds outside the city. Maddened 
with the fury of combat, they struck each other 
with their lightning -bolt-like clubs. (34) As 
they skillfully circled left and right, like actors 
dancing on a stage, the fight presented a mag-
nificent spectacle.  (35) When Jarāsandha’s and 
Bhīmasena’s clubs loudly collided, O King, the 
sound was like the impact of the big tusks of 
two fighting elephants, or the crash of a thun-
derbolt in a flashing electrical storm. (36)  

They swung their clubs at each other with 
such speed and force that as the clubs struck 
their shoulders, hips, feet, hands, thighs and 
collarbones, the weapons were crushed and 
broken like branches of arka trees with which 
two enraged elephants furiously attack each 
other. (37) Their clubs thus rui ned, those great 
heroes among men angrily pummeled each 
other with their iron -hard fists. As they slapped 
each other, the sound resembled the crash of el-
ephants colliding or harsh thunderclaps. (38)  

As they thus fought, this contest between 
opponents of e qual training, strength and stam-
ina reached no conclusion. And so they kept on 
fighting, O King, without any letup. (39) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa knew the secret of His enemy 
Jarāsandha’s birth and death, and also how he 
had been given life by the demoness Jarā. Con-
sidering all this, Lord K ṛṣṇa imparted His spe-
cial power to Bhīma. (40) Having determined 
how to kill the enemy, that Lord of infallible 
vision made a sign to Bhīma by tearing in half 
a small branch of a tree. (41) Understanding 
this sign, mighty Bhīma, the be st of fighters, 
seized his opponent by the feet and threw him 
to the ground. (42) Bhīma pressed down on one 
leg with his foot while grabbing Jarāsandha’s 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

752 
 other leg in his hands, and just as a great ele-
phant might break the branch of a tree, Bhīma 
tore Jarā sandha apart from the anus upward. 
(43) The King’s subjects then saw him lying in 
two separate pieces, each with a single leg, 
thigh, testicle, hip, shoulder, arm, eye, eyebrow 
and ear, and with half a back and chest. (44)  

With the death of the lord of Ma gadha, a 
great cry of lamentation arose, while Arjuna 
and K ṛṣṇa congratulated Bhīma by embracing 
him. (45) The immeasurable Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, the sustainer and benefactor 
of all living beings, coronated Jarāsandha’s 
son, Sahadeva, as the new ruler of the 
Magadhas. The Lord then freed all the kings 
Jarāsandha had imprisoned. (46)  

SB 10.73: Lord K ṛṣṇa Blesses the Liber-
ated Kings  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Jarāsandha had 
defeated 20,800 kings in combat and thrown 
them into prison. As these kings em erged from 
the Giridro ṇī fortress, they appeared dirty and 
shabbily dressed. They were emaciated by hun-
ger, their faces were dried up, and they were 
greatly weakened by their long imprisonment. 
(1-6) The ecstasy of beholding Lord K ṛṣṇa hav-
ing dispelled the  weariness of their imprison-
ment, the kings stood with joined palms and of-
fered words of praise to that supreme master of 
the senses. (7)  

The kings said:  Obeisances to You, O Lord 
of the ruling demigods, O destroyer of Your 
surrendered devotees’ distress.  Since we have 
surrendered to You, O inexhaustible K ṛṣṇa, 
please save us from this terrible material life, 
which has made us so despondent. (8) O mas-
ter, Madhusūdana, we do not blame this King 
of Magadha, since it is actually by Your mercy 
that kings fall from their royal position, O al-
mighty Lord. (9) Infatuated with his opulence 
and ruling power, a king loses all self -restraint 
and cannot obtain his true welfare. Thus bewil-
dered by Your illusory energy, he imagines his 
temporary assets to be permanent. (1 0) Just as 
men of childish intelligence consider a mirage in the desert to be a pond of water, so those who 
are irrational look upon the illusory transfor-
mations of Māyā as substantial. (11) Previ-
ously, blinded by the intoxication of riches, we 
wanted to c onquer this earth, and thus we 
fought one another to achieve victory, merci-
lessly harassing our own subjects. We arro-
gantly disregarded You, O Lord, who stood be-
fore us as death. But now, O K ṛṣṇa, that pow-
erful form of Yours called time, moving mys-
teriousl y and irresistibly, has deprived us of our 
opulences. Now that You have mercifully de-
stroyed our pride, we beg simply to remember 
Your lotus feet. (12 -13) Never again will we 
hanker for a miragelike kingdoma kingdom 
that must be slavishly served by this mo rtal 
body, which is simply a source of disease and 
suffering and which is declining at every mo-
ment. Nor, O almighty Lord, will we hanker to 
enjoy the heavenly fruits of pious work in the 
next life, since the promise of such rewards is 
simply an empty enti cement for the ears. (14) 
Please tell us how we may constantly remem-
ber Your lotus feet, though we continue in the 
cycle of birth and death in this world. (15) 
Again and again we offer our obeisances unto 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, Hari, the son of Vasudeva. That 
Supreme  Soul, Govinda, vanquishes the suffer-
ing of all who surrender to Him. (16)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus the kings, 
now freed from bondage, glorified the Supreme 
Lord. Then, my dear Parīk ṣit, that merciful be-
stower of shelter spoke to them in a gentle 
voice . (17)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  From now on, my dear kings, you will 
have firm devotion to Me, the Supreme Self 
and the Lord of all that be. I assure you this will 
come to pass, just as you desire. (18) Fortu-
nately you have come to the pro per conclusion, 
my dear kings, and what you have spoken is 
true. I can see that human beings’ lack of self -
restraint, which arises from their intoxication 
with opulence and power, simply leads to mad-
ness. (19) Haihaya, Nahu ṣa, Ve ṇa, Rāva ṇa, 
Naraka and many  other rulers of demigods, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

753 
 men and demons fell from their elevated posi-
tions because of infatuation with material opu-
lence. (20) Understanding that this material 
body and everything connected with it have a 
beginning and an end, worship Me by Vedic 
sacrifi ces, and with clear intelligence protect 
your subjects in accordance with the principles 
of religion. (21) As you live your lives, beget-
ting generations of progeny and encountering 
happiness and distress, birth and death, always 
keep your minds fixed on Me . (22) Be detached 
from the body and everything connected to it. 
Remaining self -satisfied, steadfastly keep your 
vows while concentrating your minds fully on 
Me. In this way you will ultimately attain Me, 
the Supreme Absolute Truth. (23)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having thus in-
structed the kings, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the supreme 
master of all the worlds, engaged male and fe-
male servants in bathing and grooming them. 
(24) 

O descendant of Bharata, the Lord then had 
King Sahadeva honor them with offerings of 
clothing, j ewelry, garlands and sandalwood 
paste, all suitable for royalty. (25) After they 
had been properly bathed and adorned, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa saw to it that they dined on excellent 
food. He also presented them with various 
items befitting the pleasure of kings, such a s 
betel nut. (26) Honored by Lord Mukunda and 
freed from tribulation, the kings shone splen-
didly, their earrings gleaming, just as the moon 
and other celestial bodies shine brilliantly in the 
sky at the end of the rainy season. (27) Then the 
Lord arranged for the kings to be seated on 
chariots drawn by fine horses and adorned with 
jewels and gold, and pleasing them with gra-
cious words, He sent them off to their own 
kingdoms. (28) Thus liberated from all diffi-
culty by K ṛṣṇa, the greatest of personalities, th e 
kings departed, and as they went they thought 
only of Him, the Lord of the universe, and of 
His wonderful deeds. (29) The kings told their 
ministers and other associates what the Person-
ality of Godhead had done, and then they dili-
gently carried out the o rders He had imparted 
to them. (30)   
Having arranged for Bhīmasena to kill 
Jarāsandha, Lord Keśava accepted worship 
from King Sahadeva and then departed with the 
two sons of P ṛthā. (31) When they arrived at 
Indraprastha, the victorious heroes blew their 
conchshells, bringing joy to their well -wishing 
friends and sorrow to their enemies. (32) The 
residents of Indraprastha were very pleased to 
hear that sound, for they understood that now 
the King of Magadha had been put to rest. King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira felt that hi s desires were now ful-
filled. (33) Bhīma, Arjuna and Janārdana of-
fered their respects to the King and informed 
him fully about what they had done. (34)  

Upon hearing their account of the great fa-
vor Lord Keśava had mercifully shown him, 
King Dharmarāja she d tears of ecstasy. He felt 
such love that he could not say anything. (35)  

SB 10.74: The Deliverance of Śiśupāla at 
the Rājasūya Sacrifice  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having thus 
heard of the killing of Jarāsandha, and also of 
almighty K ṛṣṇa’s wonderful power , King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira addressed the Lord as follows with 
great pleasure. (1)  

Śrī Yudhi ṣṭhira said:  All the exalted spir-
itual masters of the three worlds, together with 
the inhabitants and rulers of the various planets, 
carry on their heads Your command, whic h is 
rarely obtained. (2) That You, the lotus -eyed 
Supreme Lord, accept the orders of wretched 
fools who presume themselves rulers is a great 
pretense on Your part, O all -pervading one. (3) 
But of course the power of the Absolute Truth, 
the Supreme Soul, t he primeval one without a 
second, is neither increased nor diminished by 
His activities, any more than the sun’s power is 
by its movements. (4) O unconquerable 
Mādhava, even Your devotees make no distinc-
tions of “I” and “mine,” “you” and “yours,” for 
this is the perverted mentality of animals. (5)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having said this, 
King Yudhi ṣṭhira waited until the proper time 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

754 
 for the sacrifice was at hand. Then with Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s permission he selected suitable priests, 
all expert authorities on the Vedas, to execute 
the sacrifice. (6)  

He selected K ṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana, Bharadvāja, 
Sumantu, Gotama and Asita, along with Va-
siṣṭha, Cyavana, Ka ṇva, Maitreya, Kava ṣa and 
Trita. He also selected Viśvāmitra, Vāmadeva, 
Sumati, Jaimini, Kratu, Paila and Parāśara, a s 
well as Garga, Vaiśampāyana, Atharvā, 
Kaśyapa, Dhaumya, Rāma of the Bhārgavas, 
Āsuri, Vītihotra, Madhucchandā, Vīrasena and 
Akṛtavra ṇa. (7-9) 

O King, others who were invited included 
Droṇa, Bhī ṣma, K ṛpa, Dh ṛtarāṣṭra with his 
sons, the wise Vidura, and m any other 
brāhma ṇas, k ṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras, all 
eager to witness the sacrifice. Indeed, all the 
kings came there with their entourages. (10 -11) 

The brāhma ṇa priests then plowed the sacri-
ficial ground with golden plowshares and initi-
ated King Yudhi ṣṭhira for the sacrifice in ac-
cordance with the traditions set down by stand-
ard authorities. (12) The utensils used in the 
sacrifice were made of gold, just as in the an-
cient Rājasūya performed by Lord Varu ṇa. In-
dra, Brahmā, Śiva and many other planetary 
rulers; the Siddhas and Gandharvas with their 
entourage; the Vidyādharas; great serpents; 
sages; Yak ṣas; Rāk ṣasas; celestial birds; Kin-
naras; Cāra ṇas; and earthly kingsall were in-
vited, and indeed they all came from every di-
rection to the Rājasūya sacrifice  of King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, the son of Pā ṇḍu. They were not 
in the least astonished to see the opulence of the 
sacrifice, since it was quite appropriate for a 
devotee of Lord K ṛṣṇa. (13 -15) 

The priests, as powerful as gods, performed 
the Rājasūya sacrifice for King Yudhi ṣṭhira in 
accordance with the Vedic injunctions, just as 
the demigods had previously performed it for 
Varu ṇa. (16) On the day of extracting the soma 
juice, King Yudhi ṣṭhira properly and very at-
tentively worshiped the priests and the most ex-
alted personalities of the assembly. (17)   
The members of the assembly then pondered 
over who among them should be worshiped 
first, but since there were many personalities 
qualified for this honor, they were unable to de-
cide. Finally Sahadeva spoke up. (18) [Sa-
hadeva said:] Certainly it is Acyuta, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead and chief of the 
Yādavas, who deserves the highest position. In 
truth, He Himself comprises all the demigods 
worshiped in sacrifice, along with such aspects 
of the worship as the sacre d place, the time and 
the paraphernalia. (19) This entire universe is 
founded upon Him, as are the great sacrificial 
performances, with their sacred fires, oblations 
and mantras. Sā ṅkhya and yoga both aim to-
ward Him, the one without a second. O assem-
bly me mbers, that unborn Lord, relying solely 
on Himself, creates, maintains and destroys this 
cosmos by His personal energies, and thus the 
existence of this universe depends on Him 
alone. (20 -21) He creates the many activities of 
this world, and thus by His gr ace the whole 
world endeavors for the ideals of religiosity, 
economic development, sense gratification and 
liberation. (22) Therefore, we should give the 
highest honor to K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord. If 
we do so, we will be honoring all living beings 
and also our own selves. (23) Anyone who 
wishes the honor he gives to be reciprocated in-
finitely should honor K ṛṣṇa, the perfectly 
peaceful and perfectly complete Soul of all be-
ings, the Supreme Lord, who views nothing as 
separate from Himself. (24) [Śukadeva 
Gosvā mī continued:] Having said this, Sa-
hadeva, who understood Lord K ṛṣṇa’s powers, 
fell silent. And having heard his words, all the 
saintly persons present congratulated him, ex-
claiming “Excellent! Excellent!” (25) The King 
was delighted to hear this pronounce ment of 
the brāhma ṇas, from which he understood the 
mood of the entire assembly. Overwhelmed 
with love, he fully worshiped Lord K ṛṣṇa, the 
master of the senses. (26) After bathing Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s feet, Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhira joyfully 
sprinkled the water upon hi s own head, and 
then upon the heads of his wife, brothers, other 
family members and ministers. That water pu-
rifies the whole world. As he honored the Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

755 
 with presentations of yellow silken garments 
and precious jeweled ornaments, the King’s 
tear-filled e yes prevented him from looking di-
rectly at the Lord. (27 -28) 

When they saw Lord K ṛṣṇa thus honored, 
nearly all who were present joined their palms 
reverentially, exclaiming “Obeisances to You! 
All victory to You!” and then bowed down to 
Him. Flowers raine d down from above. (29)  

The intolerant son of Damagho ṣa became 
infuriated upon hearing the glorification of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s transcendental qualities. He stood 
up from his seat and, angrily waving his arms, 
fearlessly spoke to the entire assembly the fol-
lowin g harsh words against the Supreme Lord. 
(30) [Śiśupāla said:] The statement of the Ve-
das that time is the unavoidable controller of all 
has indeed been proven true, since the intelli-
gence of wise elders has now become diverted 
by the words of a mere boy. ( 31) O leaders of 
the assembly, you know best who is a fit candi-
date for being honored. Therefore, you should 
not heed the words of a child when he claims 
that K ṛṣṇa deserves to be worshiped. (32) How 
can you pass over the most exalted members of 
this assem blytopmost sages dedicated to the 
Absolute Truth endowed with powers of aus-
terity, divine insight and strict adherence to se-
vere vows, sanctified by knowledge and wor-
shiped even by the rulers of the universe? How 
does this cowherd boy, the disgrace of His fam-
ily, deserve your worship, any more than a 
crow deserves to eat the sacred puro ḍāśa rice 
cake? (33 -34) How does one who follows no 
principles of the social and spiritual orders or 
of family ethics, who has been excluded from 
all religious duties, who be haves whimsically, 
and who has no good qualitieshow does such a 
person deserve to be worshiped? (35) Yayāti 
cursed the dynasty of these Yādavas, and ever 
since then they have been ostracized by honest 
men and addicted to liquor. How, then, does 
Kṛṣṇa deser ve to be worshiped? (36) These 
Yādavas have abandoned the holy lands inhab-
ited by saintly sages and have instead taken 
shelter of a fortress in the sea, a place where no 
brahminical principles are observed. There, just like thieves, they harass their subje cts. (37) 
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Bereft of all 
good fortune, Śiśupāla spoke these and other 
insults. But the Supreme Lord said nothing, just 
as a lion ignores a jackal’s cry. (38) Upon hear-
ing such intolerable blasphemy of the Lord, 
several members of the assembly covered their 
ears and walked out, angrily cursing the King 
of Cedi. (39) Anyone who fails to immediately 
leave the place where he hears criticism of the 
Supreme Lord or His faithful devotee will cer-
tainly fall down, bereft of his pious cre dit. (40)  

Then the sons of Pā ṇḍu became furious, and 
together with the warriors of the Matsya, 
Kaikaya and S ṛñjaya clans, they rose up from 
their seats with weapons poised, ready to kill 
Śiśupāla. (41) Undaunted, Śiśupāla then took 
up his sword and shield  in the midst of all the 
assembled kings, O Bhārata, and hurled insults 
at those who sided with Lord K ṛṣṇa. (42) At 
that point the Supreme Lord stood up and 
checked His devotees. He then angrily sent 
forth His razor -sharp disc and severed the head 
of His e nemy as he was attacking. (43) When 
Śiśupāla was thus killed, a great roar and howl 
went up from the crowd. Taking advantage of 
that disturbance, the few kings who were sup-
porters of Śiśupāla quickly left the assembly 
out of fear for their lives. (44) An e ffulgent 
light rose from Śiśupāla’s body and, as every-
one watched, entered Lord K ṛṣṇa just like a me-
teor falling from the sky to the earth. (45) Ob-
sessed with hatred of Lord K ṛṣṇa throughout 
three lifetimes, Śiśupāla attained the Lord’s 
transcendental natu re. Indeed, one’s conscious-
ness determines one’s future birth. (46) Em-
peror Yudhi ṣṭhira gave generous gifts to the 
sacrificial priests and the members of the as-
sembly, properly honoring them all in the man-
ner prescribed by the Vedas. He then took the 
avabh ṛtha bath. (47)  

Thus Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Lord of all masters of 
mystic yoga, saw to the successful execution of 
this great sacrifice on behalf of King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira. Afterwards, the Lord stayed with 
His intimate friends for a few months at their 
earnest request.  (48) Then the Lord, the son of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

756 
 Devakī, took the reluctant permission of the 
King and returned to His capital with His wives 
and ministers. (49)  

I have already described to you in detail the 
history of the two residents of Vaiku ṇṭha who 
had to undergo rep eated births in the material 
world because of being cursed by brāhma ṇas. 
(50) Purified in the final, avabh ṛthya ritual, 
which marked the successful completion of the 
Rājasūya sacrifice, King Yudhi ṣṭhira shone 
among the assembled brāhma ṇas and k ṣatriyas 
like the King of the demigods himself. (51) The 
demigods, humans and residents of intermedi-
ate heavens, all properly honored by the King, 
happily set off for their respective domains 
while singing the praises of Lord K ṛṣṇa and the 
great sacrifice. (52) [All w ere satisfied] except 
sinful Duryodhana, the personification of the 
age of quarrel and the disease of the Kuru dyn-
asty. He could not bear to see the flourishing 
opulence of the son of Pā ṇḍu. (53)  

One who recites these activities of Lord 
Viṣṇu, including t he killing of Śiśupāla, the de-
liverance of the kings and the performance of 
the Rājasūya sacrifice, is freed from all sins. 
(54) 

SB 10.75: Duryodhana Humiliated  

Mahārāja Parīk ṣit said:  O brāhma ṇa, ac-
cording to what I have heard from you, all the 
assemble d kings, sages and demigods were de-
lighted to see the wonderful festivities of King 
Ajātaśatru’s Rājasūya sacrifice, with the sole 
exception of Duryodhana. Please tell me why 
this was so, my lord. (1 -2) 

Śrī Bādarāya ṇi said:  At the Rājasūya sac-
rifice of yo ur saintly grandfather, his family 
members, bound by their love for him, engaged 
themselves in humble services on his behalf. 
(3) 

Bhīma supervised the kitchen, Duryodhana 
looked after the treasury, while Sahadeva re-
spectfully greeted the arriving guests. Nakula procured needed items, Arjuna attended the re-
spectable elders, and K ṛṣṇa washed everyone’s 
feet, while Draupadī served food, and generous 
Karṇa gave out the gifts. Many others, such as 
Yuyudhāna; Vikar ṇa, Hārdikya; Vidura; 
Bhūriśravā and other sons of Bāhlīka; and San-
tardana, similarly volunteered for various du-
ties during the elaborate sacrifice. They did so 
because of their eagerness to please Mahārāja 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, O best of kings. (4 -7) 

After the priests, the prominent delegates, 
the greatly lear ned saints and the King’s most 
intimate well -wishers had all been properly 
honored with pleasing words, auspicious offer-
ings and various gifts as remuneration, and af-
ter the King of Cedi had entered the lotus feet 
of the Lord of the Sātvatas, the avabh ṛtha bath 
was performed in the divine river Yamunā. (8) 
During the avabh ṛtha celebration, the music of 
many kinds of instruments resounded, includ-
ing m ṛdaṅgas, conchshells, panavas, dhund-
huris, kettledrums and gomukha horns. (9) Fe-
male dancers danced with grea t joy, and cho-
ruses sang, while the loud vibrations of vīnās, 
flutes and hand cymbals reached all the way to 
the heavenly regions. (10) All the kings, wear-
ing gold necklaces, then set off for the Yamunā. 
They had flags and banners of various colors 
and wer e accompanied by infantrymen and 
well-adorned soldiers riding lordly elephants, 
chariots and horses. (11) The massed armies of 
the Yadus, S ṛñjayas, Kāmbojas, Kurus, 
Kekayas and Kośalas made the earth tremble as 
they followed Yudhi ṣṭhira Mahārāja, the per-
former of the sacrifice, in procession. (12) The 
assembly officials, the priests and other excel-
lent brāhma ṇas resoundingly vibrated Vedic 
mantras, while the demigods, divine sages, 
Pitās and Gandharvas sang praises and rained 
down flowers. (13) Men and wome n, all 
adorned with sandalwood paste, flower gar-
lands, jewelry and fine clothing, sported by 
smearing and sprinkling one another with vari-
ous liquids. (14)  

The men smeared the courtesans with plen-
tiful oil, yogurt, perfumed water, turmeric and 
kuṅkuma pow der, and the courtesans playfully 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

757 
 smeared the men with the same substances. 
(15) 

Surrounded by guards, King Yudhi ṣṭhira’s 
queens came out on their chariots to see the fun, 
just as the demigods’ wives appeared in the sky 
in celestial airplanes. As maternal  cousins and 
intimate friends sprinkled the queens with liq-
uids, the ladies’ faces bloomed with shy smiles, 
enhancing the queens’ splendid beauty. (16) As 
the queens squirted water from syringes at their 
brothers -in-law and other male companions, 
their own  garments became drenched, reveal-
ing their arms, breasts, thighs and waists. In 
their excitement, the flowers fell from their 
loosened braids. By these charming pastimes 
they agitated those with contaminated con-
sciousness. (17)  

The emperor, mounted upon h is chariot 
drawn by excellent horses wearing golden col-
lars, appeared splendid in the company of his 
wives, just like the brilliant Rājasūya sacrifice 
surrounded by its various rituals. (18) The 
priests led the King through the execution of 
the final ritua ls of patnī -saṁyāja and 
avabh ṛthya. Then they had him and Queen 
Draupadī sip water for purification and bathe in 
the Ganges. (19) The kettledrums of the gods 
resounded, along with those of human beings. 
Demigods, sages, forefathers and humans all 
poured do wn showers of flowers. (20) All the 
citizens belonging to the various orders of 
varṇa and āśrama then bathed in that place, 
where even the most grievous sinner can imme-
diately be freed from all sinful reactions. (21) 
Next the King put on new silken garment s and 
adorned himself with fine jewelry. He then 
honored the priests, assembly officials, learned 
brāhma ṇas and other guests by presenting them 
with ornaments and clothing. (22) In various 
ways King Yudhi ṣṭhira, who had totally dedi-
cated his life to Lord N ārāya ṇa, continuously 
honored his relatives, his immediate family, the 
other kings, his friends and well -wishers, and 
all others present as well. (23) All the men there 
shone like demigods. They were adorned with 
jeweled earrings, flower garlands, turbans,  waistcoats, silk dhotīs and valuable pearl neck-
laces. The lovely faces of the women were 
beautified by their matched earrings and locks 
of hair, and they all wore golden belts. (24)  

Then the highly cultured priests, the great 
Vedic authorities who had se rved as sacrificial 
witnesses, the specially invited kings, the 
brāhma ṇas, k ṣatriyas, vaiśyas, śūdras, demi-
gods, sages, forefathers and mystic spirits, and 
the chief planetary rulers and their followersall 
of them, having been worshiped by King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, took his permission and departed, 
O King, each for his own abode. (25 -26) As 
they all glorified the wonderful Rājasūya -yajña 
performed by that great saintly King and serv-
ant of Lord Hari, they were not satiated, just as 
an ordinary man is never satiated when drink-
ing nectar. (27) At that time Rājā Yudhi ṣṭhira 
stopped a number of his friends, immediate 
family members and other relatives from de-
parting, among them Lord K ṛṣṇa. Out of love 
Yudhi ṣṭhira could not let them go, for he felt 
the pain of imminent se paration. (28) My dear 
Parīk ṣit, the Supreme Lord remained there for 
some time to please the King, after first sending 
Sāmba and the other Yadu heroes back to 
Dvārakā. (29) Thus King Yudhi ṣṭhira, the son 
of Dharma, was at last relieved of his burning 
ambit ion, having by the grace of Lord K ṛṣṇa 
successfully crossed the vast and formidable 
ocean of his desires. (30)  

One day Duryodhana, while observing the 
riches of King Yudhi ṣṭhira’s palace, felt greatly 
disturbed by the magnificence of both the 
Rājasūya sac rifice and its performer, the King, 
whose life and soul was Lord Acyuta. (31) In 
that palace all the collected opulences of the 
kings of men, demons and gods were brilliantly 
manifest, having been brought there by the cos-
mic inventor, Maya Dānava. With tho se riches 
Draupadī served her husbands, and 
Duryodhana, the prince of the Kurus, lamented 
because he was very much attracted to her. (32) 
Lord Madhupati’s thousands of queens were 
also staying in the palace. Their feet moved 
slowly, weighed down by their h ips, and the 
bells on their feet tinkled charmingly. Their 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

758 
 waists were very slender, the ku ṅkuma from 
their breasts reddened their pearl necklaces, 
and their swaying earrings and flowing locks of 
hair enhanced the exquisite beauty of their 
faces. (33)  

It so happened that Emperor Yudhi ṣṭhira, 
the son of Dharma, was sitting just like Indra 
on a golden throne in the assembly hall built by 
Maya Dānava. Present with him were his at-
tendants and family members, and also Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, his special eye. Displaying the  opu-
lences of Brahma himself, King Yudhi ṣṭhira 
was being praised by the court poets. (34 -35) 
Proud Duryodhana, holding a sword in his hand 
and wearing a crown and necklace, angrily 
went into the palace in the company of his 
brothers, O King, insulting the doorkeepers as 
he entered. (36) Bewildered by the illusions 
created through Maya Dānava’s magic, 
Duryodhana mistook the solid floor for water 
and lifted the end of his garment. And else-
where he fell into the water, mistaking it for the 
solid floor. (37) My  dear Parīk ṣit, Bhīma 
laughed to see this, and so did the women, 
kings and others. King Yudhi ṣṭhira tried to stop 
them, but Lord K ṛṣṇa showed His approval. 
(38) Humiliated and burning with anger, 
Duryodhana turned his face down, left without 
uttering a wor d and went back to Hastināpura. 
The saintly persons present loudly cried out, 
“Alas, alas!” and King Yudhi ṣṭhira was some-
what saddened. But the Supreme Lord, whose 
mere glance had bewildered Duryodhana, re-
mained silent, for His intention was to remove 
the burden of the earth. (39) I have now replied 
to your question, O King, concerning why 
Duryodhana was dissatisfied on the occasion of 
the great Rājasūya sacrifice. (40)  

SB 10.76: The Battle Between Śālva and 
the V ṛṣṇis 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Now please he ar, 
O King, another wondrous deed performed by 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, who appeared in His humanlike 
body to enjoy transcendental pastimes. Hear 
how He killed the master of Saubha. (1) Śālva 
was a friend of Śiśupāla’s. When he attended the wedding of Rukmi ṇī, the Yadu  warriors de-
feated him in battle, along with Jarāsandha and 
the other kings. (2) Śālva swore in the presence 
of all the kings: “I will rid the earth of Yādavas. 
Just see my prowess!” (3) Having thus made his 
vow, the foolish King proceeded to worship 
Lord Paśupati [Śiva] as his deity by eating a 
handful of dust each day, and nothing more. (4) 
The great Lord Umāpati is known as “he who 
is quickly pleased,” yet only at the end of a year 
did he gratify Śālva, who had approached him 
for shelter, by offering him  a choice of benedic-
tions. (5) Śālva chose a vehicle that could be 
destroyed by neither demigods, demons, hu-
mans, Gandharvas, Uragas nor Rāk ṣasas, that 
could travel anywhere he wished to go, and that 
would terrify the V ṛṣṇis. (6) Lord Śiva said, 
“So be it. ” On his order, Maya Dānava, who 
conquers his enemies’ cities, constructed a fly-
ing iron city named Saubha and presented it to 
Śālva. (7) This unassailable vehicle was filled 
with darkness and could go anywhere. Upon 
obtaining it, Śālva went to Dvārakā, re member-
ing the V ṛṣṇis’ enmity toward him. (8)  

Śālva besieged the city with a large army, O 
best of the Bharatas, decimating the outlying 
parks and gardens, the mansions along with 
their observatories, towering gateways and sur-
rounding walls, and also the p ublic recreational 
areas. From his excellent airship he threw down 
a torrent of weapons, including stones, tree 
trunks, thunderbolts, snakes and hailstones. A 
fierce whirlwind arose and blanketed all direc-
tions with dust. (9 -11) Thus terribly tormented 
by the airship Saubha, Lord K ṛṣṇa’s city had no 
peace, O King, just like the earth when it was 
attacked by the three aerial cities of the de-
mons. (12) Seeing His subjects so harassed, the 
glorious and heroic Lord Pradyumna told them, 
“Do not fear,” and mounte d His chariot. (13) 
The chief commanders of the chariot warriors-
Sātyaki, Cārude ṣṇa, Sāmba, Akrūra and his 
younger brothers, along with Hārdikya, 
Bhānuvinda, Gada, Śuka and Sāra ṇawent out 
of the city with many other eminent bowmen, 
all girded in armor and p rotected by contin-
gents of soldiers riding on chariots, elephants 
and horses, and also by companies of infantry. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

759 
 (14-15) A tumultuous, hair -raising battle then 
commenced between Śālva’s forces and the 
Yadus. It equaled the great battles between the 
demons and demigods. (16) With His divine 
weapons Pradyumna instantly destroyed all of 
Śālva’s magic illusions, in the same way that 
the warm rays of the sun dissipate the darkness 
of night. (17) Lord Pradyumna’s arrows all had 
gold shafts, iron heads and perfect ly smooth 
joints. With twenty -five of them He struck 
down Śālva’s commander -in-chief [Dyumān], 
and with one hundred He struck Śālva himself. 
Then He pierced Śālva’s officers with one ar-
row each, his chariot drivers with ten arrows 
each, and his horses and other carriers with 
three arrows each. (18 -19) When they saw the 
glorious Pradyumna perform that amazing and 
mighty feat, all the soldiers on both sides 
praised Him. (20)  

At one moment the magic airship built by 
Maya Dānava appeared in many identical 
form s, and the next moment it was again only 
one. Sometimes it was visible, and sometimes 
not. Thus Śālva’s opponents could never be 
sure where it was. (21) From one moment to the 
next the Saubha airship appeared on the earth, 
in the sky, on a mountain peak or  in the water. 
Like a whirling, flaming baton, it never re-
mained in any one place. (22) Wherever Śālva 
would appear with his Saubha ship and his 
army, there the Yadu commanders would shoot 
their arrows. (23) Śālva became bewildered 
upon seeing his army and  aerial city thus har-
assed by his enemy’s arrows, which struck like 
fire and the sun and were as intolerable as snake 
venom. (24)  

Because the heroes of the V ṛṣṇi clan were 
eager for victory in this world and the next, they 
did not abandon their assigned p osts on the bat-
tlefield, even though the downpour of weapons 
hurled by Śālva’s commanders tormented 
them. (25) Śālva’s minister Dyumān, previ-
ously wounded by Śrī Pradyumna, now ran up 
to Him and, roaring loudly, struck Him with his 
club of black steel. (26 ) Pradyumna’s driver, 
the son of Dāruka, thought that his valiant mas-
ter’s chest had been shattered by the club. Knowing well his religious duty, he removed 
Pradyumna from the battlefield. (27) Quickly 
regaining consciousness, Lord K ṛṣṇa’s son Pra-
dyumna sa id to His charioteer, “O driver, this 
is abominablefor Me to have been removed 
from the battlefield! (28) “Except for Me, no 
one born in the Yadu dynasty has ever been 
known to abandon the battlefield. My reputa-
tion has now been stained by a driver who 
thinks like a eunuch. (29) “What will I say to 
My fathers, Rāma and Keśava, when I return to 
Them after having simply fled the battle? What 
can I tell Them that will befit My honor? (30) 
“Certainly My sisters -in-law will laugh at Me 
and say, ‘O hero, tell us how in the world Your 
enemies turned You into such a coward in bat-
tle.’” (31)  

The driver replied:  O long -lived one, I 
have done this knowing full well my prescribed 
duty. O my Lord, the chariot driver must pro-
tect the master of the chariot when he is in d an-
ger, and the master must also protect his driver. 
(32) With this rule in mind, I removed You 
from the battlefield, since You had been struck 
unconscious by Your enemy’s club and I 
thought You were seriously injured. (33)  

SB 10.77: Lord K ṛṣṇa Slays the D emon 
Śālva  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After refreshing 
Himself with water, putting on His armor and 
picking up His bow, Lord Pradyumna told His 
driver, “Take Me back to where the hero Dyu-
mān is standing.” (1) In Pradyumna’s absence, 
Dyumān had been devastatin g His army, but 
now Pradyumna counterattacked Dyumān and, 
smiling, pierced him with eight nārāca arrows. 
(2) 

With four of these arrows He struck Dyu-
mān’s four horses, with one arrow, his driver, 
with two more arrows, his bow and chariot flag, 
and with the  last arrow, Dyumān’s head. (3) 
Gada, Sātyaki, Sāmba and others began killing 
Śālva’s army, and thus all the soldiers inside 
the airship began falling into the ocean, their 
necks severed. (4)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

760 

As the Yadus and Śālva’s followers thus 
went on attacking one a nother, the tumultuous, 
fearsome battle continued for twenty -seven 
days and nights. (5)  

Invited by Yudhi ṣṭhira, the son of Dharma, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa had gone to Indraprastha. Now that 
the Rājasūya sacrifice had been completed and 
Śiśupāla killed, the Lord began to see inauspi-
cious omens. So He took leave of the Kuru el-
ders and the great sages, and also of P ṛthā and 
her sons, and returned to Dvārakā. (6 -7) The 
Lord said to Himself: Because I have come here 
with My respected elder brother, kings partial 
to Śiśupāla  may well be attacking My capital 
city. (8) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] After 
He arrived at Dvārakā and saw how His people 
were threatened with destruction, and also saw 
Śālva and his Saubha airship, Lord Keśava ar-
ranged for the city’s defense and then a d-
dressed Dāruka as follows. (9) [Lord K ṛṣṇa 
said:] O driver, quickly take My chariot near 
Śālva. This lord of Saubha is a powerful magi-
cian; don’t let him bewilder you. (10) Thus or-
dered, Dāruka took command of the Lord’s 
chariot and drove forth. As the ch ariot entered 
the battlefield, everyone there, both friend and 
foe, caught sight of the emblem of Garu ḍa. (11) 
When Śālva, the master of a decimated army, 
saw Lord K ṛṣṇa approaching, he hurled his 
spear at the Lord’s charioteer. The spear roared 
frightenin gly as it flew across the battlefield. 
(12) Śālva’s hurtling spear lit up the whole sky 
like a mighty meteor, but Lord Śauri tore the 
great weapon into hundreds of pieces with His 
arrows. (13) Lord K ṛṣṇa then pierced Śālva 
with sixteen arrows and struck th e Saubha air-
ship with a deluge of arrows as it darted about 
the sky. Firing His arrows, the Lord appeared 
like the sun flooding the heavens with its rays. 
(14) Śālva then managed to strike Lord K ṛṣṇa’s 
left arm, which held His bow Śār ṅga, and, 
amazingly, Ś ārṅga fell from His hand. (15) 
Those who witnessed this all cried out in dis-
may. Then the master of Saubha roared loudly 
and addressed Lord Janārdana. (16)  
 [Śālva said:]  You fool! Because in our pres-
ence You kidnapped the bride of our friend 
Śiśupāla, You r own cousin, and because You 
later murdered him in the sacred assembly 
while he was inattentive, today with my sharp 
arrows I will send You to the land of no return! 
Though You think Yourself invincible, I will 
kill You now if You dare stand before me. (1 7-
18) 

The Supreme Lord said:  O dullard, you 
boast in vain, since you fail to see death stand-
ing near you. Real heroes do not talk much but 
rather show their prowess in action. (19) Hav-
ing said this, the furious Lord swung His club 
with frightening power a nd speed and hit Śālva 
on the collarbone, making him tremble and 
vomit blood. (20) But as soon as Lord Acyuta 
withdrew His club, Śālva disappeared from 
sight, and a moment later a man approached the 
Lord. Bowing his head down to Him, he an-
nounced, “Devakī has sent me,” and, sobbing, 
spoke the following words. (21) [The man 
said:] O K ṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, mighty -armed one, who 
are so affectionate to Your parents! Śālva has 
seized Your father and taken him away, as a 
butcher leads an animal to slaughter. (22) When 
He heard this disturbing news, Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
who was playing the role of a mortal man, 
showed sorrow and compassion, and out of 
love for His parents He spoke the following 
words like an ordinary conditioned soul. (23) 
[Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] Balarāma is ever vigilan t, 
and no demigod or demon can defeat Him. So 
how could this insignificant Śālva defeat Him 
and abduct My father? Indeed, fate is all -pow-
erful! (24) After Govinda spoke these words, 
the master of Saubha again appeared, appar-
ently leading Vasudeva before th e Lord. Śālva 
then spoke as follows. (25) [Śālva said:] Here 
is Your dear father, who begot You and for 
whose sake You are living in this world. I shall 
now kill him before Your very eyes. Save him 
if You can, weakling! (26) After he had 
mocked the Lord in  this way, the magician 
Śālva appeared to cut off Vasudeva’s head with 
his sword. Taking the head with him, he entered 
the Saubha vehicle, which was hovering in the 
sky. (27) By nature Lord K ṛṣṇa is full in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

761 
 knowledge, and He possesses unlimited powers 
of perception. Yet for a moment, out of great 
affection for His loved ones, He remained ab-
sorbed in the mood of an ordinary human be-
ing. He soon recalled, however, that this was all 
a demoniac illusion engineered by Maya 
Dānava and employed by Śālva. (28) Now alert 
to the actual situation, Lord Acyuta saw before 
Him on the battlefield neither the messenger 
nor His father’s body. It was as if He had awak-
ened from a dream. Seeing His enemy flying 
above Him in his Saubha plane, the Lord then 
prepared to kill him. (29) 

Such is the account given by some sages, O 
wise King, but those who speak in this illogical 
way are contradicting themselves, having for-
gotten their own previous statements. (30) How 
can lamentation, bewilderment, material affec-
tion or fear, all born  out of ignorance, be as-
cribed to the infinite Supreme Lord, whose per-
ception, knowledge and power are all similarly 
infinite? (31) By virtue of self -realization forti-
fied by service rendered to His feet, devotees of 
the Lord dispel the bodily concept of l ife, 
which has bewildered the soul since time im-
memorial. Thus they attain eternal glory in His 
personal association. How, then, can that Su-
preme Truth, the destination of all genuine 
saints, be subject to illusion? (32)  

While Śālva continued to hurl torr ents of 
weapons at Him with great force, Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
whose prowess never fails, shot His arrows at 
Śālva, wounding him and shattering his armor, 
bow and crest jewel. Then with His club the 
Lord smashed His enemy’s Saubha airship. 
(33) Shattered into thousa nds of pieces by Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s club, the Saubha airship plummeted 
into the water. Śālva abandoned it, stationed 
himself on the ground, took up his club and 
rushed toward Lord Acyuta. (34) As Śālva 
rushed at Him, the Lord shot a bhalla dart and 
cut off his a rm that held the club. Having finally 
decided to kill Śālva, K ṛṣṇa then raised His Su-
darśana disc weapon, which resembled the sun 
at the time of universal annihilation. The bril-
liantly shining Lord appeared like the eastern-most mountain bearing the rising sun. (35) Em-
ploying His disc, Lord Hari removed that great 
magician’s head with its earrings and crown, 
just as Purandara had used his thunderbolt to 
cut off V ṛtra’s head. Seeing this, all of Śālva’s 
followers cried out, “Alas, alas!” (36) With the 
sinful Śālva now dead and his Saubha airship 
destroyed, the heavens resounded with kettle-
drums played by groups of demigods. Then 
Dantavakra, wanting to avenge the death of his 
friends, furiously attacked the Lord. (37)  

SB 10.78: The Killing of Dantavakra, 
Vidūr atha and Romahar ṣaṇa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Acting out of 
friendship for Śiśupāla, Śālva and Pau ṇḍraka, 
who had all passed on to the next world, the 
wicked Dantavakra appeared on the battlefield 
in a great rage, O King. All alone, on foot and 
wielding a c lub in his hand, the mighty warrior 
shook the earth with his footsteps. (1 -2) Seeing 
Dantavakra approach, Lord K ṛṣṇa quickly 
picked up His club, jumped down from His 
chariot and stopped His advancing opponent 
just as the shore holds back the ocean. (3) Rai s-
ing his club, the reckless King of Karū ṣa said 
to Lord Mukunda, “What luck! What luckto 
have You come before me today! (4)  

“You are our maternal cousin, K ṛṣṇa, but 
You committed violence against my friends, 
and now You want to kill me also. Therefore, 
fool, I will kill You with my thunderbolt club. 
(5) “Then, O unintelligent one, I who am 
obliged to my friends will have repaid my debt 
to them by killing You, my enemy disguised as 
a relative, who are like a disease within my 
body.” (6) Thus trying to haras s Lord K ṛṣṇa 
with harsh words, as one might prick an ele-
phant with sharp goads, Dantavakra struck the 
Lord on the head with his club and roared like 
a lion. (7) Although hit by Dantavakra’s club, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the deliverer of the Yadus, did not 
budge from H is place on the battlefield. Rather, 
with His massive Kaumodakī club the Lord 
struck Dantavakra in the middle of his chest. 
(8) His heart shattered by the club’s blow, Dan-
tavakra vomited blood and fell lifeless to the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

762 
 ground, his hair disheveled and his ar ms and 
legs sprawling. (9) A most subtle and wondrous 
spark of light then [rose from the demon’s body 
and] entered Lord K ṛṣṇa while everyone looked 
on, O King, just as when Śiśupāla was killed. 
(10) 

But then Dantavakra’s brother Vidūratha, 
immersed in sor row over his brother’s death, 
came forward breathing heavily, sword and 
shield in hand. He wanted to kill the Lord. (11) 
O best of kings, as Vidūratha fell upon Him, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa used His razor -edged Sudarśana 
disc to remove his head, complete with its hel-
met and earrings. (12) Having thus destroyed 
Śālva and his Saubha airship, along with Dan-
tavakra and his younger brother, all of whom 
were invincible before any other opponent, the 
Lord was praised by demigods, human beings 
and great sages, by Siddhas, Gandh arvas, 
Vidyādharas and Mahoragas, and also by Ap-
sarās, Pitās, Yak ṣas, Kinnaras and Cāra ṇas. As 
they sang His glories and showered Him with 
flowers, the Supreme Lord entered His fes-
tively decorated capital city in the company of 
the most eminent V ṛṣṇis. (13 -15) Thus Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the master all mystic power and Lord of the 
universe, is ever victorious. Only those of 
beastly vision think He sometimes suffers de-
feat. (16)  

Lord Balarāma then heard that the Kurus 
were preparing  for war with the Pā ṇḍavas. Be-
ing neutral, He departed on the pretext of going 
to bathe in holy places. (17) After bathing at 
Prabhāsa and honoring the demigods, sages, 
forefathers and prominent human beings, He 
went in the company of brāhma ṇas to the por-
tion of the Sarasvatī that flows westward into 
the sea. (18) Lord Balarāma visited the broad 
Bindu -saras Lake, Tritakūpa, Sudarśana, 
Viśāla, Brahma -tīrtha, Cakra -tīrtha and the 
eastward -flowing Sarasvatī. He also went to all 
the holy places along the Yamunā  and the Gan-
ges, O Bhārata, and then He came to the 
Naimi ṣa forest, where great sages were per-
forming an elaborate sacrifice. (19 -20) Recog-
nizing the Lord upon His arrival, the sages, who had been engaged in their sacrificial rituals for 
a long time, greet ed Him properly by standing 
up, bowing down and worshiping Him. (21) 
After being thus worshiped along with His en-
tourage, the Lord accepted a seat of honor. 
Then He noticed that Romahar ṣaṇa, 
Vyāsadeva’s disciple, had remained seated. 
(22) Lord Balarāma bec ame extremely angry 
upon seeing how this member of the sūta caste 
had failed to stand up, bow down or join his 
palms, and also how he was sitting above all the 
learned brāhma ṇas. (23) [Lord Balarāma said:] 
Because this fool born from an improperly 
mixed ma rriage sits above all these brāhma ṇas 
and even above Me, the protector of religion, 
he deserves to die. (24) Although he is a disci-
ple of the divine sage Vyāsa and has thoroughly 
learned many scriptures from him, including 
the lawbooks of religious duties and the epic 
histories and Purā ṇas, all this study has not pro-
duced good qualities in him. Rather, his study 
of the scriptures is like an actor’s studying his 
part, for he is not self -controlled or humble and 
vainly presumes himself a scholarly authority, 
though he has failed to conquer his own mind. 
(25-26) 

The very purpose of My descent into this 
world is to kill such hypocrites who pretend to 
be religious. Indeed, they are the most sinful 
rascals. (27) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] 
Although Lord Balarām a had stopped killing 
the impious, Romahar ṣaṇa’s death was inevita-
ble. Thus, having spoken, the Lord killed him 
by picking up a blade of kuśa grass and touch-
ing him with its tip. (28) All the sages cried out, 
“Alas, alas!” in great distress. They told Lord  
Saṅkarṣaṇa, “O master, You have committed 
an irreligious act! (29) “O favorite of the Ya-
dus, we gave him the seat of the spiritual master 
and promised him long life and freedom from 
physical pain for as long as this sacrifice con-
tinues. (30) “You have unk nowingly killed a 
brāhma ṇa. Of course, even the injunctions of 
revealed scripture cannot dictate to You, the 
Lord of all mystic power. But if by Your own 
free will You nonetheless carry out the pre-
scribed purification for this slaying of a 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

763 
 brāhma ṇa, O puri fier of the whole world, peo-
ple in general will greatly benefit by Your ex-
ample.” (31 -32) 

The Personality of Godhead said:  I will 
certainly perform the atonement for this killing, 
since I wish to show compassion to the people 
in general. Please, therefore , prescribe for Me 
whatever ritual is to be done first. (33) O sages, 
just say the word, and by My mystic power I 
shall restore everything you promised himlong 
life, strength and sensory power. (34)  

The sages said:  Please see to it, O Rāma, 
that Your powe r and that of Your kuśa weapon, 
as well as our promise and Romahar ṣaṇa’s 
death, all remain intact. (35)  

The Supreme Lord said:  The Vedas in-
struct us that one’s own self takes birth again as 
one’s son. Thus let Romahar ṣaṇa’s son become 
the speaker of the P urāṇas, and let him be en-
dowed with long life, strong senses and stam-
ina. (36)  

Please tell Me your desire, O best of sages, 
and I shall certainly fulfill it. And, O wise souls, 
please carefully determine My proper atone-
ment, since I do not know what it mi ght be. (37)  

The sages said:  A fearsome demon named 
Balvala, the son of Ilvala, comes here every 
new-moon day and contaminates our sacrifice. 
(38) O descendant of Daśārha, please kill that 
sinful demon, who pours down pus, blood, fe-
ces, urine, wine and me at upon us. This is the 
best service You can do for us. (39) Thereafter, 
for twelve months, You should circumambu-
late the land of Bhārata in a mood of serious 
meditation, executing austerities and bathing at 
various holy pilgrimage sites. In this way You 
will become purified. (40)  

SB 10.79: Lord Balarāma Goes on Pil-
grimage  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Then, on the 
new-moon day, O King, a fierce and frighten-
ing wind arose, scattering dust all about and spreading the smell of pus everywhere. (1) 
Next, onto the sa crificial arena came a down-
pour of abominable things sent by Balvala, af-
ter which the demon himself appeared, trident 
in hand. (2) The immense demon resembled a 
mass of black carbon. His topknot and beard 
were like molten copper, and his face had hor-
rible fangs and furrowed eyebrows. Upon see-
ing him, Lord Balarāma thought of His club, 
which tears to pieces His enemies’ armies, and 
His plow weapon, which punishes the demons. 
Thus summoned, His two weapons appeared 
before Him at once. (3 -4) 

With the tip of H is plow Lord Balarāma 
caught hold of the demon Balvala as he flew 
through the sky, and with His club the Lord an-
grily struck that harasser of brāhma ṇas on the 
head. (5) Balvala cried out in agony and fell to 
the ground, his forehead cracked open and 
gushin g blood. He resembled a red mountain 
struck by a lightning bolt. (6) The exalted sages 
honored Lord Rāma with sincere prayers and 
awarded Him infallible blessings. Then they 
performed His ritual bath, just as the demigods 
had formally bathed Indra when he killed V ṛtra. 
(7) They gave Lord Balarāma a Vaijayantī gar-
land of unfading lotuses in which resided the 
goddess of fortune, and they also gave Him a 
set of divine garments and jewelry. (8)  

Then, given leave by the sages, the Lord 
went with a contingent of  brāhma ṇas to the 
Kauśikī River, where He bathed. From there He 
went to the lake from which flows the river 
Sarayū. (9) The Lord followed the course of the 
Sarayū until He came to Prayāga, where He 
bathed and then performed rituals to propitiate 
the demigo ds and other living beings. Next He 
went to the āśrama of Pulaha Ṛṣi. (10) Lord 
Balarāma bathed in the Gomatī, Ga ṇḍakī and 
Vipāśā rivers, and also immersed Himself in 
the Śo ṇa. He went to Gayā, where He wor-
shiped His forefathers, and to the mouth of the 
Ganges, where He performed purifying ablu-
tions. At Mount Mahendra He saw Lord 
Paraśurāma and offered Him prayers, and then 
He bathed in the seven branches of the 
Godāvarī River, and also in the rivers Ve ṇā, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

764 
 Pampā and Bhīmarathī. Then Lord Balarāma 
met Lord S kanda and visited Śrī -śaila, the 
abode of Lord Giriśa. In the southern provinces 
known as Dravi ḍa-deśa the Supreme Lord saw 
the sacred Ve ṅkaṭa Hill, as well as the cities of 
Kāmako ṣṇī and Kāñcī, the exalted Kāverī 
River and the most holy Śrī -raṅga, where L ord 
Kṛṣṇa has manifested Himself. From there He 
went to Ṛṣabha Mountain, where Lord K ṛṣṇa 
also lives, and to the southern Mathurā. Then 
He came to Setubandha, where the most griev-
ous sins are destroyed. (11 -15) 

There at Setubandha [Rāmeśvaram] Lord 
Halāyu dha gave brāhma ṇas ten thousand cows 
in charity. He then visited the K ṛtamālā and 
Tāmrapar ṇī rivers and the great Malaya Moun-
tains. In the Malaya range Lord Balarāma 
found Agastya Ṛṣi sitting in meditation. After 
bowing down to the sage, the Lord offered h im 
prayers and then received blessings from him. 
Taking leave from Agastya, He proceeded to 
the shore of the southern ocean, where He saw 
Goddess Durgā in her form of Kanyā -kumārī. 
(16-17) Next He went to Phālguna -tīrtha and 
bathed in the sacred Pañcāpsarā  Lake, where 
Lord Vi ṣṇu had directly manifested Himself. 
At this place He gave away another ten thou-
sand cows. (18)  

The Supreme Lord then traveled through the 
kingdoms of Kerala and Trigarta, visiting Lord 
Śiva’s sacred city of Gokar ṇa, where Lord 
Dhūrja ṭi [Śiva] directly manifests himself. Af-
ter also visiting Goddess Pārvatī, who dwells 
on an island, Lord Balarāma went to the holy 
district of Śūrpāraka and bathed in the Tāpī, 
Payo ṣṇī and Nirvindhyā rivers. He next entered 
the Da ṇḍaka forest and went to th e river Revā, 
along which the city of Māhi ṣmatī is found. 
Then He bathed at Manu -tīrtha and finally re-
turned to Prabhāsa. (19 -21) The Lord heard 
from some brāhma ṇas how all the kings in-
volved in the battle between the Kurus and 
Pāṇḍavas had been killed. Fr om this He con-
cluded that the earth was now relieved of her 
burden. (22) Wanting to stop the club fight then 
raging between Bhīma and Duryodhana on the battlefield, Lord Balarāma went to Kuruk ṣetra. 
(23) 

When Yudhi ṣṭhira, Lord K ṛṣṇa, Arjuna and 
the twin b rothers Nakula and Sahadeva saw 
Lord Balarāma, they offered Him respectful 
obeisances but said nothing, thinking “What 
has He come here to tell us?” (24) Lord 
Balarāma found Duryodhana and Bhīma with 
clubs in their hands, each furiously striving for 
victor y over the other as they circled about 
skillfully. The Lord addressed them as follows. 
(25) [Lord Balarāma said:] King Duryodhana! 
And Bhīma! Listen! You two warriors are 
equal in fighting prowess. I know that one of 
you has greater physical power, while t he other 
is better trained in technique. (26)  

Since you are so evenly matched in fighting 
prowess, I do not see how either of you can win 
or lose this duel. Therefore, please stop this 
useless battle. (27) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī contin-
ued:] They did not accept  Lord Balarāma’s re-
quest, O King, although it was logical, for their 
mutual enmity was irrevocable. Each of them 
constantly remembered the insults and injuries 
he had suffered from the other. (28) Concluding 
that the battle was the arrangement of fate, Lor d 
Balarāma went back to Dvārakā. There He was 
greeted by Ugrasena and His other relatives, 
who were all delighted to see Him. (29) Later 
Lord Balarāma returned to Naimi ṣāraṇya, 
where the sages joyfully engaged Him, the em-
bodiment of all sacrifice, in perfo rming various 
kinds of Vedic sacrifice. Lord Balarāma was 
now retired from warfare. (30) The all -power-
ful Lord Balarāma bestowed upon the sages 
pure spiritual knowledge, by which they could 
see the whole universe within Him and also see 
Him pervading every thing. (31) After execut-
ing with His wife the avabh ṛtha ablutions, the 
beautifully dressed and ornamented Lord 
Balarāma, encircled by His immediate family 
and other relatives and friends, looked as splen-
did as the moon surrounded by its effulgent 
rays. (32 ) Countless other such pastimes were 
performed by mighty Balarāma, the unlimited 
and immeasurable Supreme Lord, whose mys-
tic Yoga -māyā power makes Him appear to be 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

765 
 a human being. (33) All the activities of the un-
limited Lord Balarāma are amazing. Anyone 
who regularly remembers them at dawn and 
dusk will become very dear to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Śrī Vi ṣṇu. (34)  

SB 10.80: The Brāhma ṇa Sudāmā Visits 
Lord K ṛṣṇa in Dvārakā  

King Parīk ṣit said:  My lord, O master, I 
wish to hear about other valorous  deeds per-
formed by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Mukunda, whose valor is unlimited. (1) 
O brāhma ṇa, how could anyone who knows the 
essence of life and is disgusted with endeavor-
ing for sense gratification give up the transcen-
dental topics of Lord Ut tama ḥśloka after hear-
ing them repeatedly? (2) Actual speech is that 
which describes the qualities of the Lord, real 
hands are those that work for Him, a true mind 
is that which always remembers Him dwelling 
within everything moving and nonmoving, and 
actua l ears are those that listen to sanctifying 
topics about Him. (3) An actual head is one that 
bows down to the Lord in His manifestations 
among the moving and nonmoving creatures, 
real eyes are those that see only the Lord, and 
actual limbs are those which regularly honor 
the water that has bathed the Lord’s feet or 
those of His devotees. (4)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thus questioned by 
King Vi ṣṇurāta, the powerful sage Bādarāya ṇi 
replied, his heart fully absorbed in meditation 
on the Supreme Personality of Godhea d, 
Vāsudeva. (5)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Lord K ṛṣṇa had a 
certain brāhma ṇa friend [named Sudāmā] who 
was most learned in Vedic knowledge and de-
tached from all sense enjoyment. Furthermore, 
his mind was peaceful and his senses subdued. 
(6) Living as a house holder, he maintained 
himself with whatever came of its own accord. 
The wife of that poorly dressed brāhma ṇa suf-
fered along with him and was emaciated from 
hunger. (7) The chaste wife of the poverty -
stricken brāhma ṇa once approached him, her 
face dried up because of her distress. Trembling with fear, she spoke as follows. (8) [Sudāmā’s 
wife said:] O brāhma ṇa, isn’t it true that the 
husband of the goddess of fortune is the per-
sonal friend of your exalted self? That greatest 
of Yādavas, the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa, is com-
passionate to brāhma ṇas and very willing to 
grant them His shelter. (9) O fortunate one, 
please approach Him, the real shelter of all 
saints. He will certainly give abundant wealth 
to such a suffering householder as you. (10) 
Lord K ṛṣṇa is now the ruler of the Bhojas, 
Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas and is staying at Dvārakā. 
Since He gives even His own self to anyone 
who simply remembers His lotus feet, what 
doubt is there that He, the spiritual master of 
the universe, will bestow upon His sincere wor-
shiper pr osperity and material enjoyment, 
which are not even very desirable? (11) 
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] When his wife 
thus repeatedly implored him in various ways, 
the brāhma ṇa thought to himself, “To see Lord 
Kṛṣṇa is indeed the greatest achievement in 
life.” Thus he decided to go, but first he told 
her, “My good wife, if there is anything in the 
house I can bring as a gift, please give it to me.” 
(12-13) Sudāmā’s wife begged four handfuls of 
flat rice from neighboring brāhma ṇas, tied up 
the rice in a torn piece of cloth and gave it to 
her husband as a present for Lord K ṛṣṇa. (14) 
Taking the flat rice, the saintly brāhma ṇa set off 
for Dvārakā, all the while wondering “How will 
I be able to have K ṛṣṇa’s audience?” (15)  

The learned brāhma ṇa, joined by some lo cal 
brāhma ṇas, passed three guard stations and 
went through three gateways, and then he 
walked by the homes of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s faithful 
devotees, the Andhakas and V ṛṣṇis, which or-
dinarily no one could do. He then entered one 
of the opulent palaces belonging t o Lord Hari’s 
sixteen thousand queens, and when he did so he 
felt as if he were attaining the bliss of libera-
tion. (16 -17) 

At that time Lord Acyuta was seated on His 
consort’s bed. Spotting the brāhma ṇa at some 
distance, the Lord immediately stood up, wen t 
forward to meet him and with great pleasure 
embraced him. (18) The lotus -eyed Supreme 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

766 
 Lord felt intense ecstasy upon touching the 
body of His dear friend, the wise brāhma ṇa, and 
thus He shed tears of love. (19) Lord K ṛṣṇa 
seated His friend Sudāmā upon th e bed. Then 
the Lord, who purifies the whole world, person-
ally offered him various tokens of respect and 
washed his feet, O King, after which He sprin-
kled the water on His own head. He anointed 
him with divinely fragrant sandalwood, aguru 
and ku ṅkuma paste s and happily worshiped 
him with aromatic incense and arrays of lamps. 
After finally offering him betel nut and the gift 
of a cow, He welcomed him with pleasing 
words. (20 -22) By fanning him with her 
cāmara, the divine goddess of fortune person-
ally served that poor brāhma ṇa, whose clothing 
was torn and dirty and who was so thin that 
veins were visible all over his body. (23) The 
people in the royal palace were astonished to 
see K ṛṣṇa, the Lord of spotless glory, so lov-
ingly honor this shabbily dressed brāhm aṇa. 
(24) [The residents of the palace said:] What pi-
ous acts has this unkempt, impoverished 
brāhma ṇa performed? People regard him as 
lowly and contemptible, yet the spiritual master 
of the three worlds, the abode of Goddess Śrī, 
is serving him reverently.  Leaving the goddess 
of fortune sitting on her bed, the Lord has em-
braced this brāhma ṇa as if he were an older 
brother. (25 -26) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī contin-
ued:] Taking each other’s hands, O King, K ṛṣṇa 
and Sudāmā talked pleasantly about how they 
once lived to gether in the school of their guru. 
(27) 

The Supreme Lord said:  My dear 
brāhma ṇa, you know well the ways of dharma. 
After you offered the gift of remuneration to 
our guru and returned home from his school, 
did you marry a compatible wife or not? (28) 
Even  though you are mostly involved in house-
hold affairs, your mind is not affected by mate-
rial desires. Nor, O learned one, do you take 
much pleasure in the pursuit of material wealth. 
This I am well aware of. (29) Having re-
nounced all material propensities, which spring 
from the Lord’s illusory energy, some people 
execute worldly duties with their minds undis-
turbed by mundane desires. They act as I do, to instruct the general populace. (30) My dear 
brāhma ṇa, do you remember how we lived to-
gether in our spirit ual master’s school? When a 
twice -born student has learned from his guru all 
that is to be learned, he can enjoy spiritual life, 
which lies beyond all ignorance. (31) My dear 
friend, he who gives a person his physical birth 
is his first spiritual master, a nd he who initiates 
him as a twice -born brāhma ṇa and engages him 
in religious duties is indeed more directly his 
spiritual master. But the person who bestows 
transcendental knowledge upon the members 
of all the spiritual orders of society is one’s ul-
timate  spiritual master. Indeed, he is as good as 
My own self. (32) Certainly, O brāhma ṇa, of all 
the followers of the var ṇāśrama system, those 
who take advantage of the words I speak in My 
form as the spiritual master and thus easily 
cross over the ocean of mat erial existence best 
understand their own true welfare. (33) I, the 
Soul of all beings, am not as satisfied by ritual 
worship, brahminical initiation, penances or 
self-discipline as I am by faithful service ren-
dered to one’s spiritual master. (34)  

O brāhm aṇa, do you remember what hap-
pened to us while we were living with our spir-
itual master? Once our guru’s wife sent us to 
fetch firewood, and after we entered the vast 
forest, O twice -born one, an unseasonal storm 
arose, with fierce wind and rain and harsh thun-
der. (35 -36) Then, as the sun set, the forest was 
covered by darkness in every direction, and 
with all the flooding we could not distinguish 
high land from low. (37)  

Constantly besieged by the powerful wind 
and rain, we lost our way amidst the floodin g 
waters. We simply held each other’s hands and, 
in great distress, wandered aimlessly about the 
forest. (38) Our guru, Sāndīpani, understanding 
our predicament, set out after sunrise to search 
for us, his disciples, and found us in distress. 
(39) [Sāndīpa ni said:] O my children, you have 
suffered so much for my sake! The body is 
most dear to every living creature, but you are 
so dedicated to me that you completely disre-
garded your own comfort. (40) This indeed is 
the duty of all true disciples: to repay th e debt 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

767 
 to their spiritual master by offering him, with 
pure hearts, their wealth and even their very 
lives. (41) You boys are first -class brāhma ṇas, 
and I am satisfied with you. May all your de-
sires be fulfilled, and may the Vedic mantras 
you have learned never lose their meaning for 
you, in this world or the next. (42) [Lord K ṛṣṇa 
continued:] We had many similar experiences 
while living in our spiritual master’s home. 
Simply by the grace of the spiritual master a 
person can fulfill life’s purpose and attai n eter-
nal peace. (43)  

The brāhma ṇa said:  What could I possibly 
have failed to achieve, O Lord of lords, O uni-
versal teacher, since I was able to personally 
live with You, whose every desire is fulfilled, 
at the home of our spiritual master? (44) O al-
might y Lord, Your body comprises the Abso-
lute Truth in the form of the Vedas and is thus 
the source of all auspicious goals of life. That 
You took up residence at the school of a spir-
itual master is simply one of Your pastimes in 
which You play the role of a hu man being. (45)  

SB 10.81: The Lord Blesses Sudāmā 
Brāhma ṇa 

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:]  Lord Hari, 
Kṛṣṇa, perfectly knows the hearts of all living 
beings, and He is especially devoted to the 
brāhma ṇas. While the Supreme Lord, the goal 
of all saintly persons,  conversed in this way 
with the best of the twice -born, He laughed and 
spoke the following words to that dear friend of 
His, the brāhma ṇa Sudāmā, all the while smil-
ing and looking upon him with affection. (1 -2) 

The Supreme Lord said:  O brāhma ṇa, 
what gift  have you brought Me from home? I 
regard as great even the smallest gift offered by 
My devotees in pure love, but even great offer-
ings presented by nondevotees do not please 
Me. (3) If one offers Me with love and devotion 
a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water , I will accept it. 
(4) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Even after 
being addressed in this way, O King, the 
brāhma ṇa felt too embarrassed to offer his palmfuls of flat rice to the husband of the god-
dess of fortune. He simply kept his head bowed 
in shame. (5)  Being the direct witness in the 
hearts of all living beings, Lord K ṛṣṇa fully un-
derstood why Sudāmā had come to see Him. 
Thus He thought, “In the past My friend has 
never worshiped Me out of a desire for material 
opulence, but now he comes to Me to satisf y his 
chaste and devoted wife. I will give him riches 
that even the immortal demigods cannot ob-
tain.” (6 -7) Thinking like this, the Lord 
snatched from the brāhma ṇa’s garment the 
grains of flat rice tied up in an old piece of cloth 
and exclaimed, “What is t his? (8) “My friend, 
have You brought this for Me? It gives Me ex-
treme pleasure. Indeed, these few grains of flat 
rice will satisfy not only Me but also the entire 
universe.” (9) After saying this, the Supreme 
Lord ate one palmful and was about to eat a se c-
ond when the devoted goddess Rukmi ṇī took 
hold of His hand. (10) [Queen Rukmi ṇī said:] 
This is more than enough, O Soul of the uni-
verse, to secure him an abundance of all kinds 
of wealth in this world and the next. After all, 
one’s prosperity depends simp ly on Your satis-
faction. (11)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  The 
brāhma ṇa spent that night in Lord Acyuta’s 
palace after eating and drinking to his full sat-
isfaction. He felt as if he had gone to the spir-
itual world. (12) The next day, Sudāmā set off 
for h ome while being honored by Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
the self -satisfied maintainer of the universe. 
The brāhma ṇa felt greatly delighted, my dear 
King, as he walked along the road. (13) Alt-
hough he had apparently received no wealth 
from Lord K ṛṣṇa, Sudāmā was too shy to beg 
for it on his own. He simply returned home, 
feeling perfectly satisfied to have had the Su-
preme Lord’s audience. (14) [Sudāmā 
thought:] Lord K ṛṣṇa is known to be devoted to 
the brāhma ṇas, and now I have personally seen 
this devotion. Indeed, He who car ries the god-
dess of fortune on His chest has embraced the 
poorest beggar. (15) Who am I? A sinful, poor 
friend of a brāhma ṇa. And who is K ṛṣṇa? The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, full in six op-
ulences. Nonetheless, He has embraced me 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

768 
 with His two arms. (1 6) He treated me just like 
one of His brothers, making me sit on the bed 
of His beloved consort. And because I was fa-
tigued, His queen personally fanned me with a 
yak-tail cāmara. (17) Although He is the Lord 
of all demigods and the object of worship for 
all brāhma ṇas, He worshiped me as if I were a 
demigod myself, massaging my feet and ren-
dering other humble services. (18) Devotional 
service to His lotus feet is the root cause of all 
the perfections a person can find in heaven, in 
liberation, in the subter ranean regions and on 
earth. (19) Thinking “If this poor wretch sud-
denly becomes rich, he will forget Me in his in-
toxicating happiness,” the compassionate Lord 
did not grant me even a little wealth. (20)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  Thinking 
thus to hims elf, Sudāmā finally came to the 
place where his home stood. But that place was 
now crowded on all sides with towering, celes-
tial palaces rivaling the combined brilliance of 
the sun, fire and the moon. There were splen-
dorous courtyards and gardens, each fil led with 
flocks of cooing birds and beautified by ponds 
in which kumuda, ambhoja, kahlāra and utpala 
lotuses grew. Finely attired men and doe -eyed 
women stood in attendance. Sudāmā wondered, 
“What is all this? Whose property is it? How 
has this all come ab out?” (21 -23) As he contin-
ued to ponder in this way, the beautiful menand 
maidservants, as effulgent as demigods, came 
forward to greet their greatly fortunate master 
with loud song and instrumental music. (24) 
When she heard that her husband had arrived, 
the brāhma ṇa’s wife quickly came out of the 
house in a jubilant flurry. She resembled the 
goddess of fortune herself emerging from her 
divine abode. (25) When the chaste lady saw 
her husband, her eyes filled with tears of love 
and eagerness. As she held he r eyes closed, she 
solemnly bowed down to him, and in her heart 
she embraced him. (26)  

Sudāmā was amazed to see his wife. Shining 
forth in the midst of maidservants adorned with 
jeweled lockets, she looked as effulgent as a 
demigoddess in her celestial ai rplane. (27) 
With pleasure he took his wife with him and entered his house, where there were hundreds 
of gem -studded pillars, just as in the palace of 
Lord Mahendra. (28) In Sudāmā’s home were 
beds as soft and white as the foam of milk, with 
bedsteads made  of ivory and ornamented with 
gold. There were also couches with golden 
legs, as well as royal cāmara fans, golden 
thrones, soft cushions and gleaming canopies 
hung with strings of pearls. Upon the walls of 
sparkling crystal glass, inlaid with precious em-
eralds, shone jeweled lamps, and the women in 
the palace were all adorned with precious gems. 
As he viewed this luxurious opulence of all va-
rieties, the brāhma ṇa calmly reasoned to him-
self about his unexpected prosperity. (29 -32) 

[Sudāmā thought:]  I have a lways been 
poor. Certainly the only possible way that such 
an unfortunate person as myself could become 
suddenly rich is that Lord K ṛṣṇa, the supremely 
opulent chief of the Yadu dynasty, has glanced 
upon Me. (33) After all, my friend K ṛṣṇa, the 
most exalte d of the Dāśārhas and the enjoyer of 
unlimited wealth, noticed that I secretly in-
tended to beg from Him. Thus even though He 
said nothing about it when I stood before Him, 
He actually bestowed upon me the most abun-
dant riches. In this way He acted just lik e a mer-
ciful rain cloud. (34) The Lord considers even 
His greatest benedictions to be insignificant, 
while He magnifies even a small service ren-
dered to Him by His well -wishing devotee. 
Thus with pleasure the Supreme Soul accepted 
a single palmful of the f lat rice I brought Him. 
(35) The Lord is the supremely compassionate 
reservoir of all transcendental qualities. Life af-
ter life may I serve Him with love, friendship 
and sympathy, and may I cultivate such firm at-
tachment for Him by the precious association  
of His devotees. (36) To a devotee who lacks 
spiritual insight, the Supreme Lord will not 
grant the wonderful opulences of this world-
kingly power and material assets. Indeed, in 
His infinite wisdom the unborn Lord well 
knows how the intoxication of pride can cause 
the downfall of the wealthy. (37) [Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī continued:] Thus firmly fixing his de-
termination by means of his spiritual intelli-
gence, Sudāmā remained absolutely devoted to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

769 
 Lord K ṛṣṇa, the shelter of all living beings. Free 
from avarice, he  enjoyed, together with his 
wife, the sense pleasures that had been be-
stowed upon him, always with the idea of even-
tually renouncing all sense gratification. (38)  

Lord Hari is the God of all gods, the master 
of all sacrifices, and the supreme ruler. But H e 
accepts the saintly brāhma ṇas as His masters, 
and so there exists no deity higher than them. 
(39) Thus seeing how the unconquerable Su-
preme Lord is nonetheless conquered by His 
own servants, the Lord’s dear brāhma ṇa friend 
felt the remaining knots of mat erial attachment 
within his heart being cut by the force of his 
constant meditation on the Lord. In a short time 
he attained Lord K ṛṣṇa’s supreme abode, the 
destination of great saints. (40) The Lord al-
ways shows brāhma ṇas special favor. Anyone 
who hears t his account of the Supreme Lord’s 
kindness to brāhma ṇas will come to develop 
love for the Lord and thus become freed from 
the bondage of material work. (41)  

SB 10.82: K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma Meet the 
Inhabitants of V ṛndāvana  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Once, while  
Balarāma and K ṛṣṇa were living in Dvārakā, 
there occurred a great eclipse of the sun, just as 
if the end of Lord Brahmā’s day had come. (1) 
Knowing of this eclipse in advance, O King, 
many people went to the holy place known as 
Samanta -pañcaka in order to  earn pious credit. 
(2) 

After ridding the earth of kings, Lord 
Paraśurāma, the foremost of warriors, created 
huge lakes from the kings’ blood at Samantaka -
pañcaka. Although he is never tainted by kar-
mic reactions, Lord Paraśurāma performed sac-
rifices ther e to instruct people in general; thus 
he acted like an ordinary person trying to free 
himself of sins. From all parts of Bhārata -varṣa 
a great number of people now came to that Sa-
manta -pañcaka on pilgrimage. O descendant of 
Bharata, among those arriving at  the holy place 
were many V ṛṣṇis, such as Gada, Pradyumna 
and Sāmba, hoping to be relieved of their sins; Akrūra, Vasudeva, Āhuka and other kings also 
went there. Aniruddha remained in Dvārakā 
with Sucandra, Śuka and Sāra ṇa to guard the 
city, together with  Kṛtavarmā, the commander 
of their armed forces. (3 -6) The mighty Yāda-
vas passed with great majesty along the road. 
They were attended by their soldiers, who rode 
on chariots rivaling the airplanes of heaven, on 
horses moving with a rhythmic gait, and on b el-
lowing elephants as huge as clouds. Also with 
them were many infantrymen as effulgent as 
celestial Vidyādharas. The Yādavas were so di-
vinely dressedbeing adorned with gold neck-
laces and flower garlands and wearing fine ar-
morthat as they proceeded along t he road with 
their wives they seemed to be demigods flying 
through the sky. (7 -8) At Samanta -pañcaka, the 
saintly Yādavas bathed and then observed a fast 
with careful attention. Afterward they pre-
sented brāhma ṇas with cows bedecked with 
garments, flower ga rlands and gold necklaces. 
(9) In accordance with scriptural injunctions, 
the descendants of V ṛṣṇi then bathed once more 
in Lord Paraśurāma’s lakes and fed first -class 
brāhma ṇas with sumptuous food. All the while 
they prayed, “May we be granted devotion to  
Lord K ṛṣṇa.” (10) Then, with the permission of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, their sole object of worship, the 
Vṛṣṇis ate breakfast and sat down at their lei-
sure beneath trees that gave cooling shade. (11) 
The Yādavas saw that many of the kings who 
had arrived were old fri ends and relativesthe 
Matsyas, Uśīnaras, Kauśalyas, Vidarbhas, Ku-
rus, S ṛñjayas, Kāmbojas, Kaikayas, Madras, 
Kuntīs and the kings of Ānarta and Kerala. 
They also saw many hundreds of other kings, 
both allies and adversaries. In addition, my dear 
King Parīk ṣit, they saw their dear friends 
Nanda Mahārāja and the cowherd men and 
women, who had been suffering in anxiety for 
so long. (12 -13) As the great joy of seeing one 
another made the lotuses of their hearts and 
faces bloom with fresh beauty, the men em-
braced  one another enthusiastically. With tears 
pouring from their eyes, the hair on their bodies 
standing on end and their voices choked up, 
they all felt intense bliss. (14) The women 
glanced at one another with pure smiles of lov-
ing friendship. And when they embraced, their 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

770 
 breasts, smeared with saffron paste, pressed 
against one another as their eyes filled with 
tears of affection. (15)  

They all then offered obeisances to their el-
ders and received respect in turn from their 
younger relatives. After inquiring  from one an-
other about the comfort of their trip and their 
well-being, they proceeded to talk about K ṛṣṇa. 
(16) Queen Kuntī met with her brothers and sis-
ters and their children, and also with her par-
ents, her brothers’ wives and Lord Mukunda. 
While talkin g with them she forgot her sorrow. 
(17) 

Queen Kuntī said:  My dear, respectable 
brother, I feel that my desires have been frus-
trated, because although all of you are most 
saintly, you forgot me during my calamities. 
(18) 

Friends and family members even ch ildren, 
brothers and parents forget a dear one whom 
Providence no longer favors. (19) Śrī Vasudeva 
said: Dear sister, please do not be angry with 
us. We are only ordinary men, playthings of 
fate. Indeed, whether a person acts on his own 
or is forced by oth ers, he is always under the 
Supreme Lord’s control. (20)  

Harassed by Ka ṁsa, we all fled in various 
directions, but by the grace of Providence we 
have now finally been able to return to our 
homes, my dear sister. (21) Śukadeva Gosvāmī 
said: Vasudeva, Ugras ena and the other Yadus 
honored the various kings, who became su-
premely blissful and content upon seeing Lord 
Acyuta. (22)  

All the royalty present, including Bhī ṣma, 
Droṇa, Dh ṛtarāṣṭra, Gāndhārī and her sons, the 
Pāṇḍavas and their wives, Kuntī, Sañjaya, 
Vidura, K ṛpācārya, Kuntībhoja, Virā ṭa, 
Bhīṣmaka, the great Nagnajit, Purujit, Drupada, 
Śalya, Dh ṛṣṭaketu, Kāśirāja, Damagho ṣa, 
Viśālāk ṣa, Maithila, Madra, Kekaya, 
Yudhāmanyu, Suśarmā, Bāhlika with his asso-
ciates and their sons, and the many other kings 
subservient to Mahārāja Yudhi ṣṭhiraall of them, O best of kings, were simply amazed to 
see the transcendental form of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the 
abode of all opulence and beauty, standing be-
fore them with His consorts. (23 -26) 

After Lord Balarāma and Lord K ṛṣṇa had 
liberally honored them, with great joy and en-
thusiasm these kings began to praise the mem-
bers of the V ṛṣṇi clan, Śrī K ṛṣṇa’s personal as-
sociates. (27) [The kings said:] O King of the 
Bhojas, you alone among men have achieved a 
truly exalted birth, for you con tinually behold 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, who is rarely visible even to great 
yogīs. (28) His fame, as broadcast by the Ve-
das, the water that has washed His feet, and the 
words He speaks in the form of the revealed 
scripturesthese thoroughly purify this universe. 
Althou gh the earth’s good fortune was ravaged 
by time, the touch of His lotus feet has revital-
ized her, and thus she is raining down on us the 
fulfillment of all our desires. The same Lord 
Viṣṇu who makes one forget the goals of 
heaven and liberation has now ent ered into 
marital and blood relationships with you, who 
otherwise travel on the hellish path of family 
life. Indeed, in these relationships you see and 
touch Him directly, walk beside Him, converse 
with Him, and together with Him lie down to 
rest, sit at e ase and take your meals. (29 -30) 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When Nanda 
Mahārāja learned that the Yadus had arrived, 
led by K ṛṣṇa, he immediately went to see them. 
The cowherds accompanied him, their various 
possessions loaded on their wagons. (31)  

Seeing Nand a, the V ṛṣṇis were delighted 
and stood up like dead bodies coming back to 
life. Having felt much distress at not seeing him 
for so long, they held him in a tight embrace. 
(32) Vasudeva embraced Nanda Mahārāja with 
great joy. Beside himself with ecstatic lo ve, 
Vasudeva remembered the troubles Ka ṁsa had 
caused him, forcing him to leave his sons in 
Gokula for Their safety. (33) O hero of the Ku-
rus, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma embraced Their foster 
parents and bowed down to them, but Their 
throats were so choked up with  tears of love 
that the two Lords could say nothing. (34) Rais-
ing their two sons onto their laps and holding 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

771 
 Them in their arms, Nanda and saintly mother 
Yaśodā forgot their sorrow. (35) Then Rohi ṇī 
and Devakī both embraced the Queen of Vraja, 
remembering the faithful friendship she had 
shown them. Their throats choking with tears, 
they addressed her as follows. (36) [Rohi ṇī and 
Devakī said:] What woman could forget the un-
ceasing friendship you and Nanda have shown 
us, dear Queen of Vraja? There is no way t o re-
pay you in this world, even with the wealth of 
Indra. (37) Before these two boys had ever seen 
Their real parents, you acted as Their parents 
and gave Them all affectionate care, training, 
nourishment and protection. They were never 
afraid, good lady, because you protected Them 
just as eyelids protect the eyes. Indeed, saintly 
persons like you never discriminate between 
outsiders and their own kin. (38) Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī said: While gazing at their beloved 
Kṛṣṇa, the young gopīs used to condemn the 
creat or of their eyelids, [which would momen-
tarily block their vision of Him]. Now, seeing 
Kṛṣṇa again after such a long separation, with 
their eyes they took Him into their hearts, and 
there they embraced Him to their full satisfac-
tion. In this way they became  totally absorbed 
in ecstatic meditation on Him, although those 
who constantly practice mystic yoga find such 
absorption difficult to achieve. (39)  

The Supreme Lord approached the gopīs in 
a secluded place as they stood in their ecstatic 
trance. After emb racing each of them and in-
quiring about their well -being, He laughed and 
spoke as follows. (40) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] My 
dear girlfriends, do you still remember Me? It 
was for My relatives’ sake that I stayed away 
so long, intent on destroying My enemies. (41 ) 
Do you perhaps think I’m ungrateful and thus 
hold Me in contempt? After all, it is the Su-
preme Lord who brings living beings together 
and then separates them. (42) Just as the wind 
brings together masses of clouds, blades of 
grass, wisps of cotton and pa rticles of dust, only 
to scatter them all again, so the creator deals 
with His created beings in the same way. (43) 
Rendering devotional service to Me qualifies 
any living being for eternal life. But by your good fortune you have developed a special lov-
ing attitude toward Me, by which you have ob-
tained Me. (44) Dear ladies, I am the beginning 
and end of all created beings and exist both 
within and without them, just as the elements 
ether, water, earth, air and fire are the begin-
ning and end of all material objects and exist 
both within and without them. (45) In this way 
all created things reside within the basic ele-
ments of creation, while the spirit souls pervade 
the creation, remaining in their own true iden-
tity. You should see both of thesethe material 
creation and the selfas manifest within Me, the 
imperishable Supreme Truth. (46) Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī said: Having thus been instructed by 
Kṛṣṇa in spiritual matters, the gopīs were freed 
of all tinges of false ego because of their inces-
sant meditation upon Him.  And with their deep-
ening absorption in Him, they came to under-
stand Him fully. (47)  

The gopīs spoke thus:  Dear Lord, whose 
navel is just like a lotus flower, Your lotus feet 
are the only shelter for those who have fallen 
into the deep well of material ex istence. Your 
feet are worshiped and meditated upon by great 
mystic yogīs and highly learned philosophers. 
We wish that these lotus feet may also be awak-
ened within our hearts, although we are only or-
dinary persons engaged in household affairs. 
(48) 

SB 10 .83: Draupadī Meets the Queens of 
Kṛṣṇa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
the spiritual master of the gopīs and the very 
purpose of their life, showed them His mercy. 
He then met with Yudhi ṣṭhira and all His other 
relatives and inquired from them ab out their 
welfare. (1) Feeling greatly honored, King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira and the others, freed of all sinful 
reactions by seeing the feet of the Lord of the 
universe, gladly answered His inquiries. (2) 
[Lord K ṛṣṇa’s relatives said:] O master, how 
can misfortune ar ise for those who have even 
once freely drunk the nectar coming from Your 
lotus feet? This intoxicating liquor pours into 
the drinking cups of their ears, having flowed 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

772 
 from the minds of great devotees through their 
mouths. It destroys the embodied souls’ forget-
fulness of the creator of their bodily existence. 
(3) The radiance of Your personal form dispels 
the threefold effects of material consciousness, 
and by Your grace we become immersed in to-
tal happiness. Your knowledge is indivisible 
and unrestricted.  By Your Yoga -māyā potency 
You have assumed this human form for protect-
ing the Vedas, which had been threatened by 
time. We bow down to You, the final destina-
tion of perfect saints. (4)  

The great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  
As Yudhi ṣṭhira and the others w ere thus prais-
ing Lord K ṛṣṇa, the crest jewel of all sublimely 
glorified personalities, the women of the 
Andhaka and Kaurava clans met with one an-
other and began discussing topics about Go-
vinda that are sung throughout the three worlds. 
Please listen as I relate these to you. (5)  

Śrī Draupadī said:  O Vaidarbhī, Bhadrā 
and Jāmbavatī, O Kauśalā, Satyabhāmā and 
Kālindī, O Śaibyā, Rohi ṇī, Lak ṣmaṇā and other 
wives of Lord K ṛṣṇa, please tell me how the 
Supreme Lord Acyuta, imitating the ways of 
this world by His  mystic power, came to marry 
each of you. (6 -7) 

Śrī Rukmi ṇī said:  When all the kings held 
their bows at the ready to assure that I would be 
presented to Śiśupāla, He who puts the dust of 
His feet on the heads of invincible warriors 
took me from their mids t, as a lion forcibly 
takes his prey from the midst of goats and 
sheep. May I always be allowed to worship 
those feet of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the abode of Goddess 
Śrī. (8)  

Śrī Satyabhāmā said:  My father, his heart 
tormented by his brother’s death, accused 
Kṛṣṇa of killing him. To remove the stain on 
His reputation, the Lord defeated the king of 
the bears and took back the Syamantaka jewel, 
which He then returned to my father. Fearing 
the consequences of his offense, my father of-
fered me to the Lord, even though I h ad already 
been promised to others. (9)   
Śrī Jāmbavatī said:  Unaware that Lord 
Kṛṣṇa was none other than his own master and 
worshipable Deity, the husband of Goddess 
Sītā, my father fought with Him for twenty -
seven days. When my father finally came to his 
senses and recognized the Lord, he took hold of 
His feet and presented Him with both me and 
the Syamantaka jewel as tokens of his rever-
ence. I am simply the Lord’s maidservant. (10)  

Śrī Kālindī said:  The Lord knew I was per-
forming severe austerities and p enances with 
the hope of one day touching His lotus feet. So 
He came to me in the company of His friend 
and took my hand in marriage. Now I am en-
gaged as a sweeper in His palace. (11)  

Śrī Mitravindā said:  At my svaya ṁvara 
ceremony He came forward, defeate d all the 
kings presentincluding my brothers, who dared 
insult Himand took me away just as a lion re-
moves his prey from amidst a pack of dogs. 
Thus Lord K ṛṣṇa, the shelter of the goddess of 
fortune, brought me to His capital city. May I 
be allowed to serve  Him by washing His feet, 
life after life. (12)  

Śrī Satyā said:  My father arranged for 
seven extremely powerful and vigorous bulls 
with deadly sharp horns to test the prowess of 
the kings who desired my hand in marriage. 
Although these bulls destroyed the  false pride 
of many heroes, Lord K ṛṣṇa subdued them ef-
fortlessly, tying them up in the same way that 
children playfully tie up a goat’s kids. He thus 
purchased me with His valor. Then He took me 
away with my maidservants and a full army of 
four divisions,  defeating all the kings who op-
posed Him along the road. May I be granted the 
privilege of serving that Lord. (13 -14) 

Śrī Bhadrā said:  My dear Draupadī, of his 
own free will my father invited his nephew 
Kṛṣṇa, to whom I had already dedicated my 
heart, and  offered me to Him as His bride. My 
father presented me to the Lord with an ak ṣau-
hiṇi military guard and a retinue of my female 
companions. My ultimate perfection is this: to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

773 
 always be allowed to touch Lord K ṛṣṇa’s lotus 
feet as I wander from life to life,  bound by my 
karma. (15 -16) 

Śrī Lak ṣmaṇā said:  O Queen, I repeatedly 
heard Nārada Muni glorify the appearances and 
activities of Acyuta, and thus my heart also be-
came attached to that Lord, Mukunda. Indeed, 
even Goddess Padmahastā chose Him as her 
husband  after careful consideration, rejecting 
the great demigods who rule various planets. 
(17) 

My father, B ṛhatsena, was by nature com-
passionate to his daughter, and knowing how I 
felt, O saintly lady, he arranged to fulfill my de-
sire. (18) Just as a fish was used as a target in 
your svaya ṁvara ceremony, O Queen, to assure 
that you would obtain Arjuna as your husband, 
so a fish was also used in my ceremony. In my 
case, however, it was concealed on all sides, 
and only its reflection could be seen in a pot of 
water below. (19) Hearing of this, thousands of 
kings expert in shooting arrows and in wielding 
other weapons converged from all directions on 
my father’s city, accompanied by their military 
teachers. (20) My father properly honored each 
king according to his  strength and seniority. 
Then those whose minds were fixed on me took 
up the bow and arrow and one by one tried to 
pierce the target in the midst of the assembly. 
(21) Some of them picked up the bow but could 
not string it, and so they threw it aside in fr us-
tration. Some managed to pull the bowstring to-
ward the tip of the bow, only to have the bow 
spring back and knock them to the ground. (22) 
A few heroesnamely Jarāsandha, Śiśupāla, 
Bhīma, Duryodhana, Kar ṇa and the King of 
Amba ṣṭhasucceeded in stringing th e bow, but 
none of them could find the target. (23) Then 
Arjuna looked at the reflection of the fish in the 
water and determined its position. When he 
carefully shot his arrow at it, however, he did 
not pierce the target but merely grazed it. (24)  

After a ll the arrogant kings had given up, 
their pride broken, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead picked up the bow, easily strung it 
and then fixed His arrow upon it. As the sun stood in the constellation Abhijit, He looked at 
the fish in the water only once and  then pierced 
it with the arrow, knocking it to the ground. 
(25-26) Kettledrums resounded in the sky, and 
on the earth people shouted “Jaya! Jaya!” Over-
joyed, demigods showered flowers. (27) Just 
then I walked onto the ceremonial ground, the 
ankle bells on  my feet gently tinkling. I was 
wearing new garments of the finest silk, tied 
with a belt, and I carried a brilliant necklace 
fashioned of gold and jewels. There was a shy 
smile on my face and a wreath of flowers in my 
hair. (28) I lifted my face, which wa s encircled 
by my abundant locks and effulgent from the 
glow of my earrings reflected from my cheeks. 
Smiling coolly, I glanced about. Then, looking 
around at all the kings, I slowly placed the 
necklace on the shoulder of Murāri, who had 
captured my heart.  (29) Just then there were 
loud sounds of conchshells and m ṛdaṅga, 
paṭaha, bherī and ānaka drums, as well as other 
instruments. Men and women began to dance, 
and singers began to sing. (30)  

The leading kings there could not tolerate 
my having chosen the S upreme Personality of 
Godhead, O Draupadī. Burning with lust, they 
became quarrelsome. (31) The Lord then 
placed me on His chariot, drawn by four most 
excellent horses. Donning His armor and read-
ying His bow Śār ṅga, He stood on the chariot, 
and there on th e battleground He manifested 
His four arms. (32) Dāruka drove the Lord’s 
gold-trimmed chariot as the kings looked on, O 
Queen, like small animals helplessly watching 
a lion. (33) The kings pursued the Lord like vil-
lage dogs chasing a lion. Some kings, rais ing 
their bows, stationed themselves on the road to 
stop Him as He passed by. (34) These warriors 
were deluged by arrows shot from the Lord’s 
bow, Śār ṅga. Some of the kings fell on the bat-
tlefield with severed arms, legs and necks; the 
rest gave up the fig ht and fled. (35)  

The Lord of the Yadus then entered His cap-
ital city, Kuśasthalī [Dvārakā], which is glori-
fied in heaven and on earth. The city was elab-
orately decorated with flagpoles carrying ban-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

774 
 ners that blocked the sun, and also with splen-
did archway s. As Lord K ṛṣṇa entered, He ap-
peared like the sun -god entering his abode. (36) 
My father honored his friends, family and in -
laws with priceless clothing and jewelry and 
with royal beds, thrones and other furnishings. 
(37) With devotion he presented the pe rfectly 
complete Lord with a number of maidservants 
bedecked with precious ornaments. Accompa-
nying these maidservants were guards walking 
on foot and others riding elephants, chariots 
and horses. He also gave the Lord extremely 
valuable weapons. (38) Thus,  by renouncing all 
material association and practicing austere pen-
ances, we queens have all become personal 
maidservants of the self -satisfied Supreme 
Lord. (39)  

Rohi ṇī-devi, speaking for the other 
queens, said:  After killing Bhaumāsura and his 
followers,  the Lord found us in the demon’s 
prison and could understand that we were the 
daughters of the kings whom Bhauma had de-
feated during his conquest of the earth. The 
Lord set us free, and because we had been con-
stantly meditating upon His lotus feet, the 
source of liberation from material entangle-
ment, He agreed to marry us, though His every 
desire is already fulfilled. (40) O saintly lady, 
we do not desire dominion over the earth, the 
sovereignty of the King of heaven, unlimited 
facility for enjoyment, myst ic power, the posi-
tion of Lord Brahmā, immortality or even at-
tainment of the kingdom of God. We simply 
desire to carry on our heads the glorious dust of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s feet, enriched by the fragrance of 
kuṅkuma from His consort’s bosom. (41 -42) 
We desire the  same contact with the Supreme 
Lord’s feet that the young women of Vraja, the 
cowherd boys and even the aborigine Pulinda 
women desirethe touch of the dust He leaves on 
the plants and grass as He tends His cows. (43)  

SB 10.84: The Sages’ Teachings at Ku-
rukṣetra 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Pṛthā, Gāndhārī, 
Draupadī, Subhadrā, the wives of other kings 
and the Lord’s cowherd girīfriends were all amazed to hear of the queens’ deep love for 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of God-
head and Soul of all beings, and their eyes filled 
with tears. (1) As the women thus talked among 
themselves and the men among themselves, a 
number of great sages arrived there, all of them 
eager to see Lord K ṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma. 
They included Dvaipāyana, Nārada, Cyavana, 
Devala and As ita, Viśvāmitra, Śatānanda, Bha-
radvāja and Gautama, Lord Paraśurāma and his 
disciples, Vasi ṣṭha, Gālava, Bh ṛgu, Pulastya 
and Kaśyapa, Atri, Mārka ṇḍeya and B ṛhaspati, 
Dvita, Trita, Ekata and the four Kumāras, and 
Aṅgirā, Agastya, Yājñavalkya and Vāmadeva. 
(2-5) As soon as they saw the sages approach-
ing, the kings and other gentlemen who had 
been seated immediately stood up, including 
the Pā ṇḍava brothers and K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma. 
They all then bowed down to the sages, who are 
honored throughout the universe. ( 6) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, Lord Balarāma and the other kings and 
leaders properly worshiped the sages by offer-
ing them words of greeting, sitting places, wa-
ter for washing their feet, drinking water, 
flower garlands, incense and sandalwood paste. 
(7) After the sages w ere comfortably seated, the 
Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa, whose transcendental 
body protects religious principles, addressed 
them in the midst of that great assembly. Eve-
ryone listened silently with rapt attention. (8)  

The Supreme Lord said:  Now our lives are 
indee d successful, for we have obtained life’s 
ultimate goal: the audience of great yoga mas-
ters, which even demigods only rarely obtain. 
(9) How is it that people who are not very aus-
tere and who recognize God only in His Deity 
form in the temple can now see y ou, touch you, 
inquire from you, bow down to you, worship 
your feet and serve you in other ways? (10)  

Mere bodies of water are not the real sacred 
places of pilgrimage, nor are mere images of 
earth and stone the true worshipable deities. 
These purify one only after a long time, but 
saintly sages purify one immediately upon be-
ing seen. (11) Neither the demigods controlling 
fire, the sun, the moon and the stars nor those 
in charge of earth, water, ether, air, speech and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

775 
 mind actually remove the sins of their  wor-
shipers, who continue to see in terms of duali-
ties. But wise sages destroy one’s sins when re-
spectfully served for even a few moments. (12) 
One who identifies his self as the inert body 
composed of mucus, bile and air, who assumes 
his wife and family a re permanently his own, 
who thinks an earthen image or the land of his 
birth is worshipable, or who sees a place of pil-
grimage as merely the water there, but who 
never identifies himself with, feels kinship 
with, worships or even visits those who are 
wise in spiritual truthsuch a person is no better 
than a cow or an ass. (13)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Hearing such un-
fathomable words from the unlimitedly wise 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the learned brāhma ṇas remained 
silent, their minds bewildered. (14) For some 
time the sage s pondered the Supreme Lord’s 
behavior, which resembled that of a subordi-
nate living being. They concluded that He was 
acting this way to instruct the people in general. 
Thus they smiled and spoke to Him, the spir-
itual master of the universe. (15)  

The gre at sages said:  Your power of illu-
sion has totally bewildered us, the most exalted 
knowers of the truth and leaders among the uni-
versal creators. Ah, how amazing is the behav-
ior of the Supreme Lord! He covers Himself 
with His humanlike activities and preten ds to 
be subject to superior control. (16) Indeed, the 
humanlike pastimes of the Almighty are simply 
a pretense! Effortlessly, He alone sends forth 
from His Self this variegated creation, main-
tains it and then swallows it up again, all with-
out becoming ent angled, just as the element 
earth takes on many names and forms in its var-
ious transformations. (17) Nonetheless, at suit-
able times You assume the pure mode of good-
ness to protect Your devotees and punish the 
wicked. Thus You, the Soul of the var ṇāśrama 
social order, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, maintain the eternal path of the Vedas by 
enjoying Your pleasure pastimes. (18) The Ve-
das are Your spotless heart, and through them 
one can perceiveby means of austerity, study 
and self -controlthe manifest, t he unmanifest and the pure existence transcendental to both. 
(19) Therefore, O Supreme Brahman, You 
honor the members of the brahminical commu-
nity, for they are the perfect agents by which 
one can realize You through the evidence of the 
Vedas. For that ver y reason You are the fore-
most worshiper of the brāhma ṇas. (20) Today 
our birth, education, austerity and vision have 
all become perfect because we have been able 
to associate with You, the goal of all saintly 
persons. Indeed, You Yourself are the ultimate,  
supreme blessing. (21) Let us offer obeisances 
unto that Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, the infinitely intelligent Supersoul, 
who has disguised His greatness through His 
mystic Yoga -māyā. (22) Neither these kings 
nor even the V ṛṣṇis, who enjo y Your intimate 
association, know You as the Soul of all exist-
ence, the force of time and the supreme control-
ler. For them You are covered by the curtain of 
Māyā. (23) A sleeping person imagines an al-
ternative reality for himself and, seeing himself 
as hav ing various names and forms, forgets his 
waking identity, which is distinct from the 
dream. Similarly, the senses of one whose con-
sciousness is bewildered by illusion perceive 
only the names and forms of material objects. 
Thus such a person loses his memor y and can-
not know You. (24 -25) Today we have directly 
seen Your feet, the source of the holy Ganges, 
which washes away volumes of sins. Perfected 
yogīs can at best meditate upon Your feet 
within their hearts. But only those who render 
You wholehearted devo tional service and in 
this way vanquish the soul’s coveringthe mate-
rial mindattain You as their final destination. 
Therefore, kindly show mercy to us, Your dev-
otees. (26)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having thus spo-
ken, O wise king, the sages then took leave of  
Lord Dāśārha, Dh ṛtarāṣṭra and Yudhi ṣṭhira and 
prepared to depart for their āśramas. (27) See-
ing that they were about to leave, the renowned 
Vasudeva approached the sages. After bowing 
down to them and touching their feet, he spoke 
to them with carefully c hosen words. (28)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

776 
 Śrī Vasudeva said:  Obeisances to you, the 
residence of all the demigods. Please hear me, 
O sages. Kindly tell us how the reactions of 
one’s work can be counteracted by further 
work. (29)  

Śrī Nārada Muni said:  O brāhma ṇas, it is 
not so a mazing that in his eagerness to know, 
Vasudeva has asked us about his ultimate ben-
efit, for he considers K ṛṣṇa a mere boy. (30) In 
this world familiarity breeds contempt. For ex-
ample, one who lives on the banks of the Gan-
ges might travel to some other body  of water to 
be purified. (31) The Supreme Lord’s aware-
ness is never disturbed by time, by the creation 
and destruction of the universe, by changes in 
its own qualities, or by anything else, whether 
self-caused or external. But although the con-
sciousness o f the Personality of Godhead, who 
is the supreme one without a second, is never 
affected by material distress, by the reactions of 
material work or by the constant flow of na-
ture’s modes, ordinary persons nonetheless 
think that the Lord is covered by His o wn crea-
tions of prā ṇa and other material elements, just 
as one may think that the sun is covered by 
clouds, snow or an eclipse. (32 -33) 

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  The 
sages then spoke again, O King, addressing 
Vasudeva while all the kings, along with L ord 
Acyuta and Lord Rāma, listened. (34) [The 
sages said:] It has been definitely concluded 
that work is counteracted by further work when 
one executes Vedic sacrifices as a means of 
worshiping Vi ṣṇu, the Lord of all sacrifices, 
with sincere faith. (35)  

Learned authorities who see through the eye 
of scripture have demonstrated that this is the 
easiest method of subduing the agitated mind 
and attaining liberation, and that it is a sacred 
duty which brings joy to the heart. (36) This is 
the most auspicious p ath for a religious house-
holder of the twice -born ordersto selflessly 
worship the Personality of Godhead with 
wealth honestly obtained. (37) An intelligent 
person should learn to renounce his desire for 
wealth by performing sacrifices and acts of charity. He should learn to renounce his desire 
for wife and children by experiencing family 
life. And he should learn to renounce his desire 
for promotion to a higher planet in his next life, 
O saintly Vasudeva, by studying the effects of 
time. Self -controlled sag es who have thus re-
nounced their attachment to household life go 
to the forest to perform austerities. (38) Dear 
Prabhu, a member of the twice -born classes is 
born with three kinds of debtsthose owed to the 
demigods, to the sages and to his forefathers. If  
he leaves his body without first liquidating 
these debts by performing sacrifice, studying 
the scriptures and begetting children, he will 
fall down into a hellish condition. (39) But you, 
O magnanimous soul, are already free from two 
of your debtsthose to  the sages and the forefa-
thers. Now absolve yourself of your debt to the 
demigods by executing Vedic sacrifices, and in 
this way free yourself completely of debt and 
renounce all material shelter. (40) O Vasudeva, 
without doubt you must have previously wor-
shiped Lord Hari, the master of all worlds. Both 
you and your wife must have perfectly wor-
shiped Him with supreme devotion, since He 
has accepted the role of your son. (41)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After hearing 
these statements of the sages, generous 
Vasud eva bowed his head to the ground and, 
praising them, requested them to become his 
priests. (42) Thus requested by him, O King, 
the sages engaged the pious Vasudeva in per-
forming fire sacrifices at that holy place of Ku-
rukṣetra according to strict religious  principles 
and with most excellent ritual arrangements. 
(43) When Mahārāja Vasudeva was about to be 
initiated for the sacrifice, O King, the V ṛṣṇis 
came to the initiation pavilion after bathing and 
putting on fine clothes and garlands of lotuses. 
The othe r kings also came, elaborately orna-
mented, as well as all their joyful queens, who 
wore jeweled lockets around their necks and 
were also clad in fine garments. The royal 
wives were anointed with sandalwood paste 
and carried auspicious items for the worship . 
(44-45) 

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

777 
 Mṛdaṅgas, pa ṭahas, conchshells, bherīs, 
ānakas and other instruments resounded, male 
and female dancers danced, and sūtas and 
māgadhas recited glorifications. Sweet -voiced 
Gandharvīs sang, accompanied by their hus-
bands. (46) After Vasudeva’s eye s had been 
decorated with black cosmetic and his body 
smeared with fresh butter, the priests initiated 
him according to scriptural rules by sprinkling 
him and his eighteen wives with sacred water. 
Encircled by his wives, he resembled the regal 
moon encircl ed by stars. (47) Vasudeva re-
ceived initiation along with his wives, who 
wore silk saris and were adorned with bangles, 
necklaces, ankle bells and earrings. With his 
body wrapped in a deerskin, Vasudeva shone 
splendidly. (48) My dear Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, 
Vasudeva’s priests and the officiating members 
of the assembly, dressed in silk dhotīs and jew-
eled ornaments, looked so effulgent that they 
seemed to be standing in the sacrificial arena of 
Indra, the killer of V ṛtra. (49) At that time 
Balarāma and K ṛṣṇa, the  Lords of all living en-
tities, shone forth with great majesty in the 
company of Their respective sons, wives and 
other family members, who were expansions of 
Their opulences. (50)  

Performing various kinds of Vedic sacrifice 
according to the proper regulat ions, Vasudeva 
worshiped the Lord of all sacrificial parapher-
nalia, mantras and rituals. He executed both 
primary and secondary sacrifices, offering ob-
lations to the sacred fire and carrying out other 
aspects of sacrificial worship. (51) Then, at the 
appro priate time and according to scripture, 
Vasudeva remunerated the priests by decorat-
ing them with precious ornaments, though they 
were already richly adorned, and offering them 
valuable gifts of cows, land and marriageable 
girls. (52) After supervising the patnī -saṁyāja 
and avabh ṛthya rituals, the great brāhma ṇa 
sages bathed in Lord Paraśurāma’s lake with 
the sponsor of the sacrifice, Vasudeva, who led 
them. (53) His sacred bath complete, Vasudeva 
joined with his wives in giving the jewelry and 
clothes they had been wearing to the profes-
sional reciters. Vasudeva then put on new gar-
ments, after which he honored all classes of people by feeding everyone, even the dogs. 
(54) With opulent gifts he honored his relatives, 
including all their wives and children; the  roy-
alty of the Vidarbha, Kosala, Kuru, Kāśī, 
Kekaya and S ṛñjaya kingdoms; the officiating 
members of the assembly; and also the priests, 
witnessing demigods, humans, spirits, forefa-
thers and Cāra ṇas. Then, taking permission 
from Lord K ṛṣṇa, the shelter of  the goddess of 
fortune, the various guests departed as they all 
chanted the glories of Vasudeva’s sacrifice. 
(55-56) The Yadus were all embraced by their 
friends, close family members and other rela-
tives, including Dh ṛtarāṣṭra and his younger 
brother, Vid ura; P ṛthā and her sons; Bhī ṣma; 
Droṇa; the twins Nakula and Sahadeva; 
Nārada; and Vedavyāsa, the Personality of 
Godhead. Their hearts melting with affection, 
these and the other guests left for their king-
doms, their progress slowed by the pain of sep-
aration. (57 -58) Nanda Mahārāja showed his 
affection for his relatives, the Yadus, by re-
maining with them a little longer, together with 
his cowherds. During his stay, K ṛṣṇa, 
Balarāma, Ugrasena and the others honored 
him with especially opulent worship. (59) Ha v-
ing so easily crossed over the vast ocean of his 
ambition, Vasudeva felt fully satisfied. In the 
company of his many well -wishers, he took 
Nanda by the hand and addressed him as fol-
lows. (60)  

ŚrīVasudeva said:  My dear brother, God 
Himself has tied the kn ot called affection, 
which tightly binds human beings together. It 
seems to me that even great heroes and mystics 
find it very difficult to free themselves from it. 
(61) Indeed, the Supreme Lord must have cre-
ated the bonds of affection, for such exalted 
saints as you have never stopped showing 
matchless friendship toward us ingrates, alt-
hough it has never been properly reciprocated. 
(62) Previously, dear brother, we did nothing to 
benefit you because we were unable to, yet 
even now that you are present befo re us, our 
eyes are so blinded by the intoxication of mate-
rial good fortune that we continue to ignore 
you. (63) O most respectful one, may a person 
who wants the highest benefit in life never gain 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

778 
 kingly opulence, for it leaves him blind to the 
needs of h is own family and friends. (64)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  His heart sof-
tened by feelings of intimate sympathy, 
Vasudeva wept. His eyes brimmed with tears as 
he remembered the friendship Nanda had 
shown him. (65) And on his part, Nanda was 
also full of aff ection for his friend Vasudeva. 
Thus during the following days Nanda would 
repeatedly announce, “I will be leaving later to-
day” and “I will be leaving tomorrow.” But out 
of love for K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma he remained 
there for three more months, honored by all  the 
Yadus. (66) Then, after Vasudeva, Ugrasena, 
Kṛṣṇa, Uddhava, Balarāma and others had ful-
filled his desires and presented him with pre-
cious ornaments, fine linen and varieties of 
priceless household furnishings, Nanda 
Mahārāja accepted all these gifts a nd took his 
leave. Seen off by all the Yadus, he departed 
with his family members and the residents of 
Vraja. (67 -68) Unable to withdraw their minds 
from Lord Govinda’s lotus feet, where they had 
surrendered them, Nanda and the cowherd men 
and women return ed to Mathurā. (69)  

Their relatives having thus departed, and 
seeing that the rainy season was approaching, 
the V ṛṣṇis, whose only Lord was K ṛṣṇa, went 
back to Dvārakā. (70) They told the people of 
the city about the festive sacrifices performed 
by Vasude va, lord of the Yadus, and about eve-
rything else that had happened during their pil-
grimage, especially how they had met with all 
their loved ones. (71)  

SB 10.85: Lord K ṛṣṇa Instructs Vasudeva 
and Retrieves Devakī’s Sons  

Śrī Bādarāya ṇi said:  One day the t wo sons 
of VasudevaSa ṅkarṣaṇa and Acyutacame to 
pay him respects, bowing down at his feet. 
Vasudeva greeted Them with great affection 
and spoke to Them. (1) Having heard the great 
sages’ words concerning the power of his two 
sons, and having seen Their val orous deeds, 
Vasudeva became convinced of Their divinity. 
Thus, addressing Them by name, he spoke to Them as follows. (2) [Vasudeva said:] O K ṛṣṇa, 
Kṛṣṇa, best of yogīs, O eternal Sa ṅkarṣaṇa! I 
know that You two are personally the source of 
universal creat ion and the ingredients of crea-
tion as well. (3) You are the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, who manifest as the Lord of 
both nature and the creator of nature [Mahā -
Viṣṇu]. Everything that comes into existence, 
however and whenever it does so, is created 
within You, by You, from You, for You and in 
relation to You. (4) O transcendental Lord, 
from Yourself You created this entire varie-
gated universe, and then You entered within it 
in Your personal form as the Supersoul. In this 
way, O unborn Supreme Soul, as  the life force 
and consciousness of everyone, You maintain 
the creation. (5) Whatever potencies the life air 
and other elements of universal creation exhibit 
are actually all personal energies of the Su-
preme Lord, for both life and matter are subor-
dinate to Him and dependent on Him, and also 
different from one another. Thus everything ac-
tive in the material world is set into motion by 
the Supreme Lord. (6) The glow of the moon, 
the brilliance of fire, the radiance of the sun, the 
twinkling of the stars, th e flash of lightning, the 
permanence of mountains and the aroma and 
sustaining power of the earthall these are actu-
ally You. (7) My Lord, You are water, and also 
its taste and and its capacities to quench thirst 
and sustain life. You exhibit Your potencies  
through the manifestations of the air as bodily 
warmth, vitality, mental power, physical 
strength, endeavor and movement. (8) You are 
the directions and their accommodating capac-
ity, the all -pervading ether and the elemental 
sound residing within it. You are the primeval, 
unmanifested form of sound; the first syllable, 
om; and audible speech, by which sound, as 
words, acquires particular references. (9) You 
are the power of the senses to reveal their ob-
jects, the senses’ presiding demigods, and the 
sanctio n these demigods give for sensory activ-
ity. You are the capacity of the intelligence for 
decision -making, and the living being’s ability 
to remember things accurately. (10) You are 
false ego in the mode of ignorance, which is the 
source of the physical ele ments; false ego in the 
mode of passion, which is the source of the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

779 
 bodily senses; false ego in the mode of good-
ness, which is the source of the demigods; and 
the unmanifest, total material energy, which 
underlies everything. (11) You are the one in-
destruc tible entity among all the destructible 
things of this world, like the underlying sub-
stance that is seen to remain unchanged while 
the things made from it undergo transfor-
mations. (12) The modes of material na-
turenamely goodness, passion and ignoranceto-
gether with all their functions, become directly 
manifest within You, the Supreme Absolute 
Truth, by the arrangement of Your Yoga -māyā. 
(13) Thus these created entities, transfor-
mations of material nature, do not exist except 
when material nature manifests th em within 
You, at which time You also manifest within 
them. But aside from such periods of creation, 
You stand alone as the transcendental reality. 
(14) They are truly ignorant who, while impris-
oned within the ceaseless flow of this world’s 
material qualit ies, fail to know You, the Su-
preme Soul of all that be, as their ultimate, sub-
lime destination. Because of their ignorance, 
the entanglement of material work forces such 
souls to wander in the cycle of birth and death. 
(15) By good fortune a soul may obtai n a 
healthy human lifean opportunity rarely 
achieved. But if he is nonetheless deluded 
about what is best for him, O Lord, Your illu-
sory Māyā will cause him to waste his entire 
life. (16) You keep this whole world bound up 
by the ropes of affection, and th us when people 
consider their material bodies, they think, “This 
is me,” and when they consider their progeny 
and other relations, they think, “These are 
mine.” (17) You are not our sons but the very 
Lords of both material nature and its creator 
[Mahā -Viṣṇu]. As You Yourself have told us, 
You have descended to rid the earth of the rul-
ers who are a heavy burden upon her. (18) 
Therefore, O friend of the distressed, I now ap-
proach Your lotus feet for shelterthe same lotus 
feet that dispel all fear of worldly e xistence for 
those who have surrendered to them. Enough! 
Enough with hankering for sense enjoyment, 
which makes me identify with this mortal body 
and think of You, the Supreme, as my child. 
(19) Indeed, while still in the maternity room You told us that Yo u, the unborn Lord, had al-
ready been born several times as our son in pre-
vious ages. After manifesting each of these 
transcendental bodies to protect Your own 
principles of religion, You then made them un-
manifest, thus appearing and disappearing like 
a clo ud. O supremely glorified, all -pervading 
Lord, who can understand the mystic, deluding 
potency of Your opulent expansions? (20)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having heard His 
father’s words, the Supreme Lord, leader of the 
Sātvatas, replied in a gentle voice as He bowed 
His head in humility and smiled. (21)  

The Supreme Lord said:  My dear Father, I 
consider your statements appropriate, since you 
have explained the various categories of exist-
ence by referring to Us, your sons. (22) Not 
only I, but also you, along with My respected 
brother and these residents of Dvārakā, should 
all be considered in this same philosophical 
light, O best of the Yadus. Indeed, we should 
include all that exists, both moving and non-
moving. (23) The supreme spirit, Paramātmā, 
is indeed on e. He is self -luminous and eternal, 
transcendental and devoid of material qualities. 
But through the agency of the very modes He 
has created, the one Supreme Truth manifests 
as many among the expansions of those modes. 
(24) The elements of ether, air, fire , water and 
earth become visible, invisible, minute or ex-
tensive as they manifest in various objects. 
Similarly, the Paramātmā, though one, appears 
to become many. (25)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, hearing 
these instructions spoken to him by the Su-
preme  Lord, Vasudeva became freed from all 
ideas of duality. Satisfied at heart, he remained 
silent. (26) At that time, O best of the Kurus, 
the universally worshiped Devakī took the op-
portunity to address her two sons, K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma. Previously she had he ard with aston-
ishment that They had brought Their spiritual 
master’s son back from death. Now, thinking of 
her own sons who had been murdered by 
Kaṁsa, she felt great sorrow, and thus with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

780 
 tear-filled eyes she beseeched K ṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma. (27 -28) 

Śrī Dev akī said:  O Rāma, Rāma, immeas-
urable Supreme Soul! O K ṛṣṇa, Lord of all 
masters of yoga! I know that You are the ulti-
mate rulers of all universal creators, the prime-
val Personalities of Godhead. (29) Taking birth 
from me, You have now descended to this 
world in order to kill those kings whose good 
qualities have been destroyed by the present 
age, and who thus defy the authority of re-
vealed scriptures and burden the earth. (30)  

O Soul of all that be, the creation, mainte-
nance and destruction of the universe  are all 
carried out by a fraction of an expansion of an 
expansion of Your expansion. Today I have 
come to take shelter of You, the Supreme Lord. 
(31) It is said that when Your spiritual master 
ordered You to retrieve his long -dead son, You 
brought him bac k from the forefathers’ abode 
as a token of remuneration for Your guru’s 
mercy. Please fulfill my desire in the same way, 
O supreme masters of all yoga masters. Please 
bring back my sons who were killed by the 
King of Bhoja, so that I may see them once 
again. (32 -33) 

The sage Śukadeva said:  Thus entreated by 
Their mother, O Bhārata, Balarāma and K ṛṣṇa 
employed Their mystic Yoga -māyā potency 
and entered the region of Sutala. (34) When the 
King of the Daityas, Bali Mahārāja, noticed the 
arrival of the two Lo rds, his heart overflowed 
with joy, since he knew Them to be the Su-
preme Soul and worshipable Deity of the entire 
universe, and especially of himself. He imme-
diately stood up and then bowed down to offer 
respects, along with his entire entourage. (35) 
Bali took pleasure in offering Them elevated 
seats. After They sat down, he washed the feet 
of the two Supreme Personalities. Then he took 
that water, which purifies the whole world even 
up to Lord Brahmā, and poured it upon himself 
and his followers. (36) He worshiped Them 
with all the riches at his disposalpriceless cloth-
ing, ornaments, fragrant sandalwood paste, be-
tel nut, lamps, sumptuous food and so on. Thus he offered Them all his family’s wealth, and 
also his own self. (37) Taking hold of the 
Lords’ lotu s feet again and again, Bali, the con-
queror of Indra’s army, spoke from his heart, 
which was melting out of his intense love. O 
King, as tears of ecstasy filled his eyes and the 
hair on his limbs stood on end, he began to 
speak with faltering words. (38)  

King Bali said:  Obeisances to the unlimited 
Lord, Ananta, the greatest of all beings. And 
obeisances to Lord K ṛṣṇa, the creator of the 
universe, who appears as the impersonal Abso-
lute and the Supersoul in order to disseminate 
the principles of sā ṅkhya and yoga. (39) Seeing 
You Lords is a rare achievement for most living 
beings. But even persons like us, situated in the 
modes of passion and ignorance, can easily see 
You when You reveal Yourself by Your own 
sweet will. (40) Many who had been constantly 
absorb ed in enmity toward You ultimately be-
came attracted to You, who are the direct em-
bodiment of transcendental goodness and 
whose divine form comprises the revealed 
scriptures. These reformed enemies include 
Daityas, Dānavas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, 
Vidyādharas,  Cāra ṇas, Yak ṣas, Rāk ṣasas, 
Piśācas, Bhūtas, Pramathas and Nāyakas, and 
also ourselves and many others like us. Some 
of us have become attracted to You because of 
exceptional hatred, while others have become 
attracted because of their mood of devotion 
based on lust. But the demigods and others in-
fatuated by material goodness feel no such at-
traction for You. (41 -43) What to speak of our-
selves, O Lord of all perfect yogīs, even the 
greatest mystics do not know what Your spir-
itual power of delusion is or how i t acts. (44) 
Please be merciful to me so I may get out of the 
blind well of family lifemy false homeand find 
the true shelter of Your lotus feet, which self-
less sages always seek. Then, either alone or in 
the company of great saints, who are the friends 
of everyone, I may wander freely, finding life’s 
necessities at the feet of the universally charita-
ble trees. (45) O Lord of all subordinate crea-
tures, please tell us what to do and thus free us 
of all sin. One who faithfully executes Your 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

781 
 command, O master,  is no longer obliged to fol-
low the ordinary Vedic rites. (46)  

The Supreme Lord said:  During the age of 
the first Manu, the sage Marīci had six sons by 
his wife Ūrnā. They were all exalted demigods, 
but once they laughed at Lord Brahmā when 
they saw him p reparing to have sex with his 
own daughter. (47) Because of that improper 
act, they immediately entered a demoniac form 
of life, and thus they took birth as sons of 
Hiraṇyakaśipu. The goddess Yoga -māyā then 
took them away from Hira ṇyakaśipu, and they 
were born again from Devakī’s womb. After 
this, O King, Ka ṁsa murdered them. Devakī 
still laments for them, thinking of them as her 
sons. These same sons of Marīci are now living 
here with you. (48 -49) We wish to take them 
from this place to dispel their mother ’s sorrow. 
Then, released from their curse and free from 
all suffering, they will return to their home in 
heaven. (50) By My grace these sixSmara, 
Udgītha, Pari ṣvaṅga, Pata ṅga, K ṣudrabh ṛt and 
Ghṛṇīwill return to the abode of pure saints. 
(51) [Śukadeva Gos vāmī continued:] After say-
ing this, Lord K ṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma, hav-
ing been duly worshiped by Bali Mahārāja, 
took the six sons and returned to Dvārakā, 
where They presented them to Their mother. 
(52) When she saw her lost children, Goddess 
Devakī felt su ch affection for them that milk 
flowed from her breasts. She embraced them 
and took them onto her lap, smelling their 
heads again and again. (53) Lovingly she let her 
sons drink from her breast, which became wet 
with milk just by their touch. She was en-
tranced by the same illusory energy of Lord 
Viṣṇu that initiates the creation of the universe. 
(54) By drinking her nectarean milk, the rem-
nants of what K ṛṣṇa Himself had previously 
drunk, the six sons touched the transcendental 
body of the Lord, Nārāya ṇa, an d this contact 
awakened them to their original identities. 
They bowed down to Govinda, Devakī, their 
father and Balarāma, and then, as everyone 
looked on, they left for the abode of the demi-
gods. (55 -56) Seeing her sons return from death 
and then depart ag ain, saintly Devakī was 
struck with wonder, O King. She concluded that this was all simply an illusion created by 
Kṛṣṇa. (57) Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Soul, the 
Lord of unlimited valor, performed countless 
pastimes just as amazing as this one, O de-
scendant o f Bharata. (58)  

Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: This pastime en-
acted by Lord Murāri, whose fame is eternal, 
totally destroys the sins of the universe and 
serves as the transcendental ornament for His 
devotees’ ears. Anyone who carefully hears or 
narrates this past ime, as recounted by the ven-
erable son of Vyāsa, will be able to fix his mind 
in meditation on the Supreme Lord and attain 
to the all -auspicious kingdom of God. (59)  

SB 10.86: Arjuna Kidnaps Subhadrā, and 
Kṛṣṇa Blesses His Devotees  

King Parīk ṣit said:  O brāhma ṇa, we would 
like to learn how Arjuna married Lord 
Balarāma’s and Lord K ṛṣṇa’s sister, who was 
my grandmother. (1)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  While traveling 
far and wide visiting various holy places of pil-
grimage, Arjuna came to Prabhāsa. There he 
heard that Lord Balarāma intended to give his 
maternal cousin Subhadrā to Duryodhana in 
marriage, and that no one else approved of this 
plan. Arjuna wanted to marry her himself, so he 
disguised himself as a renunciant, complete 
with triple staff, and went to D vārakā. (2 -3) He 
stayed there during the monsoon months to ful-
fill his purpose. Lord Balarāma and the other 
residents of the city, not recognizing him, of-
fered him all honor and hospitality. (4)  

One day Lord Balarāma brought him to His 
home as His invited  dinner guest, and Arjuna 
ate the food the Lord respectfully offered him. 
(5) 

There he saw the wonderful maiden Sub-
hadrā, who was enchanting to heroes. His eyes 
opened wide with delight, and his mind became 
agitated and absorbed in thoughts of her. (6) 
Arjuna was very attractive to women, and as 
soon as Subhadrā saw him, she wanted to have 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

782 
 him as her husband. Smiling bashfully with 
sidelong glances, she fixed her heart and eyes 
upon him. (7) Meditating only on her and wait-
ing for the opportunity to take he r away, Arjuna 
had no peace. His heart trembled with passion-
ate desire. (8)  

Once, on the occasion of a great temple fes-
tival in honor of the Supreme Lord, Subhadrā 
rode out of the fortresslike palace on a chariot, 
and at that time the mighty chariot warri or Ar-
juna took the opportunity to kidnap her. Sub-
hadrā’s parents and K ṛṣṇa had sanctioned this. 
(9) Standing on his chariot, Arjuna took up his 
bow and drove off the valiant fighters and pal-
ace guards who tried to block his way. As her 
relatives shouted in  anger, he took Subhadrā 
away just as a lion takes his prey from the midst 
of lesser animals. (10) When He heard of Sub-
hadrā’s kidnapping, Lord Balarāma became as 
disturbed as the ocean during the full moon, but 
Lord K ṛṣṇa respectfully took hold of His fee t 
and, together with other family members, paci-
fied Him by explaining the matter. (11) Lord 
Balarāma then happily sent the bride and 
groom very valuable wedding gifts consisting 
of elephants, chariots, horses and male and fe-
male servants. (12)  

Śukadeva Go svāmī continued:  There was 
a devotee of K ṛṣṇa’s known as Śrutadeva, who 
was a first -class brāhma ṇa. Perfectly satisfied 
by rendering unalloyed devotional service to 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, he was peaceful, learned and free 
from sense gratification. (13) Living as a re li-
gious householder in the city of Mithilā, within 
the kingdom of Videha, he managed to fulfill 
his obligations while maintaining himself with 
whatever sustenance easily came his way. (14) 
By the will of Providence he obtained each day 
just what he needed for his maintenance, and 
no more. Satisfied with this much, he properly 
executed his religious duties. (15) Similarly 
free from false ego was the ruler of that king-
dom, my dear Parīk ṣit, a descendant of the 
Mithila dynasty named Bahulāśva. Both these 
devot ees were very dear to Lord Acyuta. (16)  
 Pleased with both of them, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead mounted His chariot, 
which Dāruka had brought, and traveled to 
Videha with a group of sages. (17) Among 
these sages were Nārada, Vāmadeva, Atri, 
Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Vyāsa, Paraśurāma, Asita, 
Aruṇi, myself, B ṛhaspati, Ka ṇva, Maitreya and 
Cyavana. (18) In every city and town the Lord 
passed along the way, O King, the people came 
forward to worship Him with offerings of ar-
ghya water in their hands, as if to wors hip the 
risen sun surrounded by planets. (19) The men 
and women of Ānarta, Dhanva, Kuru -jāṅgala, 
Kaṅka, Matsya, Pañcāla, Kunti, Madhu, 
Kekaya, Kośala, Ar ṇa and many other king-
doms drank with their eyes the nectarean 
beauty of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s lotuslike face, w hich 
was graced with generous smiles and affection-
ate glances. (20) Simply by glancing at those 
who came to see Him, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the spiritual 
master of the three worlds, delivered them from 
the blindness of materialism. As He thus en-
dowed them with fearle ssness and divine vi-
sion, He heard demigods and men singing His 
glories, which purify the entire universe and de-
stroy all misfortune. Gradually, He reached 
Videha. (21)  

Hearing that Lord Acyuta had arrived, O 
King, the residents of the cities and villages  of 
Videha joyfully came forth to receive Him with 
offerings in their hands. (22) As soon as the 
people saw Lord Uttama ḥśloka, their faces and 
hearts blossomed with affection. Joining their 
palms above their heads, they bowed down to 
the Lord and to the sa ges accompanying Him, 
whom they had previously only heard about. 
(23) Both the King of Mithilā and Śrutadeva 
fell at the Lord’s feet, each thinking that the 
spiritual master of the universe had come there 
just to show him mercy. (24) At exactly the 
same ti me, King Maithila and Śrutadeva each 
went forward with joined palms and invited the 
Lord of the Daśārhas to be his guest, along with 
the brāhma ṇa sages. (25)  

Wanting to please them both, the Lord ac-
cepted both their invitations. Thus He simulta-
neously wen t to both homes, and neither could 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

783 
 see Him entering the other’s house. (26) When 
King Bahulāśva, a descendant of Janaka, saw 
Lord K ṛṣṇa approaching his house from a dis-
tance with the sages, who were somewhat fa-
tigued from the journey, he immediately ar-
ranged to have seats of honor brought out for 
them. After they were all comfortably seated, 
the wise King, his heart overflowing with joy 
and his eyes clouded by tears, bowed down to 
them and washed their feet with intense devo-
tion. Taking the wash water, whic h could pu-
rify the entire world, he sprinkled it on his head 
and the heads of his family members. Then he 
worshiped all those great lords by offering 
them fragrant sandalwood paste, flower gar-
lands, fine clothing and ornaments, incense, 
lamps, arghya and c ows and bulls. (27 -29) 
When they had eaten to their full satisfaction, 
for their further pleasure the King began to 
speak slowly and in a gentle voice as he held 
Lord Vi ṣṇu’s feet in his lap and happily mas-
saged them. (30)  

Śrī Bahulāśva said:  O almighty L ord, You 
are the Soul of all created beings, their self -il-
lumined witness, and now You are giving Your 
audience to us, who constantly meditate on 
Your lotus feet. (31) You have said, “Neither 
Ananta, Goddess Śrī nor unborn Brahmā is 
dearer to Me than My un alloyed devotee.” To 
prove Your own words true, You have now re-
vealed Yourself to our eyes. (32) What person 
who knows this truth would ever abandon Your 
lotus feet, when You are ready to give Your 
very self to peaceful sages who call nothing 
their own? (3 3) Appearing in the Yadu dynasty, 
You have spread Your glories, which can re-
move all the sins of the three worlds, just to de-
liver those entrapped in the cycle of birth and 
death. (34) Obeisances to You, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Lord K ṛṣṇa, whos e in-
telligence is ever unrestricted. Obeisances to 
the sage Nara -Nārāya ṇa, who always under-
goes austerities in perfect peace. (35) Please 
stay a few days in our house, along with these 
brāhma ṇas, O all -pervading one, and with the 
dust of Your feet sanctify  this dynasty of Nimi. 
(36) 
 [Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  Thus in-
vited by the King, the Supreme Lord, sustainer 
of the world, consented to stay for some time to 
bestow good fortune on the men and women of 
Mithilā. (37) Śrutadeva received Lord Acyuta 
into his home with as much enthusiasm as that 
shown by King Bahulāśva. After bowing down 
to the Lord and the sages, Śrutadeva began to 
dance with great joy, waving his shawl. (38) 
After bringing mats of grass and darbha straw 
and seating his guests upon them, h e greeted 
them with words of welcome. Then he and his 
wife washed their feet with great pleasure. (39) 
With the wash water, the virtuous Śrutadeva 
copiously sprinkled himself, his house and his 
family. Overjoyed, he felt that all his desires 
had now been f ulfilled. (40) He worshiped 
them with offerings of auspicious items easily 
available to him, such as fruits, uśīra root, pure, 
nectarean water, fragrant clay, tulasī leaves, 
kuśa grass and lotus flowers. Then he offered 
them food that increases the mode of  goodness. 
(41) He wondered: How is it that I, fallen into 
the blind well of family life, have been able to 
meet Lord K ṛṣṇa? And how have I also been 
allowed to meet these great brāhma ṇas, who al-
ways carry the Lord within their hearts? Indeed, 
the dust of their feet is the shelter of all holy 
places. (42) When his guests were seated com-
fortably, having each received a proper wel-
come, Śrutadeva approached them and sat 
down nearby with his wife, children and other 
dependents. Then, while massaging the Lord’s 
feet, he addressed K ṛṣṇa and the sages. (43)  

Śrutadeva said:  It is not that we have at-
tained the audience of the Supreme Person only 
today, for we have in fact been associating with 
Him ever since He created this universe with 
His energies and then entere d it in His transcen-
dental form. (44) The Lord is like a sleeping 
person who creates a separate world in his im-
agination and then enters his own dream and 
sees himself within it. (45) You reveal Yourself 
within the hearts of those persons of pure con-
scious ness who constantly hear about You, 
chant about You, worship You, glorify You and 
converse with one another about You. (46) But 
although You reside within the heart, You are 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

784 
 very far away from those whose minds are dis-
turbed by their entanglement in materi al work. 
Indeed, no one can grasp You by his material 
powers, for You reveal Yourself only in the 
hearts of those who have learned to appreciate 
Your transcendental qualities. (47) Let me offer 
my obeisances unto You. You are realized as 
the Supreme Soul b y those who know the Ab-
solute Truth, whereas in Your form of time You 
impose death upon the forgetful souls. You ap-
pear both in Your causeless spiritual form and 
in the created form of this universe, thus simul-
taneously uncovering the eyes of Your devo-
tees and obstructing the vision of the nondevo-
tees. (48) O Lord, You are that Supreme Soul, 
and we are Your servants. How shall we serve 
You? My Lord, simply seeing You puts an end 
to all the troubles of human life. (49)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  After hearin g 
Śrutadeva speak these words, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who relieves His surren-
dered devotees’ distress, took Śrutadeva’s hand 
in His own and, smiling, spoke to him as fol-
lows. (50)  

The Supreme Lord said:  My dear 
brāhma ṇa, you should know that these great 
sages have come here just to bless you. They 
travel throughout the worlds with Me, purify-
ing them with the dust of their feet. (51) One 
can gradually become purified by seeing, 
touching and worshiping temple deities, places 
of pilgrimage and ho ly rivers. But one can at-
tain the same result immediately simply by re-
ceiving the glance of exalted sages. (52) By his 
very birth, a brāhma ṇa is the best of all living 
beings in this world, and he becomes even more 
exalted when he is endowed with austerity , 
learning and self -satisfaction, what to speak of 
devotion to Me. (53)  

Even My own four -armed form is no dearer 
to Me than a brāhma ṇa. Within himself a 
learned brāhma ṇa comprises all the Vedas, just 
as within Myself I comprise all the demigods. 
(54) Igno rant of this truth, foolish people ne-
glect and enviously offend a learned brāhma ṇa, who, being nondifferent from Me, is their spir-
itual master and very self. They consider wor-
shipable only such obvious manifestations of 
divinity as My Deity form. (55) Beca use he has 
realized Me, a brāhma ṇa is firmly fixed in the 
knowledge that everything moving and non-
moving in the universe, and also the primary 
elements of its creation, are all manifest forms 
expanded from Me. (56) Therefore, you should 
worship these brāhm aṇa sages, O brāhma ṇa, 
with the same faith you have in Me. If you do 
so, you will worship Me directly, which you 
cannot do otherwise, even with offerings of 
vast riches. (57)  

ŚrīŚuka said:  So instructed by his Lord, 
with single -minded devotion Śrutadeva w or-
shiped ŚrīK ṛṣṇa and the topmost brāhma ṇas ac-
companying Him, and King Bahulāśva did the 
same. Thus both Śrutadeva and the King at-
tained the ultimate transcendental destination. 
(58) O King, thus the Personality of Godhead, 
who is devoted to His own devote es, stayed for 
some time with His two great devotees Śru-
tadeva and Bahulāśva, teaching them the be-
havior of perfect saints. Then the Lord returned 
to Dvārakā. (59)  

SB 10.87: The Prayers of the Personified 
Vedas  

Śrī Parīk ṣit said:  O brāhma ṇa, how can the 
Vedas directly describe the Supreme Absolute 
Truth, who cannot be described in words? The 
Vedas are limited to describing the qualities of 
material nature, but the Supreme is devoid of 
these qualities, being transcendental to all ma-
terial manifestations an d their causes. (1)  

Śukadeva Gosvamī said:  The Supreme 
Lord manifested the material intelligence, 
senses, mind and vital air of the living entities 
so that they could indulge their desires for sense 
gratification, take repeated births to engage in 
fruitiv e activities, become elevated in future 
lives and ultimately attain liberation. (2) Those 
who came before even our ancient predecessors 
meditated upon this same confidential 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

785 
 knowledge of the Absolute Truth. Indeed, any-
one who faithfully concentrates on thi s 
knowledge will become free from material at-
tachments and attain the final goal of life. (3) In 
this connection I will relate to you a narration 
concerning the Supreme Lord Nārāya ṇa. It is 
about a conversation that once occurred be-
tween Śrī Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi and Nārada Muni. (4)  

Once, while traveling among the various 
planets of the universe, the Lord’s beloved dev-
otee Nārada went to visit the primeval sage 
Nārāya ṇa at His āśrama. (5) From the very be-
ginning of Brahmā’s day Lord Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi 
has been undergoin g austere penances in this 
land of Bhārata while perfectly performing re-
ligious duties and exemplifying spiritual 
knowledge and self -controlall for the benefit of 
human beings in both this world and the next. 
(6) There Nārada approached Lord Nārāya ṇa 
Ṛṣi, who was sitting amidst sages of the village 
of Kalāpa. After bowing down to the Lord, O 
hero of the Kurus, Nārada asked Him the very 
same question you have asked me. (7) As the 
sages listened, Lord Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi related to 
Nārada an ancient discussion about  the Abso-
lute Truth that took place among the residents 
of Janaloka. (8)  

The Personality of Godhead said:  O son of 
self-born Brahmā, once long ago on Janaloka, 
wise sages who resided there performed a great 
sacrifice to the Absolute Truth by vibrating 
transcendental sounds. These sages, mental 
sons of Brahmā, were all perfect celibates. (9)  

At that time, you happened to be visiting the 
Lord on Śvetadvīpathat Supreme Lord in 
whom the Vedas lie down to rest during the pe-
riod of universal annihilation. A liv ely discus-
sion arose among the sages on Janaloka as to 
the nature of the Supreme Absolute Truth. In-
deed, the same question arose then that you are 
asking Me now. (10) Although these sages 
were all equally qualified in terms of Vedic 
study and austerity, an d although they all saw 
friends, enemies and neutral parties equally, 
they chose one of their number to be the speaker, and the rest became eager listeners. 
(11) 

Śrī Sanandana replied:  After the Supreme 
Lord withdrew the universe He had previously 
created , He lay for some time as if asleep, and 
all His energies rested dormant within Him. 
When the time came for the next creation, the 
personified Vedas awakened Him by chanting 
His glories, just as the poets serving a king ap-
proach him at dawn and awaken him by reciting 
his heroic deeds. (12 -13) 

The śrutis said:  Victory, victory to You, O 
unconquerable one! By Your very nature You 
are perfectly full in all opulences; therefore, 
please defeat the eternal power of illusion, who 
assumes control over the modes of  nature to 
create difficulties for conditioned souls. O You 
who awaken all the energies of the moving and 
nonmoving embodied beings, sometimes the 
Vedas can recognize You as You sport with 
Your material and spiritual potencies. (14)  

This perceivable world  is identified with the 
Supreme because the Supreme Brahman is the 
ultimate foundation of all existence, remaining 
unchanged as all created things are generated 
from it and at last dissolved into it, just as clay 
remains unchanged by the products made from  
it and again merged with it. Thus it is toward 
You alone that the Vedic sages direct all their 
thoughts, words and acts. After all, how can the 
footsteps of men fail to touch the earth on 
which they live? (15)  

Therefore, O master of the three worlds, the  
wise get rid of all misery by diving deep into 
the nectarean ocean of topics about You, which 
washes away all the contamination of the uni-
verse. Then what to speak of those who, having 
by spiritual strength rid their minds of bad hab-
its and freed themselv es from time, are able to 
worship Your true nature, O supreme one, find-
ing within it uninterrupted bliss? (16)  

Only if they become Your faithful followers 
are those who breathe actually alive, otherwise 
their breathing is like that of a bellows. It is by 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

786 
 Your mercy alone that the elements, beginning 
with the mahat -tattva and false ego, created the 
egg of this universe. Among the manifestations 
known as anna -maya and so forth, You are the 
ultimate one, entering within the material cov-
erings along with the l iving entity and assum-
ing the same forms as those he takes. Distinct 
from the gross and subtle material manifesta-
tions, You are the reality underlying them all. 
(17) 

Among the followers of the methods set 
forth by great sages, those with less refined vi-
sion worship the Supreme as present in the re-
gion of the abdomen, while the Āru ṇis worship 
Him as present in the heart, in the subtle center 
from which all the prā ṇic channels emanate. 
From there, O unlimited Lord, these worshipers 
raise their consciousness upward to the top of 
the head, where they can perceive You directly. 
Then, passing through the top of the head to-
ward the supreme destination, they reach that 
place from which they will never again fall to 
this world, into the mouth of death. (18)  

Apparen tly entering among the variegated 
species of living beings You have created, You 
inspire them to act, manifesting Yourself ac-
cording to their higher and lower positions, just 
as fire manifests differently according to the 
shape of what it burns. Therefore,  those of spot-
less intelligence, who are altogether free from 
material attachments, realize Your undifferen-
tiated, unchanging Self to be the permanent re-
ality among all these impermanent life forms. 
(19) 

The individual living entity, while inhabit-
ing the material bodies he has created for him-
self by his karma, actually remains uncovered 
by either gross or subtle matter. This is so be-
cause, as the Vedas describe, he is part and par-
cel of You, the possessor of all potencies. Hav-
ing determined this to be the status of the living 
entity, learned sages become imbued with faith 
and worship Your lotus feet, to which all Vedic 
sacrifices in this world are offered, and which 
are the source of liberation. (20) My Lord, 
some fortunate souls have gotten relief from the  fatigue of material life by diving into the vast 
nectar ocean of Your pastimes, which You en-
act when You manifest Your personal forms to 
propagate the unfathomable science of the self. 
These rare souls, indifferent even to liberation, 
renounce the happine ss of home and family be-
cause of their association with devotees who 
are like flocks of swans enjoying at the lotus of 
Your feet. (21)  

When this human body is used for Your de-
votional service, it acts as one’s self, friend and 
beloved. But unfortunately, although You al-
ways show mercy to the conditioned souls and 
affectionately help them in every way, and alt-
hough You are their true Self, people in general 
fail to delight in You. Instead they commit spir-
itual suicide by worshiping illusion. Alas, be-
cause t hey persistently hope for success in their 
devotion to the unreal, they continue to wander 
about this greatly fearful world, assuming vari-
ous degraded bodies. (22) Simply by constantly 
thinking of Him, the enemies of the Lord at-
tained the same Supreme Trut h whom sages 
fixed in yoga worship by controlling their 
breath, mind and senses. Similarly, we śrutis, 
who generally see You as all -pervading, will 
achieve the same nectar from Your lotus feet 
that Your consorts are able to relish because of 
their loving a ttraction to Your mighty, serpen-
tine arms, for You look upon us and Your con-
sorts in the same way. (23)  

Everyone in this world has recently been 
born and will soon die. So how can anyone here 
know Him who existed prior to everything else 
and who gave rise  to the first learned sage, 
Brahmā, and all subsequent demigods, both 
lesser and greater? When He lies down and 
withdraws everything within Himself, nothing 
else remainsno gross or subtle matter or bodies 
composed of these, no force of time or revealed 
scripture. (24) Supposed authorities who de-
clare that matter is the origin of existence, that 
the permanent qualities of the soul can be de-
stroyed, that the self is compounded of separate 
aspects of spirit and matter, or that material 
transactions constitute realityall such authori-
ties base their teachings on mistaken ideas that 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

787 
 hide the truth. The dualistic conception that the 
living entity is produced from the three modes 
of nature is simply a product of ignorance. Such 
a conception has no real basis in You,  for You 
are transcendental to all illusion and always en-
joy perfect, total awareness. (25)  

The three modes of material nature comprise 
everything in this worldfrom the simplest phe-
nomena to the complex human body. Although 
these phenomena appear real, th ey are only a 
false reflection of the spiritual reality, being a 
superimposition of the mind upon You. Still, 
those who know the Supreme Self consider the 
entire material creation to be real inasmuch as 
it is nondifferent from the Self. Just as things 
made  of gold are indeed not to be rejected, 
since their substance is actual gold, so this 
world is undoubtedly nondifferent from the 
Lord who created it and then entered within it. 
(26) The devotees who worship You as the 
shelter of all beings disregard Death and place 
their feet on his head. But with the words of the 
Vedas You bind the nondevotees like animals, 
though they be vastly learned scholars. It is 
Your affectionate devotees who can purify 
themselves and others, not those who are inim-
ical to You. (27)  

Though You have no material senses, You 
are the self -effulgent sustainer of everyone’s 
sensory powers. The demigods and material na-
ture herself offer You tribute, while also enjoy-
ing the tribute offered them by their worshipers, 
just as subordinate rulers  of various districts in 
a kingdom offer tribute to their lord, the ulti-
mate proprietor of the land, while also enjoying 
the tribute paid them by their own subjects. In 
this way the universal creators faithfully exe-
cute their assigned services out of fear of You. 
(28) O eternally liberated, transcendental Lord, 
Your material energy causes the various mov-
ing and nonmoving species of life to appear by 
activating their material desires, but only when 
and if You sport with her by briefly glancing at 
her. You, t he Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
see no one as an intimate friend and no one as a stranger, just as the ethereal sky has no con-
nection with perceptible qualities. In this sense 
You resemble a void. (29)  

If the countless living entities were all -per-
vadin g and possessed forms that never 
changed, You could not possibly be their abso-
lute ruler, O immutable one. But since they are 
Your localized expansions and their forms are 
subject to change, You do control them. Indeed, 
that which supplies the ingredients for the gen-
eration of something is necessarily its control-
ler because a product never exists apart from its 
ingredient cause. It is simply illusion for some-
one to think that he knows the Supreme Lord, 
who is equally present in each of His expan-
sions, since  whatever knowledge one gains by 
material means must be imperfect. (30) Neither 
material nature nor the soul who tries to enjoy 
her are ever born, yet living bodies come into 
being when these two combine, just as bubbles 
form where water meets the air. And  just as riv-
ers merge into the ocean or the nectar from 
many different flowers blends into honey, so all 
these conditioned beings eventually merge 
back into You, the Supreme, along with their 
various names and qualities. (31)  

The wise souls who understand  how Your 
Māyā deludes all human beings render potent 
loving service to You, who are the source of 
liberation from birth and death. How, indeed, 
can fear of material life affect Your faithful 
servants? On the other hand, Your furrowing 
eyebrowsthe triple -rimmed wheel of 
timerepeatedly terrify those who refuse to take 
shelter of You. (32)  

The mind is like an impetuous horse that 
even persons who have regulated their senses 
and breath cannot control. Those in this world 
who try to tame the uncontrolled mind,  but who 
abandon the feet of their spiritual master, en-
counter hundreds of obstacles in their cultiva-
tion of various distressful practices. O unborn 
Lord, they are like merchants on a boat in the 
ocean who have failed to employ a helmsman. 
(33) 

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

788 
 To those p ersons who take shelter of You, 
You reveal Yourself as the Supersoul, the em-
bodiment of all transcendental pleasure. What 
further use have such devotees for their serv-
ants, children or bodies, their wives, money or 
houses, their land, good health or convey ances? 
And for those who fail to appreciate the truth 
about You and go on pursuing the pleasures of 
sex, what could there be in this entire worlda 
place inherently doomed to destruction and de-
void of significancethat could give them real 
happiness? (34) Sa ges free from false pride live 
on this earth by frequenting the sacred pilgrim-
age sites and those places where the Supreme 
Lord displayed His pastimes. Because such 
devotees keep Your lotus feet within their 
hearts, the water that washes their feet destroy s 
all sins. Anyone who even once turns his mind 
toward You, the ever -blissful Soul of all exist-
ence, no longer dedicates himself to serving 
family life at home, which simply robs a man 
of his good qualities. (35)  

It may be proposed that this world is perm a-
nently real because it is generated from the per-
manent reality, but such an argument is subject 
to logical refutation. Sometimes, indeed, the 
apparent nondifference of a cause and its effect 
fails to prove true, and at other times the prod-
uct of something  real is illusory. Furthermore, 
this world cannot be permanently real, for it 
partakes of the natures of not only the absolute 
reality but also the illusion disguising that real-
ity. Actually, the visible forms of this world are 
just an imaginary arrangemen t resorted to by a 
succession of ignorant persons in order to facil-
itate their material affairs. With their various 
meanings and implications, the learned words 
of Your Vedas bewilder all persons whose 
minds have been dulled by hearing the incanta-
tions of sacrificial rituals. (36)  

Since this universe did not exist prior to its 
creation and will no longer exist after its anni-
hilation, we conclude that in the interim it is 
nothing more than a manifestation imagined to 
be visible within You, whose spiritual e njoy-
ment never changes. We liken this universe to the transformation of various material sub-
stances into diverse forms. Certainly those who 
believe that this figment of the imagination is 
substantially real are less intelligent. (37)  

The illusory material  nature attracts the mi-
nute living entity to embrace her, and as a result 
he assumes forms composed of her qualities. 
Subsequently, he loses all his spiritual qualities 
and must undergo repeated deaths. You, how-
ever, avoid the material energy in the same w ay 
that a snake abandons its old skin. Glorious in 
Your possession of eight mystic perfections, 
You enjoy unlimited opulences. (38)  

Members of the renounced order who fail to 
uproot the last traces of material desire in their 
hearts remain impure, and thu s You do not al-
low them to understand You. Although You are 
present within their hearts, for them You are 
like a jewel worn around the neck of a man who 
has totally forgotten it is there. O Lord, those 
who practice yoga only for sense gratification 
must su ffer punishment both in this life and the 
next: from death, who will not release them, 
and from You, whose kingdom they cannot 
reach. (39)  

When a person realizes You, he no longer 
cares about his good and bad fortune arising 
from past pious and sinful act s, since it is You 
alone who control this good and bad fortune. 
Such a realized devotee also disregards what 
ordinary living beings say about him. Every 
day he fills his ears with Your glories, which 
are recited in each age by the unbroken succes-
sion of Ma nu’s descendants, and thus You be-
come his ultimate salvation. (40)  

Because You are unlimited, neither the lords 
of heaven nor even You Yourself can ever 
reach the end of Your glories. The countless 
universes, each enveloped in its shell, are com-
pelled by the wheel of time to wander within 
You, like particles of dust blowing about in the 
sky. The śrutis, following their method of elim-
inating everything separate from the Supreme, 
become successful by revealing You as their fi-
nal conclusion. (41)  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

789 

The Supreme  Lord, Śrī Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi, said: 
Having heard these instructions about the Su-
preme Self, the Personality of Godhead, the 
sons of Brahmā now understood their final des-
tination. They felt perfectly satisfied and hon-
ored Sanandana with their worship. (42) Thus 
the ancient saints who travel in the upper heav-
ens distilled this nectarean and confidential es-
sence of all the Vedas and Purā ṇas. (43) And as 
you wander the earth at will, My dear son of 
Brahmā, you should faithfully meditate on 
these instructions concern ing the science of the 
Self, which burn up the material desires of all 
men. (44)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  When Śrī 
Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi ordered him in this way, the self -
possessed sage Nārada, whose vow is as heroic 
as a warrior’s, accepted the command with firm 
faith. Now successful in all his purposes, he 
thought about what he had heard, O King, and 
replied to the Lord as follows. (45)  

Śrī Nārada said:  I offer my obeisances to 
Him of spotless fame, the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
who manifests His all -attractive personal  ex-
pansions so that all living beings can achieve 
liberation. (46)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:]  After 
saying this, Nārada bowed down to Śrī 
Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi, the foremost of sages, and also 
to His saintly disciples. He then returned to the 
hermitage of my fa ther, Dvaipāyana Vyāsa. 
(47) Vyāsadeva, the incarnation of the Person-
ality of Godhead, respectfully greeted Nārada 
Muni and offered him a seat, which he ac-
cepted. Nārada then described to Vyāsa what he 
had heard from the mouth of Śrī Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi. 
(48) Thu s I have replied to the question you 
asked me, O King, concerning how the mind 
can have access to the Absolute Truth, which is 
indescribable by material words and devoid of 
material qualities. (49) He is the Lord who eter-
nally watches over this universe, w ho exists be-
fore, during and after its manifestation. He is 
the master of both the unmanifest material en-
ergy and the spirit soul. After sending forth the creation He enters within it, accompanying 
each living entity. There He creates the material 
bodies a nd then remains as their regulator. By 
surrendering to Him one can escape the em-
brace of illusion, just as a dreaming person for-
gets his own body. One who wants liberation 
from fear should constantly meditate upon 
Him, Lord Hari, who is always on the platf orm 
of perfection and thus never subject to material 
birth. (50)  

SB 10.88: Lord Śiva Saved from 
Vṛkāsura  

King Parīk ṣit said:  Those demigods, de-
mons and humans who worship Lord Śiva, a 
strict renunciant, usually enjoy wealth and 
sense gratification, while  the worshipers of the 
Supreme Lord Hari, the husband of the goddess 
of fortune, do not. (1) We wish to properly un-
derstand this matter, which greatly puzzles us. 
Indeed, the results attained by the worshipers of 
these two lords of opposite characters are con-
trary to what one would expect. (2)  

ŚrīŚukadeva said:  Lord Śiva is always 
united with his personal energy, the material 
nature. Manifesting himself in three features in 
response to the entreaties of nature’s three 
modes, he thus embodies the threefold princi-
ple of material ego in goodness, passion and ig-
norance. (3) The sixteen elements have evolved 
as transformations of that false ego. When a 
devotee of Lord Śiva worships his manifesta-
tion in any one of these elements, the devotee 
obtains all sorts of corresponding enjoyable op-
ulences. (4) Lord Hari, however, has no con-
nection with the material modes. He is the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the all -seeing 
eternal witness, who is transcendental to mate-
rial nature. One who worships Him becomes 
similarly  free from the material modes. (5) 
Your grandfather, King Yudhi ṣṭhira, after com-
pleting his Aśvamedha sacrifices, asked Lord 
Acyuta this very same question while hearing 
the Lord’s explanation of religious principles. 
(6) This question pleased Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the King’s 
Lord and master, who had descended into the 
family of Yadu for the purpose of bestowing 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

790 
 the highest good on all men. The Lord replied 
as follows as the King eagerly listened. (7)  

The Personality of Godhead said:  If I es-
pecially favor someone, I gradually deprive 
him of his wealth. Then the relatives and 
friends of such a poverty -stricken man abandon 
him. In this way he suffers one distress after an-
other. (8) When he becomes frustrated in his at-
tempts to make money and instead befriends 
My devotee s, I bestow My special mercy upon 
him. (9) A person who has thus become sober 
fully realizes the Absolute as the highest truth, 
the most subtle and perfect manifestation of 
spirit, the transcendental existence without end. 
In this way realizing that the Su preme Truth is 
the foundation of his own existence, he is freed 
from the cycle of material life. (10) Because I 
am difficult to worship, people generally avoid 
Me and instead worship other deities, who are 
quickly satisfied. When people receive kingly 
opulences from these deities, they become ar-
rogant, intoxicated with pride and neglectful of 
their duties. They dare to offend even the dem-
igods who have bestowed benedictions upon 
them. (11)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Lord Brahmā, 
Lord Vi ṣṇu, Lord Śiva and other s are able to 
curse or bless one. Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā 
are very quick to curse or bestow benedictions, 
my dear King, but the infallible Supreme Lord 
is not. (12) In this connection, an ancient his-
torical account is related concerning how the 
Lord of K ailāsa Mountain was put into danger 
by offering a choice of benedictions to the de-
mon V ṛka. (13) The demon named V ṛka, a son 
of Śakuni’s, once met Nārada on the road. The 
wicked fellow asked him which of the three 
chief gods could be pleased most quickly. (14) 
Nārada told him: Worship Lord Śiva and you 
will soon achieve success. He quickly becomes 
pleased by seeing his worshiper’s slightest 
good qualitiesand quickly angered by seeing 
his slightest fault. (15) He became pleased with 
ten-headed Rāva ṇa, and al so with Bā ṇa, when 
they each chanted his glories, like bards in a 
royal court. Lord Śiva then bestowed unprece-
dented power upon each of them, but in both cases he was consequently beset with great dif-
ficulty. (16)  

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued :] Thus ad-
vised, the demon proceeded to worship Lord 
Śiva at Kedāranātha by taking pieces of flesh 
from his own body and offering them as obla-
tions into the sacred fire, which is Lord Śiva’s 
mouth. (17) V ṛkāsura became frustrated after 
failing to obtain a vision of the lord. Finally, on 
the seventh day, after dipping his hair into the 
holy waters at Kedāranātha and leaving it wet, 
he took up a hatchet and prepared to cut off his 
head. But at that very moment the supremely 
merciful Lord Śiva rose up out of the sacrificial  
fire, looking like the god of fire himself, and 
grabbed both arms of the demon to stop him 
from killing himself, just as we would do. By 
Lord Śiva’s touch, V ṛkāsura once again be-
came whole. (18 -19) Lord Śiva said to him: My 
friend, please stop, stop! Ask from me what-
ever you want, and I will bestow that boon upon 
you. Alas, you have subjected your body to 
great torment for no reason, since I am pleased 
with a simple offering of water from those who 
approach me for shelter. (20) [Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī continued: ] The benediction sinful 
Vṛka chose from the lord would terrify all liv-
ing beings. V ṛka said, “May death come to 
whomever I touch upon the head with my 
hand.” (21) Upon hearing this, Lord Rudra 
seemed somewhat disturbed. Nonetheless, O 
descendant of Bharat a, he vibrated om to sig-
nify his assent, granting V ṛka the benediction 
with an ironic smile, as if giving milk to a poi-
sonous snake. (22)  

To test Lord Śambhu’s benediction, the de-
mon then tried to put his hand on the Lord’s 
head. Thus Śiva was frightened because of 
what he himself had done. (23) As the demon 
pursued him, Lord Śiva fled swiftly from his 
abode in the north, shaking with terror. He ran 
as far as the limits of the earth, the sky and the 
corners of the universe. (24) The great demi-
gods could on ly remain silent, not knowing 
how to counteract the benediction. Then Lord 
Śiva reached the luminous realm of Vaiku ṇṭha, 
beyond all darkness, where the Supreme Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

791 
 Nārāya ṇa is manifest. That realm is the desti-
nation of renunciants who have attained peace 
and given up all violence against other crea-
tures. Going there, one never returns. (25 -26) 
The Supreme Lord, who relieves His devotees’ 
distress, had seen from afar that Lord Śiva was 
in danger. Thus by His mystic Yoga -māyā po-
tency He assumed the form of a  brahmacārī stu-
dent, with the appropriate belt, deerskin, rod 
and prayer beads, and came before V ṛkāsura. 
The Lord’s effulgence glowed brilliantly like 
fire. Holding kuśa grass in His hand, He hum-
bly greeted the demon. (27 -28) 

The Supreme Lord said:  My de ar son of 
Śakuni, you appear tired. Why have you come 
such a great distance? Please rest for a minute. 
After all, it is one’s body that fulfills all one’s 
desires. (29)  

O mighty one, please tell Us what you intend 
to do, if We are qualified to hear it. Us ually one 
accomplishes his purposes by taking help from 
others. (30)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus questioned 
by the Personality of Godhead in language that 
poured down upon him like sweet nectar, V ṛka 
felt relieved of his fatigue. He described to the 
Lord everything he had done. (31)  

The Supreme Lord said:  If this is the case, 
We cannot believe what Śiva says. Śiva is the 
same lord of the Pretas and Piśācas whom 
Dakṣa cursed to become like a carnivorous 
hobgoblin. (32) O best of the demons, if you 
have any  faith in him because he is the spiritual 
master of the universe, then without delay put 
your hand on your head and see what happens. 
(33) If the words of Lord Śambhu prove untrue 
in any way, O best of the demons, then kill the 
liar so he may never lie aga in. (34) [Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī continued:] Thus bewildered by the 
Personality of Godhead’s enchanting, artful 
words, foolish V ṛka, without realizing what he 
was doing, placed his hand on his head. (35) In-
stantly his head shattered as if struck by a light-
ning b olt, and the demon fell down dead. From the sky were heard cries of “Victory!” “Obei-
sances!” and “Well done!” (36) The celestial 
sages, Pitās and Gandharvas rained down flow-
ers to celebrate the killing of sinful V ṛkāsura. 
Now Lord Śiva was out of danger. ( 37) The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead then addressed 
Lord Giriśa, who was now out of danger: “Just 
see, O Mahādeva, My lord, how this wicked 
man has been killed by his own sinful reactions. 
Indeed, what living being can hope for good 
fortune if he offends  exalted saints, what to 
speak of offending the lord and spiritual master 
of the universe?” (38 -39) 

Lord Hari is the directly manifest Absolute 
Truth, the Supreme Soul and unlimited ocean 
of inconceivable energies. Anyone who recites 
or hears this pastime  of His saving Lord Śiva 
will be freed from all enemies and the repetition 
of birth and death. (40)  

SB 10.89: K ṛṣṇa and Arjuna Retrieve a 
Brāhma ṇa’s Sons  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Once, O King, as 
a group of sages were performing a Vedic sac-
rifice on the ba nks of the Sarasvatī River, a con-
troversy arose among them as to which of the 
three chief deities is supreme. (1) Eager to re-
solve this question, O King, the sages sent Lord 
Brahmā’s son Bh ṛgu to find the answer. First 
he went to his father’s court. (2) To  test how 
well Lord Brahmā was situated in the mode of 
goodness, Bh ṛgu failed to bow down to him or 
glorify him with prayers. The lord became an-
gry at him, inflamed into fury by his own pas-
sion. (3) Though anger toward his son was now 
rising within his hea rt, Lord Brahmā was able 
to subdue it by applying his intelligence, in the 
same way that fire is extinguished by its own 
product, water. (4)  

Bhṛgu then went to Mount Kailāsa. There 
Lord Śiva stood up and happily came forward 
to embrace his brother. (5) Bu t Bhṛgu refused 
his embrace, telling him, “You are a deviant 
heretic.” At this Lord Śiva became angry, and 
his eyes burned ferociously. He raised his tri-
dent and was about to kill Bh ṛgu when Goddess 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

792 
 Devī fell at his feet and spoke some words to 
pacify him.  Bhṛgu then left that place and went 
to Vaiku ṇṭha, where Lord Janārdana resides. 
(6-7) There he went up to the Supreme Lord, 
who was lying with His head on the lap of His 
consort, Śrī, and kicked Him on the chest. The 
Lord then rose, along with Goddess Lak ṣmī, as 
a sign of respect. Coming down from His bed-
stead, that supreme goal of all pure devotees 
bowed His head to the floor before the sage and 
told him, ‘Welcome, brāhma ṇa. Please sit in 
this chair and rest awhile. Kindly forgive us, 
dear master, for not  noticing your arrival.’ (8 -
9) “Please purify Me, My realm and the realms 
of the universal rulers devoted to Me by giving 
us the water that has washed your feet. This 
holy water is indeed what makes all places of 
pilgrimage sacred. Today, my lord, I have b e-
come the exclusive shelter of the goddess of 
fortune, Lak ṣmī; she will consent to reside on 
My chest because your foot has rid it of sins.” 
(10-11) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Bhṛgu felt satis-
fied and delighted to hear the solemn words 
spoken by Lord Vaiku ṇṭha. Overwhelmed with 
devotional ecstasy, he remained silent, his eyes 
brimming with tears. (12) O King, Bh ṛgu then 
returned to the sacrificial arena of the wise Ve-
dic authorities and described his entire experi-
ence to them. (13) Amazed upon hearing 
Bhṛgu’s account, the sages were freed from all 
doubts and became convinced that Vi ṣṇu is the 
greatest Lord. From Him come peace; fearless-
ness; the essential principles of religion; de-
tachment with knowledge; the eightfold powers 
of mystic yoga; and His glorificati on, which 
cleanses the mind of all impurities. He is 
known as the supreme destination for those 
who are peaceful and equipoisedthe selfless, 
wise saints who have given up all violence. His 
most dear form is that of pure goodness, and the 
brāhma ṇas are His worshipable deities. Persons 
of keen intellect who have attained spiritual 
peace worship Him without selfish motives. 
(14-17) 

The Lord expands into three kinds of mani-
fest beingsthe Rāk ṣasas, the demons and the demigodsall of whom are created by the Lord’ s 
material energy and conditioned by her modes. 
But among these three modes, it is the mode of 
goodness which is the means of attaining life’s 
final success. (18)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  The learned 
brāhma ṇas living along the river Sarasvatī 
came to this c onclusion in order to dispel the 
doubts of all people. Thereafter they rendered 
devotional service to the Supreme Lord’s lotus 
feet and attained His abode. (19)  

Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thus did this fra-
grant nectar flow from the lotus mouth of 
Śukadeva Gos vāmī, the son of the sage 
Vyāsadeva. This wonderful glorification of the 
Supreme Person destroys all fear of material 
existence. A traveler who constantly drinks this 
nectar through his ear -holes will forget the fa-
tigue brought on by wandering along the pa ths 
of worldly life. (20)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Once, in 
Dvārakā, a brāhma ṇa’s wife gave birth to a son, 
but the newborn infant died as soon as he 
touched the ground, O Bhārata. (21) The 
brāhma ṇa took the corpse and placed it at the 
door of King Ugrasena ’s court. Then, agitated 
and lamenting miserably, he spoke the follow-
ing. (22) [The brāhma ṇa said:] This duplic-
itous, greedy enemy of brāhma ṇas, this unqual-
ified ruler addicted to sense pleasure, has 
caused my son’s death by some discrepancies 
in the execu tion of his duties. (23) Citizens 
serving such a wicked king, who takes pleasure 
in violence and cannot control his senses, are 
doomed to suffer poverty and constant misery. 
(24) The wise brāhma ṇa suffered the same trag-
edy with his second and third child. Each time, 
he left the body of his dead son at the King’s 
door and sang the same song of lamentation. 
(25) When the ninth child died, Arjuna, who 
was near Lord Keśava, happened to overhear 
the brāhma ṇa lamenting. Thus Arjuna ad-
dressed the brāhma ṇa: “What i s the matter, my 
dear brāhma ṇa? Isn’t there some lowly member 
of the royal order here who can at least stand 
before your house with a bow in his hand? 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

793 
 These k ṣatriyas are behaving as if they were 
brāhma ṇas idly engaged in fire sacrifices. (26 -
27) “The rule rs of a kingdom in which 
brāhma ṇas lament over lost wealth, wives and 
children are merely imposters playing the role 
of kings just to earn their livelihood. (28) “My 
lord, I will protect the progeny of you and your 
wife, who are in such distress. And if I fail to 
keep this promise, I will enter fire to atone for 
my sin.” (29)  

The brāhma ṇa said:  Neither Sa ṅkarṣaṇa; 
Vāsudeva; Pradyumna, the best of bowmen; 
nor the unequaled warrior Aniruddha could 
save my sons. Then why do you naively at-
tempt a feat that the  almighty Lords of the uni-
verse could not perform? We cannot take you 
seriously. (30 -31) 

Śrī Arjuna said:  I am neither Lord 
Saṅkarṣaṇa, O brāhma ṇa, nor Lord K ṛṣṇa, nor 
even K ṛṣṇa’s son. Rather, I am Arjuna, wielder 
of the Gā ṇḍīva bow. (32) Do not minimize  my 
ability, which was good enough to satisfy Lord 
Śiva, O brāhma ṇa. I will bring back your sons, 
dear master, even if I have to defeat Death him-
self in battle. (33)  

Thus convinced by Arjuna, O tormentor of 
enemies, the brāhma ṇa went home, satisfied by 
having heard Arjuna’s declaration of his prow-
ess. (34) When the wife of the elevated 
brāhma ṇa was again about to give birth, he 
went to Arjuna in great anxiety and begged 
him, “Please, please protect my child from 
death!” (35) After touching pure water, offe r-
ing obeisances to Lord Maheśvara and recol-
lecting the mantras for his celestial weapons, 
Arjuna strung his bow Gā ṇḍīva. (36)  

Arjuna fenced in the house where the birth 
was taking place by shooting arrows attached 
to various missiles. Thus the son of P ṛthā con-
structed a protective cage of arrows, covering 
the house upwards, downwards and sideways. 
(37) The brāhma ṇa’s wife then gave birth, but 
after the newborn infant had been crying for a 
short time, he suddenly vanished into the sky in his selfsame body. (38) The brāhma ṇa then de-
rided Arjuna in front of Lord K ṛṣṇa: “Just see 
how foolish I was to put my faith in the brag-
ging of a eunuch! (39) “When neither Pra-
dyumna, Aniruddha, Rāma nor Keśava can 
save a person, who else can possibly protect 
him? (40) “To h ell with that liar Arjuna! To hell 
with that braggart’s bow! He is so foolish that 
he has deluded himself into thinking he can 
bring back a person whom destiny has taken 
away.” (41)  

While the wise brāhma ṇa continued to heap 
insults upon him, Arjuna employ ed a mystic in-
cantation to go at once to Sa ṁyamanī, the city 
of heaven where Lord Yamarāja resides. (42) 
Not seeing the brāhma ṇa’s child there, Arjuna 
went to the cities of Indra, Agni, Nir ṛti, Soma, 
Vāyu and Varu ṇa. With weapons at the ready 
he searched t hrough all the domains of the uni-
verse, from the bottom of the subterranean re-
gion to the roof of heaven. Finally, not having 
found the brāhma ṇa’s son anywhere, Arjuna 
decided to enter the sacred fire, having failed to 
keep his promise. But just as he was about to 
do so, Lord K ṛṣṇa stopped him and spoke the 
following words. (43 -44) [Lord K ṛṣṇa said:] I 
will show you the brāhma ṇa’s sons, so please 
don’t despise yourself like this. These same 
men who now criticize us will soon establish 
our spotless fame. (45 ) 

Having thus advised Arjuna, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead had Arjuna join Him 
on His divine chariot, and together they set off 
toward the west. (46) The Lord’s chariot passed 
over the seven islands of the middle universe, 
each with its ocean and it s seven principal 
mountains. Then it crossed the Lokāloka 
boundary and entered the vast region of total 
darkness. (47)  

In that darkness the chariot’s horsesŚaibya, 
Sugrīva, Meghapu ṣpa and Balāhakalost their 
way. Seeing them in this condition, O best of 
the Bhāratas, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the supreme master 
of all masters of yoga, sent His Sudarśana disc 
before the chariot. That disc shone like thou-
sands of suns. (48 -49) The Lord’s Sudarśana 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

794 
 disc penetrated the darkness with its blazing ef-
fulgence. Racing forward wit h the speed of the 
mind, it cut through the fearsome, dense obliv-
ion expanded from primeval matter, as an ar-
row shot from Lord Rāma’s bow cuts through 
His enemy’s army. (50) Following the Sudar-
śana disc, the chariot went beyond the darkness 
and reached the  endless spiritual light of the all 
pervasive brahmajyoti. As Arjuna beheld this 
glaring effulgence, his eyes hurt, and so he shut 
them. (51) From that region they entered a body 
of water resplendent with huge waves being 
churned by a mighty wind. Within t hat ocean 
Arjuna saw an amazing palace more radiant 
than anything he had ever seen before. Its 
beauty was enhanced by thousands of ornamen-
tal pillars bedecked with brilliant gems. (52) In 
that palace was the huge, awe -inspiring serpent 
Ananta Śe ṣa. He shon e brilliantly with the ra-
diance emanating from the gems on His thou-
sands of hoods and reflecting from twice as 
many fearsome eyes. He resembled white 
Mount Kailāsa, and His necks and tongues 
were dark blue. (53) Arjuna then saw the omni-
present and omnipote nt Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Mahā -Viṣṇu, sitting at ease on the 
serpent bed. His bluish complexion was the 
color of a dense rain cloud, He wore a beautiful 
yellow garment, His face looked charming, His 
broad eyes were most attractive, and He had 
eight long, handsome arms. His profuse locks 
of hair were bathed on all sides in the brilliance 
reflected from the clusters of precious jewels 
decorating His crown and earrings. He wore the 
Kaustubha gem, the mark of Śrīvatsa and a gar-
land of forest flowers. S erving that topmost of 
all Lords were His personal attendants, headed 
by Sunanda and Nanda; His cakra and other 
weapons in their personified forms; His consort 
potencies Pu ṣṭi, Śrī, Kīrti and Ajā; and all His 
various mystic powers. (54 -56) Lord K ṛṣṇa of-
fered homage to Himself in this boundless 
form, and Arjuna, astonished at the sight of 
Lord Mahā -Viṣṇu, bowed down as well. Then, 
as the two of them stood before Him with 
joined palms, the almighty Mahā -Viṣṇu, su-
preme master of all rulers of the universe, 
smiled and spoke to them in a voice full of sol-
emn authority. (57) [Lord Mahā -Viṣṇu said:] I brought the brāhma ṇa’s sons here because I 
wanted to see the two of you, My expansions, 
who have descended to the earth to save the 
principles of religion. As soon as  you finish 
killing the demons who burden the earth, 
quickly come back here to Me. (58) Although 
all your desires are completely fulfilled, O best 
of exalted personalities, for the benefit of the 
people in general you should continue to exem-
plify religious  behavior as the sages Nara and 
Nārāya ṇa. (59)  

Thus instructed by the Supreme Lord of the 
topmost planet, K ṛṣṇa and Arjuna assented by 
chanting om, and then they bowed down to al-
mighty Lord Mahā -Viṣṇu. Taking the 
brāhma ṇa’s sons with them, they returned w ith 
great delight to Dvārakā by the same path along 
which they had come. There they presented the 
brāhma ṇa with his sons, who were in the same 
infant bodies in which they had been lost. (60 -
61) Having seen the domain of Lord Vi ṣṇu, Ar-
juna was totally amaze d. He concluded that 
whatever extraordinary power a person exhibits 
can only be a manifestation of Śrī K ṛṣṇa’s 
mercy. (62) Lord K ṛṣṇa exhibited many other, 
similar heroic pastimes in this world. He appar-
ently enjoyed the pleasures of ordinary human 
life, a nd He performed greatly potent fire sac-
rifices. (63) The Lord having demonstrated His 
supremacy, at suitable times He showered 
down all desirable things upon the brāhma ṇas 
and His other subjects, just as Indra pours down 
his rain. (64) Now that He had kill ed many 
wicked kings and engaged devotees such as Ar-
juna in killing others, the Lord could easily as-
sure the execution of religious principles 
through the agency of such pious rulers as 
Yudhi ṣṭhira. (65)  

SB 10.90: Summary of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s Glo-
ries 

Śukadeva  Gosvamī said:  The master of the 
goddess of fortune resided happily in His capi-
tal city, Dvārakā, which was endowed with all 
opulences and populated by the most eminent 
Vṛṣṇis and their gorgeously dressed wives. 
When these beautiful women in the bloom of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

795 
 youth would play on the city’s rooftops with 
balls and other toys, they shone like flashing 
lightning. The main streets of the city were al-
ways crowded with intoxicated elephants exud-
ing mada, and also with cavalry, richly adorned 
infantrymen, and soldiers riding chariots bril-
liantly decorated with gold. Gracing the city 
were many gardens and parks with rows of 
flowering trees, where bees and birds would 
gather, filling all directions with their songs. (1 -
7) 

As Gandharvas joyfully sang His praises to 
the ac companiment of m ṛdaṅga, pa ṇava and 
ānaka drums, and as professional reciters 
known as Sūtas, Māgadhas and Vandīs played 
vīṇās and recited poems praising Him, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa would play with His wives in the water. 
Laughing, the queens would squirt water on 
Him with syringes, and He would squirt them 
back. Thus K ṛṣṇa would sport with His queens 
in the same way that the lord of the Yak ṣas 
sports with the Yak ṣī nymphs. (8 -9) Under the 
drenched clothing of the queens, their thighs 
and breasts would become visible. T he flowers 
tied in their large braids would scatter as they 
sprayed water on their consort, and on the plea 
of trying to take away His syringe, they would 
embrace Him. By His touch their lusty feelings 
would increase, causing their faces to beam 
with smile s. Thus Lord K ṛṣṇa’s queens shone 
with resplendent beauty. (10) Lord K ṛṣṇa’s 
flower garland would become smeared with 
kuṅkuma from their breasts, and His abundant 
locks of hair would become disheveled as a re-
sult of His absorption in the game. As the Lord 
repeatedly sprayed His young consorts and 
they sprayed Him in turn, He enjoyed Himself 
like the king of elephants enjoying in the com-
pany of his bevy of she -elephants. (11) After-
ward, Lord K ṛṣṇa and His wives would give the 
ornaments and clothing they had worn during 
their water sports to the male and female per-
formers, who earned their livelihood from sing-
ing and from playing instrumental music. (12) 
In this way Lord K ṛṣṇa would sport with His 
queens, totally captivating their hearts with His 
gestures, tal ks, glances and smiles, and also with His jokes, playful exchanges and em-
braces. (13) The queens would become stunned 
in ecstatic trance, their minds absorbed in 
Kṛṣṇa alone. Then, thinking of their lotus -eyed 
Lord, they would speak as if insane. Please he ar 
these words from me as I relate them. (14)  

The queens said:  O kurarī bird, you are la-
menting. Now it is night, and somewhere in this 
world the Supreme Lord is asleep in a hidden 
place. But you are wide awake, O friend, una-
ble to fall asleep. Is it that , like us, you have had 
your heart pierced to the core by the lotus -eyed 
Lord’s munificent, playful smiling glances? 
(15) 

Poor cakravākī, even after closing your 
eyes, you continue to cry pitifully through the 
night for your unseen mate. Or is it that, li ke us, 
you have become the servant of Acyuta and 
hanker to wear in your braided hair the garland 
He has blessed with the touch of His feet? (16)  

Dear ocean, you are always roaring, not 
sleeping at night. Are you suffering insomnia? 
Or is it that, as with us, Mukunda has taken 
your insignias and you are hopeless of retriev-
ing them? (17)  

My dear moon, having contracted a severe 
case of tuberculosis, you have become so ema-
ciated that you fail to dispel the darkness with 
your rays. Or is it that you appear du mbstruck 
because, like us, you cannot remember the en-
couraging promises Mukunda once made to 
you? (18)  

O Malayan breeze, what have we done to 
displease you, so that you stir up lust in our 
hearts, which have already been shattered by 
Govinda’s sidelong gl ances? (19)  

O revered cloud, you are indeed very dear to 
the chief of the Yādavas, who bears the mark of 
Śrīvatsa. Like us, you are bound to Him by love 
and are meditating upon Him. Your heart is dis-
traught with great eagerness, as our hearts are, 
and as you remember Him again and again you 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

796 
 shed a torrent of tears. Association with K ṛṣṇa 
brings such misery! (20)  

O sweet -throated cuckoo, in a voice that 
could revive the dead you are vibrating the 
same sounds we once heard from our beloved, 
the most pleasin g of speakers. Please tell me 
what I can do today to please you. (21)  

O magnanimous mountain, you neither 
move nor speak. You must be pondering some 
matter of great importance. Or do you, like us, 
desire to hold on your breasts the feet of 
Vasudeva’s darl ing son? (22)  

O rivers, wives of the ocean, your pools 
have now dried up. Alas, you have shriveled to 
nothing, and your wealth of lotuses has van-
ished. Are you, then, like us, who are withering 
away because of not receiving the affectionate 
glance of our dear husband, the Lord of Madhu, 
who has cheated our hearts? (23)  

Welcome, swan. Please sit here and drink 
some milk. Give us some news of the descend-
ant of Śūra, dear one. We know you are His 
messenger. Is that invincible Lord doing well, 
and does that u nreliable friend of ours still re-
member the words He spoke to us long ago? 
Why should we go and worship Him? O servant 
of a petty master, go tell Him who fulfills our 
desires to come here without the goddess of for-
tune. Is she the only woman exclusively de-
voted to Him? (24)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  By thus speaking 
and acting with such ecstatic love for Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, the master of all masters of mystic yoga, 
His loving wives attained the ultimate goal of 
life. (25) The Lord, whom countless songs glo-
rify in cou ntless ways, forcibly attracts the 
minds of all women who simply hear about 
Him. What to speak, then, of those women who 
see Him directly? (26)  

And how could one possibly describe the 
great austerities that had been performed by the 
women who perfectly se rved Him, the spiritual 
master of the universe, in pure ecstatic love? Thinking of Him as their husband, they ren-
dered such intimate services as massaging His 
feet. (27)  

Thus observing the principles of duty enun-
ciated in the Vedas, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the goal o f the 
saintly devotees, repeatedly demonstrated how 
one can achieve at home the objectives of relig-
iosity, economic development and regulated 
sense gratification. (28) While fulfilling the 
highest standards of religious householder life, 
Lord K ṛṣṇa maintai ned more than 16,100 
wives. (29) Among these jewellike women 
were eight principal queens, headed by 
Rukmi ṇī. I have already described them one af-
ter another, O King, along with their sons. (30) 
The Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa, whose endeavor 
never fails, begot ten sons in each of His many 
wives. (31) Among these sons, all possessing 
unlimited valor, eighteen were mahā -rathas of 
great renown. Now hear their names from me. 
(32) They were Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Dīp-
timān, Bhānu, Sāmba, Madhu, B ṛhadbhānu, 
Citrabhānu, V ṛka, Aru ṇa, Pu ṣkara, Vedabāhu, 
Śrutadeva, Sunandana, Citrabāhu, Virūpa, 
Kavi and Nyagrodha. (33 -34) O best of kings, 
of these sons begotten by Lord K ṛṣṇa, the en-
emy of Madhu, the most prominent was 
Rukmi ṇī’s son Pradyumna. He was just like His 
father. (35) Th e great warrior Pradyumna mar-
ried Rukmī’s daughter [Rukmavatī], who gave 
birth to Aniruddha. He was as strong as ten 
thousand elephants. (36) Rukmī’s daughter’s 
son [Aniruddha] married Rukmī’s son’s daugh-
ter [Rocana]. From her was born Vajra, who 
would rem ain among the few survivors of the 
Yadus’ battle with clubs. (37) From Vajra came 
Pratibāhu, whose son was Subāhu. Subāhu’s 
son was Śāntasena, from whom Śatasena was 
born. (38) No one born in this family was poor 
in wealth or progeny, short -lived, weak or ne-
glectful of brahminical culture. (39) The Yadu 
dynasty produced innumerable great men of fa-
mous deeds. Even in tens of thousands of years, 
O King, one could never count them all. (40) I 
have heard from authoritative sources that the 
Yadu family employed 38,800,000 teachers 
just to educate their children. (41) Who can 
count all the great Yādavas, when among them 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

797 
 King Ugrasena alone was accompanied by an 
entourage of thirty trillion attendants? (42)  

The savage descendants of Diti who had 
been killed in pas t ages in battles between the 
demigods and demons took birth among human 
beings and arrogantly harassed the general pop-
ulace. (43)  

To subdue these demons, Lord Hari told the 
demigods to descend into the dynasty of Yadu. 
They comprised 101 clans, O King. ( 44) Be-
cause Lord K ṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, the Yādavas accepted Him as their 
ultimate authority. And among them, all those 
who were His intimate associates especially 
flourished. (45) The V ṛṣṇis were so absorbed in 
Kṛṣṇa consciousness th at they forgot their own 
bodies while sleeping, sitting, walking, con-
versing, playing, bathing and so on. (46) The 
heavenly Ganges is a holy place of pilgrimage 
because her waters wash Lord K ṛṣṇa’s feet. But 
when the Lord descended among the Yadus, 
His glo ries eclipsed the Ganges as a holy place. 
Both those who hated K ṛṣṇa and those who 
loved Him attained eternal forms like His in the 
spiritual world. The unattainable and su-
premely self -satisfied goddess of fortune, for 
the sake of whose favor everyone else  strug-
gles, belongs to Him alone. His name destroys 
all inauspiciousness when heard or chanted. He 
alone has set forth the principles of the various 
disciplic successions of sages. What wonder is 
it that He, whose personal weapon is the wheel 
of time, reli eved the burden of the earth? (47)  

Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa is He who is known as jana -
nivāsa, the ultimate resort of all living entities, 
and who is also known as Devakīnandana or 
Yaśodā -nandana, the son of Devakī and 
Yaśodā. He is the guide of the Yadu dynasty, 
and with His mighty arms He kills everything 
inauspicious, as well as every man who is im-
pious. By His presence He destroys all things 
inauspicious for all living entities, moving and 
inert. His blissful smiling face always increases 
the lusty desires of th e gopīs of V ṛndāvana. 
May He be all glorious and happy! (48)  
 To protect the principles of devotional ser-
vice to Himself, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the best of the Ya-
dus, accepts the pastime forms that have been 
glorified here in the Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. One 
who desires t o faithfully serve His lotus feet 
should hear of the activities He performs in 
each of these incarnationsactivities that suita-
bly imitate those of the forms He assumes. 
Hearing narrations of these pastimes destroys 
the reactions to fruitive work. (49) By r egularly 
hearing, chanting and meditating on the beauti-
ful topics of Lord Mukunda with ever -increas-
ing sincerity, a mortal being will attain the di-
vine kingdom of the Lord, where the inviolable 
power of death holds no sway. For this purpose, 
many persons, including great kings, aban-
doned their mundane homes and took to the for-
est. (50)  

Canto 11: General History  

SB 11.1: The Curse upon the Yadu Dyn-
asty 

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, accompanied by Balarāma and sur-
rounded by the Yadu dynasty, ex ecuted the kill-
ing of many demons. Then, further to remove 
the burden of the earth, the Lord arranged for 
the great Battle of Kuruk ṣetra, which suddenly 
erupted in violence between the Kurus and the 
Pāṇḍavas. (1) Because the sons of Pā ṇḍu were 
enraged by t he numerous offenses of their ene-
mies, such as duplicitous gambling, verbal in-
sults, the seizing of Draupadī’s hair, and many 
other cruel transgressions, the Supreme Lord 
engaged those Pā ṇḍavas as the immediate 
cause to execute His will. On the pretext of the 
Battle of Kuruk ṣetra, Lord K ṛṣṇa arranged for 
all the kings who were burdening the earth to 
assemble with their armies on opposite sides of 
the battlefield, and when the Lord killed them 
through the agency of war, the earth was re-
lieved of its burden. (2) The Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead used the Yadu dynasty, which 
was protected by His own arms, to eliminate 
the kings who with their armies had been the 
burden of this earth. Then the unfathomable 
Lord thought to Himself, “Although some may 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

798 
 say that th e earth’s burden is now gone, in My 
opinion it is not yet gone, because there still re-
mains the Yādava dynasty itself, whose 
strength is unbearable for the earth.” (3) Lord 
Kṛṣṇa thought, “No outside force could ever 
bring about the defeat of this family, the Yadu 
dynasty, whose members have always been 
fully surrendered to Me and are unrestricted in 
their opulence. But if I inspire a quarrel within 
the dynasty, that quarrel will act just like a fire 
created from the friction of bamboo in a grove, 
and then I shall achieve My real purpose and 
return to My eternal abode.” (4) My dear King 
Parīk ṣit, when the supreme almighty Lord, 
whose desire always comes to pass, had thus 
made up His mind, He withdrew His own fam-
ily on the pretext of a curse spoken by an as-
sembly of brāhma ṇas. (5) The Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, is the reservoir of all 
beauty. All beautiful things emanate from Him, 
and His personal form is so attractive that it 
steals the eyes away from all other objects, 
which then seem devoid of b eauty in compari-
son to Him. When Lord K ṛṣṇa was on the earth, 
He attracted the eyes of all people. When K ṛṣṇa 
spoke, His words attracted the minds of all who 
remembered them. By seeing the footsteps of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, people became attracted to Him, 
and thus t hey wanted to offer their bodily activ-
ities to the Lord as His followers. In this way 
Kṛṣṇa very easily spread His glories, which are 
sung throughout the world by the most sublime 
and essential Vedic verses. Lord K ṛṣṇa consid-
ered that simply by hearing and  chanting those 
glories, conditioned souls born in the future 
would cross beyond the darkness of ignorance. 
Being satisfied with this arrangement, He left 
for His desired destination. (6 -7) 

King Parīk ṣit inquired:  How could the 
brāhma ṇas curse the V ṛṣṇis, who were always 
respectful to the brāhma ṇas, charitable, and in-
clined to serve senior and exalted personalities 
and whose minds were always fully absorbed 
in thought of Lord K ṛṣṇa? (8) King Parīk ṣit 
continued inquiring: What was the motive for 
this curse?  What did it consist of, O purest of 
the twice -born? And how could such a disa-
greement have arisen among the Yadus, who all shared the same goal of life? Please tell me all 
these things. (9)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  The Lord, who 
bore His body as the amalga mation of every-
thing beautiful, dutifully executed the most 
auspicious activities while on the earth, alt-
hough He was, in fact, without any endeavor 
already satisfied in all desires. Residing in His 
abode and enjoying life, the Lord, whose glori-
fication is  in itself magnanimous, now wanted 
to annihilate His dynasty, as there still re-
mained some small part of His duty to be car-
ried out. (10) The sages Viśvāmitra, Asita, 
Kaṇva, Durvāsā, Bh ṛgu, A ṅgirā, Kaśyapa, 
Vāmadeva, Atri and Vasi ṣṭha, along with 
Nārada an d others, once performed fruitive rit-
uals that award abundant pious results, bring 
great happiness and take away the sins of Kali -
yuga for the whole world by merely being re-
counted. The sages duly executed these rituals 
in the home of the chief of the Yadu s, 
Vasudeva, the father of Lord K ṛṣṇa. After Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, who was staying in Vasudeva’s house as 
time personified, respectfully sent the sages off 
at the conclusion of the ceremonies, they went 
to the holy place called Pi ṇḍāraka. (11 -12) 

To that holy place , the young boys of the 
Yadu dynasty had brought Sāmba, son of 
Jāmbavatī, dressed in woman’s garb. Playfully 
approaching the great sages gathered there, the 
boys grabbed hold of the sages’ feet and impu-
dently asked them with feigned humility, “O 
learned br āhma ṇas, this black -eyed pregnant 
woman has something to ask you. She is too 
embarrassed to inquire for herself. She is just 
about to give birth and is very desirous of hav-
ing a son. Since all of you are great sages with 
infallible vision, please tell us w hether her child 
will be a boy or a girl.” (13 -15) Thus ridiculed 
by deceit, the sages became angry, O King, and 
told the boys, “Fools! She will bear you an iron 
club that will destroy your entire dynasty.” (16) 
Upon hearing the curse of the sages, the ter ri-
fied boys quickly uncovered the belly of 
Sāmba, and indeed they observed that therein 
was an iron club. (17) The young men of the 
Yadu dynasty said, “Oh, what have we done? 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

799 
 We are so unfortunate! What will our family 
members say to us?” Speaking thus and  being 
very disturbed, they returned to their homes, 
taking the club with them. (18) The Yadu boys, 
the luster of their faces completely faded, 
brought the club into the royal assembly, and in 
the presence of all the Yādavas they told King 
Ugrasena what ha d happened. (19) O King 
Parīk ṣit, when the inhabitants of Dvārakā heard 
of the infallible curse of the brāhma ṇas and saw 
the club, they were astonished and distraught 
with fear. (20) After having the club ground to 
bits, King Āhuka [Ugrasena] of the Yadus per-
sonally threw the pieces, along with the remain-
ing lump of iron, into the water of the ocean. 
(21) 

A certain fish swallowed the iron lump, and 
the bits of iron, carried back to the shore by the 
waves, implanted themselves there and grew 
into tall, shar p canes. (22) The fish was caught 
in the ocean along with other fish in a fisher-
men’s net. The iron lump in the fish’s stomach 
was taken by the hunter Jarā, who fixed it as an 
arrowhead at the end of his shaft. (23) Knowing 
fully the significance of all th ese events, the Su-
preme Lord, though capable of reversing the 
brāhma ṇas’ curse, did not wish to do so. Ra-
ther, in His form of time, He gladly sanctioned 
the events. (24)  

SB 11.2: Mahārāja Nimi Meets the Nine 
Yogendras  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Eager to e n-
gage in the worship of Lord K ṛṣṇa, O best of 
the Kurus, Nārada Muni stayed for some time 
in Dvārakā, which was always protected by the 
arms of Govinda. (1) My dear King, in the ma-
terial world the conditioned souls are con-
fronted by death at every step of life. Therefore, 
who among the conditioned souls would not 
render service to the lotus feet of Lord 
Mukunda, who is worshipable even for the 
greatest of liberated souls? (2) One day the sage 
among the demigods, Nārada, came to the 
house of Vasudeva. After worshiping Nārada with suitable paraphernalia, seating him com-
fortably and respectfully bowing down to him, 
Vasudeva spoke as follows. (3)  

Śrī Vasudeva said:  My lord, your visit, like 
that of a father to his children, is for the benefit 
of all living bein gs. You especially help the 
most wretched among them, as well as those 
who are advanced on the path toward the Su-
preme Lord, Uttamaśloka. (4) The activities of 
demigods lead to both misery and happiness for 
living beings, but the activities of great saints  
like you, who have accepted the infallible Lord 
as their very soul, result only in the happiness 
of all beings. (5) Those who worship the demi-
gods receive reciprocation from the demigods 
in a way just corresponding to the offering. The 
demigods are attend ants of karma, like a per-
son’s shadow, but sādhus are actually merciful 
to the fallen. (6) O brāhma ṇa, although I am 
satisfied simply by seeing you, I still wish to 
inquire about those duties which give pleasure 
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Any 
mortal who faithfully hears about them is freed 
from all kinds of fear. (7) In a previous birth on 
this earth, I worshiped the Supreme Lord, 
Ananta, who alone can award liberation, but 
because I desired to have a child, I did not wor-
ship Him for liberation.  Thus I was bewildered 
by the Lord’s illusory energy. (8) My dear lord, 
you are always true to your vow. Please instruct 
me clearly, so that by your mercy I may easily 
free myself from material existence, which is 
full of many dangers and keeps us constant ly 
bound in fear. (9)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King, Devar ṣi 
Nārada was pleased by the questions of the 
highly intelligent Vasudeva. Because they sug-
gested the transcendental qualities of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, they reminded 
Nārada of Lord K ṛṣṇa. Thus Nārada replied to 
Vasudeva as follows. (10)  

Śrī Nārada said:  O best of the Sātvatas, you 
have quite correctly asked about the eternal 
duty of the living entity toward the Supreme 
Lord. Such devotional service to the Lord is so 
potent that its pe rformance can purify the entire 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

800 
 universe. (11) Pure devotional service rendered 
to the Supreme Lord is spiritually so potent that 
simply by hearing about such transcendental 
service, by chanting its glories in response, by 
meditating on it, by respectfully  and faithfully 
accepting it, or by praising the devotional ser-
vice of others, even persons who hate the dem-
igods and all other living beings can be imme-
diately purified. (12) Today you have made me 
remember my Lord, the supremely blissful Per-
sonality of G odhead, Nārāya ṇa. The Supreme 
Lord is so auspicious that whoever hears and 
chants about Him becomes completely pious. 
(13) To explain the devotional service of the 
Lord, sages have related the ancient history of 
the conversation between the great soul King  
Videha and the sons of Ṛṣabha. (14) 
Svāyambhuva Manu had a son named 
Mahārāja Priyavrata, and among Priyavrata’s 
sons was Āgnīdhra. From Āgnīdhra was born 
Nābhi, whose son was known as Ṛṣabhadeva. 
(15) Śrī Ṛṣabhadeva is accepted as an expansion 
of the Supr eme Lord, Vāsudeva. He incarnated 
in this world to propagate those religious prin-
ciples that lead living entities to ultimate liber-
ation. He had one hundred sons, all perfect in 
Vedic knowledge. (16)  

Of the one hundred sons of Lord 
Ṛṣabhadeva, the eldest,  Bharata, was com-
pletely devoted to Lord Nārāya ṇa. It is because 
of Bharata’s fame that this planet is now cele-
brated as the great Bhārata -varṣa. (17) King 
Bharata rejected this material world, consider-
ing all types of material pleasure temporary and 
usele ss. Leaving his beautiful young wife and 
family, he worshiped Lord Hari by severe aus-
terities and attained the abode of the Lord after 
three lifetimes. (18) Nine of the remaining sons 
of Ṛṣabhadeva became the rulers of the nine is-
lands of Bhārata -varṣa, an d they exercised 
complete sovereignty over this planet. Eighty -
one sons became twice -born brāhma ṇas and 
helped initiate the Vedic path of fruitive sacri-
fices [karma -kāṇḍa]. (19) The nine remaining 
sons of Ṛṣabha were greatly fortunate sages 
who worked vigo rously to spread knowledge of 
the Absolute Truth. They wandered about na-ked and were very well versed in spiritual sci-
ence. Their names were Kavi, Havir, Antarīk ṣa, 
Prabuddha, Pippalāyana, Āvirhotra, Drumila, 
Camasa and Karabhājana. (20 -21) These sages 
wandered the earth seeing the entire universe, 
with all its gross and subtle objects, as a mani-
festation of the Supreme Lord and as nondiffer-
ent from the self. (22) The nine Yogendras are 
liberated souls who travel freely to the planets 
of the demigods, the p erfected mystics, the 
Sādhyas, the heavenly musicians, the Yak ṣas, 
the human beings, and the minor demigods 
such as the Kinnaras and the serpents. No mun-
dane force can check their free movement, and 
exactly as they wish they can travel as well to 
the world s of the sages, the angels, the ghostly 
followers of Lord Śiva, the Vidyādharas, the 
brāhma ṇas and the cows. (23)  

Once in Ajanābha [the former name of the 
earth], they came upon the sacrificial perfor-
mance of the great soul Mahārāja Nimi, which 
was being carried out under the direction of el-
evated sages. (24) My dear King, seeing those 
pure devotees of the Lord, who rival the sun in 
brilliance, everyone presentthe performer of 
the sacrifice, the brāhma ṇas and even the sacri-
ficial firesstood in respect. (25 ) King Videha 
[Nimi] understood that the nine sages were ex-
alted devotees of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. Therefore, overjoyed at their auspi-
cious arrival, he offered them suitable sitting 
places and worshiped them in a proper way, 
just as one would  worship the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. (26) Overwhelmed by tran-
scendental joy, the King humbly bowed his 
head and then proceeded to question the nine 
sages. These nine great souls glowed with their 
own effulgence and thus appeared equal to the 
four K umāras, the sons of Lord Brahmā. (27)  

King Videha said:  I think that you must be 
direct associates of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is famous as the enemy of the 
demon Madhu. Indeed, the pure devotees of 
Lord Vi ṣṇu wander throughout the universe  not 
for their personal, selfish interest, but to purify 
all the conditioned souls. (28) For the condi-
tioned souls, the human body is most difficult 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

801 
 to achieve, and it can be lost at any moment. 
But I think that even those who have achieved 
human life rare ly gain the association of pure 
devotees, who are dear to the Lord of 
Vaiku ṇṭha. (29) Therefore, O completely sin-
less ones, I ask you to kindly tell me what the 
supreme good is. After all, even half a mo-
ment’s association with pure devotees within 
this wor ld of birth and death is a priceless treas-
ure for any man. (30) Please speak about how 
one engages in the devotional service of the Su-
preme Lord, if you consider me capable of 
properly hearing these topics. When a living 
entity offers loving service to the  Supreme 
Lord, the Lord is immediately satisfied, and in 
return He will give even His own self to the sur-
rendered soul. (31)  

Śrī Nārada said:  O Vasudeva, when 
Mahārāja Nimi had thus inquired from the nine 
Yogendras about devotional service to the 
Lord, th ose best of saintly persons sincerely 
thanked the King for his questions and spoke to 
him with affection in the presence of the mem-
bers of the sacrificial assembly and the 
brāhma ṇa priests. (32)  

Śrī Kavi said:  I consider that one whose in-
telligence is con stantly disturbed by his falsely 
identifying himself with the temporary material 
world can achieve real freedom from fear only 
by worshiping the lotus feet of the infallible Su-
preme Lord. In such devotional service, all fear 
ceases entirely. (33) Even igno rant living enti-
ties can very easily come to know the Supreme 
Lord if they adopt those means prescribed by 
the Supreme Lord Himself. The process recom-
mended by the Lord is to be known as 
bhāgavata -dharma, or devotional service to the 
Supreme Personality of  Godhead. (34) O King, 
one who accepts this process of devotional ser-
vice to the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
will never blunder on his path in this world. 
Even while running with eyes closed, he will 
never trip or fall. (35)  

In accordance with the part icular nature one 
has acquired in conditioned life, whatever one does with body, words, mind, senses, intelli-
gence or purified consciousness one should of-
fer to the Supreme, thinking, “This is for the 
pleasure of Lord Nārāya ṇa.” (36) Fear arises 
when a liv ing entity misidentifies himself as the 
material body because of absorption in the ex-
ternal, illusory energy of the Lord. When the 
living entity thus turns away from the Supreme 
Lord, he also forgets his own constitutional po-
sition as a servant of the Lord . This bewilder-
ing, fearful condition is effected by the potency 
for illusion, called māyā. Therefore, an intelli-
gent person should engage unflinchingly in the 
unalloyed devotional service of the Lord, under 
the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, 
whom he should accept as his worshipable de-
ity and as his very life and soul. (37) Although 
the duality of the material world does not ulti-
mately exist, the conditioned soul experiences 
it as real under the influence of his own condi-
tioned intelligence. This  imaginary experience 
of a world separate from K ṛṣṇa can be com-
pared to the acts of dreaming and desiring. 
When the conditioned soul dreams at night of 
something desirable or horrible, or when he 
daydreams of what he would like to have or 
avoid, he creates  a reality that has no existence 
beyond his own imagination. The tendency of 
the mind is to accept and reject various activi-
ties based on sense gratification. Therefore, an 
intelligent person should control the mind, re-
stricting it from the illusion of see ing things 
separate from K ṛṣṇa, and when the mind is thus 
controlled he will experience actual fearless-
ness. (38) An intelligent person who has con-
trolled his mind and conquered fear should give 
up all attachment to material objects such as 
wife, family an d nation and should wander 
freely without embarrassment, hearing and 
chanting the holy names of the Lord, the bearer 
of the chariot wheel. The holy names of K ṛṣṇa 
are all -auspicious because they describe His 
transcendental birth and activities, which He 
performs within this world for the salvation of 
the conditioned souls. Thus the holy names of 
the Lord are sung throughout the world. (39) 
By chanting the holy name of the Supreme 
Lord, one comes to the stage of love of God-
head. Then the devotee is fixed in his vow as an 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

802 
 eternal servant of the Lord, and he gradually 
becomes very much attached to a particular 
name and form of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. As his heart melts with ecstatic love, 
he laughs very loudly or cries or shouts. Some-
times he sings and dances like a madman, for 
he is indifferent to public opinion. (40)  

A devotee should not see anything as being 
separate from the Supreme Personality of God-
head, K ṛṣṇa. Ether, fire, air, water, earth, the 
sun and other luminaries, all living beings, th e 
directions, trees and other plants, the rivers and 
oceanswhatever a devotee experiences he 
should consider to be an expansion of K ṛṣṇa. 
Thus seeing everything that exists within crea-
tion as the body of the Supreme Lord, Hari, the 
devotee should offer his  sincere respects to the 
entire expansion of the Lord’s body. (41) De-
votion, direct experience of the Supreme Lord, 
and detachment from other thingsthese three 
occur simultaneously for one who has taken 
shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
in the  same way that pleasure, nourishment and 
relief from hunger come simultaneously and in-
creasingly, with each bite, for a person engaged 
in eating. (42) My dear King, the devotee who 
worships the lotus feet of the infallible Person-
ality of Godhead with const ant endeavor thus 
achieves unflinching devotion, detachment and 
experienced knowledge of the Personality of 
Godhead. In this way the successful devotee of 
the Lord achieves supreme spiritual peace. (43)  

Mahārāja Nimi said:  Now please tell me in 
greater de tail about the devotees of the Su-
preme Lord. What are the natural symptoms by 
which I can distinguish between the most ad-
vanced devotees, those on the middle level and 
those who are neophytes? What are the typical 
religious activities of a Vai ṣṇava, and ho w does 
he speak? Specifically, please describe those 
symptoms and characteristics by which Vai ṣṇa-
vas become dear to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. (44)  

Śrī Havih said:  The most advanced devotee 
sees within everything the soul of all souls, the 
Suprem e Personality of Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa. Consequently, he sees everything in relation to 
the Supreme Lord and understands that every-
thing that exists is eternally situated within the 
Lord. (45) An intermediate or second -class 
devotee, called madhyama -adhikārī,  offers his 
love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is 
a sincere friend to all the devotees of the Lord, 
shows mercy to ignorant people who are inno-
cent and disregards those who are envious of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (46) A 
devotee who fait hfully engages in the worship 
of the Deity in the temple but does not behave 
properly toward other devotees or people in 
general is called a prāk ṛta-bhakta, a materialis-
tic devotee, and is considered to be in the low-
est position. (47)  

Even while engaging his senses in contact 
with their objects, one who sees this whole 
world as the energy of Lord Vi ṣṇu is neither re-
pelled nor elated. He is indeed the greatest 
among devotees. (48) Within the material 
world, one’s material body is always subject to 
birth and  decay. Similarly, the life air [prā ṇa] is 
harassed by hunger and thirst, the mind is al-
ways anxious, the intelligence hankers for that 
which cannot be obtained, and all of the senses 
are ultimately exhausted by constant struggle in 
the material nature. A person who is not bewil-
dered by the inevitable miseries of material ex-
istence, and who remains aloof from them 
simply by remembering the lotus feet of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, is to be consid-
ered bhāgavata -pradhāna, the foremost devotee 
of the L ord. (49) One who has taken exclusive 
shelter of the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva, be-
comes free from fruitive activities, which are 
based on material lust. In fact, one who has 
taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord is 
freed from even the desire to enjoy ma terial 
sense gratification. Plans for enjoying sex life, 
social prestige and money cannot develop 
within his mind. Thus he is considered bhāga-
vatottama, a pure devotee of the Lord on the 
highest platform. (50) Birth in an aristocratic 
family and the execut ion of austere and pious 
activities certainly cause one to take pride in 
himself. Similarly, if one enjoys a prestigious 
position within society because his parents are 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

803 
 highly respected members of the var ṇāśrama 
social system, one becomes even more infatu-
ated with himself. But if despite these excellent 
material qualifications one does not feel even a 
tinge of pride within himself, he is to be con-
sidered the dearmost servitor of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. (51) When a devotee 
gives up the selfish co nception by which one 
thinks “This is my property, and that is his,” 
and when he is no longer concerned with the 
pleasures of his own material body or indiffer-
ent to the discomforts of others, he becomes 
fully peaceful and satisfied. He considers him-
self s imply one among all the living beings who 
are equally part and parcel of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. Such a satisfied Vai ṣṇava 
is considered to be at the highest standard of 
devotional service. (52) The lotus feet of the 
Supreme Personality of Godh ead are sought 
even by the greatest of demigods, such as 
Brahmā and Śiva, who have all accepted the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead as their life 
and soul. A pure devotee of the Lord can never 
forget those lotus feet in any circumstance. He 
will not give up  his shelter at the lotus feet of 
the Lord for a single momentindeed, not for 
half a momenteven in exchange for the bene-
diction of ruling and enjoying the opulence of 
the entire universe. Such a devotee of the Lord 
is to be considered the best of the Vai ṣṇavas. 
(53) How can the fire of material suffering con-
tinue to burn the hearts of those who worship 
the Supreme Lord? The Lord’s lotus feet have 
performed innumerable heroic deeds, and the 
beautiful nails on His toes resemble valuable 
jewels. The effulgence  emanating from those 
nails resembles cooling moonshine, for it in-
stantly relieves the suffering within the heart of 
the pure devotee, just as the appearance of the 
moon’s cooling light relieves the burning heat 
of the sun. (54) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is so kind to the conditioned souls that 
if they call upon Him by speaking His holy 
name, even unintentionally or unwillingly, the 
Lord is inclined to destroy innumerable sinful 
reactions in their hearts. Therefore, when a dev-
otee who has taken she lter of the Lord’s lotus 
feet chants the holy name of K ṛṣṇa with genu-
ine love, the Supreme Personality of Godhead can never give up the heart of such a devotee. 
One who has thus captured the Supreme Lord 
within his heart is to be known as bhāgavata -
pradhān a, the most exalted devotee of the Lord. 
(55) 

SB 11.3: Liberation from the Illusory En-
ergy  

King Nimi said:  Now we wish to learn 
about the illusory potency of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, Śrī Vi ṣṇu, which bewil-
ders even great mystics. My lords, ple ase speak 
to us about this subject. (1) Although I am 
drinking the nectar of your statements about the 
glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
my thirst is not yet satiated. Such nectarean de-
scriptions of the Lord and His devotees are the 
actual med icine for conditioned souls like me, 
who are tormented by the threefold miseries of 
material existence. (2)  

Śrī Antarīk ṣa said:  O mighty -armed King, 
by activating the material elements, the prime-
val Soul of all creation has sent forth all living 
beings in  higher and lower species so that these 
conditioned souls can cultivate either sense 
gratification or ultimate liberation, according to 
their desire. (3) The Supersoul enters the mate-
rial bodies of the created beings, activates the 
mind and senses, and thu s causes the condi-
tioned souls to approach the three modes of ma-
terial nature for sense gratification. (4) The in-
dividual living being, the master of the material 
body, uses his material senses, which have been 
activated by the Supersoul, to try to enjoy s ense 
objects composed of the three modes of nature. 
Thus he misidentifies the created material body 
with the unborn eternal self and becomes entan-
gled in the illusory energy of the Lord. (5) Im-
pelled by deep -rooted material desires, the em-
bodied living ent ity engages his active sense or-
gans in fruitive activities. He then experiences 
the results of his material actions by wandering 
throughout this world in so -called happiness 
and distress. (6) Thus the conditioned living en-
tity is forced to experience repea ted birth and 
death. Impelled by the reactions of his own ac-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

804 
 tivities, he helplessly wanders from one inaus-
picious situation to another, suffering from the 
moment of creation until the time of cosmic an-
nihilation. (7) When the annihilation of the ma-
terial e lements is imminent, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead in His form of eternal time 
withdraws the manifest cosmos, consisting of 
gross and subtle features, and the entire uni-
verse vanishes into nonmanifestation. (8) As 
cosmic annihilation approaches, a ter rible 
drought takes place on earth for one hundred 
years. For one hundred years the heat of the sun 
gradually increases, and its blazing heat begins 
to torment the three worlds. (9) Beginning from 
Pātālaloka, a fire grows, emanating from the 
mouth of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. Its flames shooting 
upward, driven by great winds, it scorches eve-
rything in all directions. (10) Hordes of clouds 
called Sa ṁvartaka pour torrents of rain for one 
hundred years. Flooding down in raindrops as 
long as the trunk of an elephant, th e deadly 
rainfall submerges the entire universe in water. 
(11) Then Vairāja Brahmā, the soul of the uni-
versal form, gives up his universal body, O 
King, and enters into the subtle unmanifest na-
ture, like a fire that has run out of fuel. (12) De-
prived of it s quality of aroma by the wind, the 
element earth is transformed into water; and 
water, deprived of its taste by that same wind, 
is merged into fire. (13) Fire, deprived of its 
form by darkness, dissolves into the element 
air. When the air loses its qualit y of touch by 
the influence of space, the air merges into that 
space. When space is deprived of its tangible 
quality by the Supreme Soul in the form of 
time, space merges into false ego in the mode 
of ignorance. (14) My dear King, the material 
senses and i ntelligence merge into false ego in 
the mode of passion, from which they arose; 
and the mind, along with the demigods, merges 
into false ego in the mode of goodness. Then 
the total false ego, along with all of its qualities, 
merges into the mahat -tattva. ( 15) I have now 
described māyā, the illusory energy of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. This illusory 
potency, consisting of the three modes of mate-
rial nature, is empowered by the Lord for the 
creation, maintenance and annihilation of the material unive rse. Now, what more do you 
wish to hear? (16)  

King Nimi said:  O great sage, please ex-
plain how even a foolish materialist can easily 
cross over the illusory energy of the Supreme 
Lord, which is always insurmountable for those 
who are not self -controlled. (17) 

Śrī Prabuddha said:  Accepting the roles of 
male and female in human society, the condi-
tioned souls unite in sexual relationships. Thus 
they constantly make material endeavors to 
eliminate their unhappiness and unlimitedly in-
crease their pleasure. But  one should see that 
they inevitably achieve exactly the opposite re-
sult. In other words, their happiness inevitably 
vanishes, and as they grow older their material 
discomfort increases. (18) Wealth is a perpetual 
source of distress, it is most difficult t o acquire, 
and it is virtual death for the soul. What satis-
faction does one actually gain from his wealth? 
Similarly, how can one gain ultimate or perma-
nent happiness from one’s so -called home, 
children, relatives and domestic animals, which 
are all mainta ined by one’s hard -earned 
money? (19) One cannot find permanent hap-
piness even on the heavenly planets, which one 
can attain in the next life by ritualistic ceremo-
nies and sacrifices. Even in material heaven the 
living entity is disturbed by rivalry with h is 
equals and envy of those superior to him. And 
since one’s residence in heaven is finished with 
the exhaustion of pious fruitive activities, the 
denizens of heaven are afflicted by fear, antici-
pating the destruction of their heavenly life. 
Thus they rese mble kings who, though envi-
ously admired by ordinary citizens, are con-
stantly harassed by enemy kings and who there-
fore never attain actual happiness. (20) There-
fore, any person who seriously desires real hap-
piness must seek a bona fide spiritual master 
and take shelter of him by initiation. The qual-
ification of the bona fide guru is that he has re-
alized the conclusions of the scriptures by de-
liberation and is able to convince others of 
these conclusions. Such great personalities, 
who have taken shelter of the Supreme God-
head, leaving aside all material considerations, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

805 
 should be understood to be bona fide spiritual 
masters. (21) Accepting the bona fide spiritual 
master as one’s life and soul and worshipable 
deity, the disciple should learn from him the 
proce ss of pure devotional service. The Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the soul 
of all souls, is inclined to give Himself to His 
pure devotees. Therefore, the disciple should 
learn from the spiritual master to serve the Lord 
without duplicity and in such  a faithful and fa-
vorable way that the Supreme Lord, being sat-
isfied, will offer Himself to the faithful disci-
ple. (22) A sincere disciple should learn to dis-
sociate the mind from everything material and 
positively cultivate association with his spir-
itual master and other saintly devotees. He 
should be merciful to those in an inferior posi-
tion to him, cultivate friendship with those on 
an equal level and meekly serve those in a 
higher spiritual position. Thus he should learn 
to deal properly with all living  beings. (23) To 
serve the spiritual master the disciple should 
learn cleanliness, austerity, tolerance, silence, 
study of Vedic knowledge, simplicity, celi-
bacy, nonviolence, and equanimity in the face 
of material dualities such as heat and cold, hap-
piness  and distress. (24) One should practice 
meditation by constantly seeing oneself to be 
an eternal cognizant spirit soul and seeing the 
Lord to be the absolute controller of everything. 
To increase one’s meditation, one should live 
in a secluded place and gi ve up false attachment 
to one’s home and household paraphernalia. 
Giving up the decorations of the temporary ma-
terial body, one should dress himself with 
scraps of cloth found in rejected places, or with 
the bark of trees. In this way one should learn 
to be satisfied in any material situation. (25) 
One should have firm faith that he will achieve 
all success in life by following those scriptures 
that describe the glories of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead, Bhagavān. At the same time, 
one should avoid blas pheming other scriptures. 
One should rigidly control his mind, speech and 
bodily activities, always speak the truth, and 
bring the mind and senses under full control. 
(26) One should hear, glorify and meditate 
upon the wonderful transcendental activities o f the Lord. One should specifically become ab-
sorbed in the appearance, activities, qualities 
and holy names of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. Thus inspired, one should perform 
all of one’s daily activities as an offering to the 
Lord. One should perfor m sacrifice, charity and 
penance exclusively for the Lord’s satisfaction. 
Similarly, one should chant only those mantras 
which glorify the Supreme Personality of God-
head. And all one’s religious activities should 
be performed as an offering to the Lord. Wh at-
ever one finds pleasing or enjoyable he should 
immediately offer to the Supreme Lord, and 
even his wife, children, home and very life air 
he should offer at the lotus feet of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. (27 -28) One who de-
sires his ultimate self -interest should cultivate 
friendship with those persons who have ac-
cepted K ṛṣṇa as the Lord of their life. One 
should further develop an attitude of service to-
ward all living beings. One should especially 
try to help those in the human form of life and, 
among them, especially those who accept the 
principles of religious behavior. Among reli-
gious persons, one should especially render ser-
vice to the pure devotees of the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. (29) One should learn 
how to associate with the devotees of  the Lord 
by gathering with them to chant the glories of 
the Lord. This process is most purifying. As 
devotees thus develop their loving friendship, 
they feel mutual happiness and satisfaction. 
And by thus encouraging one another they are 
able to give up m aterial sense gratification, 
which is the cause of all suffering. (30) The 
devotees of the Lord constantly discuss the glo-
ries of the Personality of Godhead among 
themselves. Thus they constantly remember the 
Lord and remind one another of His qualities 
and pastimes. In this way, by their devotion to 
the principles of bhakti -yoga, the devotees 
please the Personality of Godhead, who takes 
away from them everything inauspicious. Be-
ing purified of all impediments, the devotees 
awaken to pure love of Godhead, a nd thus, even 
within this world, their spiritualized bodies ex-
hibit symptoms of transcendental ecstasy, such 
as standing of the bodily hairs on end. (31) 
Having achieved love of Godhead, the devotees 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

806 
 sometimes weep loudly, absorbed in thought of 
the infall ible Lord. Sometimes they laugh, feel 
great pleasure, speak out loud to the Lord, 
dance or sing. Such devotees, having trans-
cended material, conditioned life, sometimes 
imitate the unborn Supreme by acting out His 
pastimes. And sometimes, achieving His per-
sonal audience, they remain peaceful and silent. 
(32) Thus learning the science of devotional 
service and practically engaging in the devo-
tional service of the Lord, the devotee comes to 
the stage of love of Godhead. And by complete 
devotion to the Supreme  Personality of God-
head, Nārāya ṇa, the devotee easily crosses over 
the illusory energy, māyā, which is extremely 
difficult to cross. (33)  

King Nimi inquired:  Please explain to me 
the transcendental situation of the Supreme 
Lord, Nārāya ṇa, who is Himself t he Absolute 
Truth and the Supersoul of everyone. You can 
explain this to me, because you are all most ex-
pert in transcendental knowledge. (34)  

Śrī Pippalāyana said:  The Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead is the cause of the creation, 
maintenance and destructi on of this universe, 
yet He has no prior cause. He pervades the var-
ious states of wakefulness, dreaming and un-
conscious deep sleep and also exists beyond 
them. By entering the body of every living be-
ing as the Supersoul, He enlivens the body, 
senses, life airs and mental activities, and thus 
all the subtle and gross organs of the body 
begin their functions. My dear King, know that 
Personality of Godhead to be the Supreme. (35) 
Neither the mind nor the faculties of speech, 
sight, intelligence, the life air o r any of the 
senses are capable of penetrating that Supreme 
Truth, any more than small sparks can affect 
the original fire from which they are generated. 
Not even the authoritative language of the Ve-
das can perfectly describe the Supreme Truth, 
since the V edas themselves disclaim the possi-
bility that the Truth can be expressed by words. 
But through indirect reference the Vedic sound 
does serve as evidence of the Supreme Truth, 
since without the existence of that Supreme Truth the various restrictions found in the Ve-
das would have no ultimate purpose. (36) Orig-
inally one, the Absolute, Brahman, comes to be 
known as threefold, manifesting itself as the 
three modes of material naturegoodness, pas-
sion and ignorance. Brahman further expands 
its potency, and thus the power to act and the 
power of consciousness become manifest, 
along with the false ego, which covers the iden-
tity of the conditioned living being. Thus, by 
the expansion of the multipotencies of the Ab-
solute, the demigods, as the embodiment of 
knowledge , become manifest, along with the 
material senses, their objects, and the results of 
material activity, namely happiness and dis-
tress. In this way the manifestation of the mate-
rial world takes place as the subtle cause and as 
the material effect visible in  the appearance of 
gross material objects. Brahman, which is the 
source of all subtle and gross manifestations, is 
simultaneously transcendental to them, being 
absolute. (37) Brahman, the eternal soul, was 
never born and will never die, nor does it grow 
or decay. That spiritual soul is actually the 
knower of the youth, middle age and death of 
the material body. Thus the soul can be under-
stood to be pure consciousness, existing every-
where at all times and never being destroyed. 
Just as the life air within th e body, although 
one, becomes manifest as many in contact with 
the various material senses, the one soul ap-
pears to assume various material designations 
in contact with the material body. (38) The 
spirit soul is born in many different species of 
life withi n the material world. Some species are 
born from eggs, others from embryos, others 
from the seeds of plants and trees, and others 
from perspiration. But in all species of life the 
prāṇa, or vital air, remains unchanging and fol-
lows the spirit soul from one  body to another. 
Similarly, the spirit soul is eternally the same 
despite its material condition of life. We have 
practical experience of this. When we are ab-
sorbed in deep sleep without dreaming, the ma-
terial senses become inactive, and even the 
mind and  false ego are merged into a dormant 
condition. But although the senses, mind and 
false ego are inactive, one remembers upon 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

807 
 waking that he, the soul, was peacefully sleep-
ing. (39) When one seriously engages in the de-
votional service of the Personality of Godhead, 
fixing the Lord’s lotus feet within one’s heart 
as the only goal of life, one can destroy the in-
numerable impure desires lodged within the 
heart as a result of one’s previous fruitive work 
within the three modes of material nature. 
When the heart is thus purified one can directly 
perceive both the Supreme Lord and one’s self 
as transcendental entities. Thus one becomes 
perfect in spiritual understanding through di-
rect experience, just as one can directly experi-
ence the sunshine through normal, heal thy vi-
sion. (40)  

King Nimi said:  O great sages, please speak 
to us about the process of karma -yoga. Purified 
by this process of dedicating one’s practical 
work to the Supreme, a person can very quickly 
free himself from all material activities, even in 
this life, and thus enjoy pure life on the tran-
scendental platform. (41) Once in the past, in 
the presence of my father, Mahārāja Ik ṣvāku, I 
placed a similar question before four great 
sages who were sons of Lord Brahmā. But they 
did not answer my question. Please explain the 
reason for this. (42)  

ŚrīĀvirhotra replied:  Prescribed duties, 
nonperformance of such duties, and forbidden 
activities are topics one can properly under-
stand through authorized study of the Vedic lit-
erature. This difficult subject matte r can never 
be understood by mundane speculation. The 
authorized Vedic literature is the sound incar-
nation of the Personality of Godhead Himself, 
and thus Vedic knowledge is perfect. Even the 
greatest learned scholars are bewildered in their 
attempts to un derstand the science of action if 
they neglect the authority of Vedic knowledge. 
(43) Childish and foolish people are attached to 
materialistic, fruitive activities, although the 
actual goal of life is to become free from such 
activities. Therefore, the Ve dic injunctions in-
directly lead one to the path of ultimate libera-
tion by first prescribing fruitive religious activ-
ities, just as a father promises his child candy 
so that the child will take his medicine. (44) If an ignorant person who has not conquered the 
material senses does not adhere to the Vedic in-
junctions, certainly he will engage in sinful and 
irreligious activities. Thus his reward will be 
repeated birth and death. (45) By executing 
without attachment the regulated activities pre-
scribed in the V edas, offering the results of 
such work to the Supreme Lord, one attains the 
perfection of freedom from the bondage of ma-
terial work. The material fruitive results offered 
in the revealed scriptures are not the actual goal 
of Vedic knowledge, but are meant  for stimu-
lating the interest of the performer. (46)  

One who desires to quickly cut the knot of 
false ego, which binds the spirit soul, should 
worship the Supreme Lord, Keśava, by the reg-
ulations found in Vedic literatures such as the 
tantras. (47) Having  obtained the mercy of his 
spiritual master, who reveals to the disciple the 
injunctions of Vedic scriptures, the devotee 
should worship the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead in the particular personal form of the 
Lord the devotee finds most attractive. (48) Af-
ter cleansing oneself, purifying the body by 
prāṇāyāma, bhūta -śuddhi and other processes, 
and marking the body with sacred tilaka for 
protection, one should sit in front of the Deity 
and worship the Supreme Personality of God-
head. (49) The devotee should  gather whatever 
ingredients for worshiping the Deity are avail-
able, make ready the offerings, the ground, his 
mind and the Deity, sprinkle his sitting place 
with water for purification and prepare the 
bathing water and other paraphernalia. The 
devotee sho uld then place the Deity in His 
proper place, both physically and within his 
own mind, concentrate his attention, and mark 
the Deity’s heart and other parts of the body 
with tilaka. Then he should offer worship with 
the appropriate mantra. (50 -51) One shou ld 
worship the Deity along with each of the limbs 
of His transcendental body, His weapons such 
as the Sudarśana cakra, His other bodily fea-
tures and His personal associates. One should 
worship each of these transcendental aspects of 
the Lord by its own man tra and with offerings 
of water to wash the feet, scented water, water 
to wash the mouth, water for bathing, fine 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

808 
 clothing and ornaments, fragrant oils, valuable 
necklaces, unbroken barleycorns, flower gar-
lands, incense and lamps. Having thus com-
pleted the  worship in all its aspects in accord-
ance with the prescribed regulations, one 
should then honor the Deity of Lord Hari with 
prayers and offer obeisances to Him by bowing 
down. (52 -53) The worshiper should become 
fully absorbed in meditating upon himself a s an 
eternal servant of the Lord and should thus per-
fectly worship the Deity, remembering that the 
Deity is also situated within his heart. Then he 
should take the remnants of the Deity’s para-
phernalia, such as flower garlands, upon his 
head and respectful ly put the Deity back in His 
own place, thus concluding the worship. (54) 
Thus the worshiper of the Supreme Lord should 
recognize that the Personality of Godhead is 
all-pervading and should worship Him through 
His presence in fire, the sun, water and other  
elements, in the heart of the guest one receives 
in one’s home, and also in one’s own heart. In 
this way the worshiper will very soon achieve 
liberation. (55)  

SB 11.4: Drumila Explains the Incarna-
tions of Godhead to King Nimi  

King Nimi said:  The Supreme  Personality 
of Godhead descends into the material world by 
His internal potency and according to His own 
desire. Therefore, please tell us about the vari-
ous pastimes Lord Hari has performed in the 
past, is performing now and will perform in this 
world in the future in His various incarnations. 
(1) 

Śrī Drumila said:  Anyone trying to enu-
merate or describe fully the unlimited qualities 
of the unlimited Supreme Lord has the intelli-
gence of a foolish child. Even if a great genius 
could somehow or other, after a time -consum-
ing endeavor, count all the particles of dust on 
the surface of the earth, such a genius could 
never count the attractive qualities of the Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is the reservoir of all 
potencies. (2) When the primeval Lord 
Nārāya ṇa creat ed His universal body out of the 
five elements produced from Himself and then entered within that universal body by His own 
plenary portion, He thus became known as the 
Puru ṣa. (3) Within His body are elaborately ar-
ranged the three planetary systems of thi s uni-
verse. His transcendental senses generate the 
knowledge -acquiring and active senses of all 
embodied beings. His consciousness generates 
conditioned knowledge, and His powerful 
breathing produces the bodily strength, sensory 
power and conditioned activ ities of the embod-
ied souls. He is the prime mover, through the 
agency of the material modes of goodness, pas-
sion and ignorance. And thus the universe is 
created, maintained and annihilated. (4) In the 
beginning, the original Supreme Personality 
manifested  the form of Brahmā through the ma-
terial mode of passion in order to create this 
universe. The Lord manifested His form as 
Viṣṇu, the Lord of sacrifice and protector of the 
twice -born brāhma ṇas and their religious du-
ties, to maintain the universe. And when  the 
universe is to be annihilated the same Supreme 
Lord employs the material mode of ignorance 
and manifests the form of Rudra. The created 
living beings are thus always subject to the 
forces of creation, maintenance and destruc-
tion. (5)  

Nara -Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi, who is perfectly peace-
ful and is the best of sages, was born as the son 
of Dharma and his wife Mūrti, the daughter of 
Dakṣa. Nara -Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi taught the devo-
tional service of the Lord, by which material 
work ceases, and He Himself perfectly prac-
ticed t his knowledge. He is living even today, 
His lotus feet served by the greatest of saintly 
persons. (6) King Indra became fearful, think-
ing that Nara -Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi would become very 
powerful by His severe penances and seize In-
dra’s heavenly kingdom. Thus Indr a, not know-
ing the transcendental glories of the incarnation 
of the Lord, sent Cupid and his associates to the 
Lord’s residence in Badarikāśrama. As the 
charming breezes of spring created a most sen-
suous atmosphere, Cupid himself attacked the 
Lord with arr ows in the form of the irresistible 
glances of beautiful women. (7) The primeval 
Lord, understanding the offense committed by 
Indra, did not become proud. Instead He spoke 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

809 
 laughingly as follows to Cupid and his follow-
ers, who were trembling before Him: “Do  not 
fear, O mighty Madana, O wind -god and wives 
of the demigods. Rather, please accept these 
gifts I am offering you and kindly sanctify My 
āśrama by your presence.” (8) My dear King 
Nimi, when Nara -Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi thus spoke, 
eradicating the fear of the dem igods, they 
bowed their heads with shame and addressed 
the Lord as follows, to invoke His compassion: 
Our dear Lord, You are always transcendental, 
beyond the reach of illusion, and therefore You 
are forever changeless. Your causeless com-
passion toward us,  despite our great offense, is 
not at all unusual in You, since innumerable 
great sages who are self -satisfied and free from 
anger and false pride bow down humbly at 
Your lotus feet. (9) The demigods place many 
obstacles on the path of those who worship Yo u 
to transcend the temporary abodes of the demi-
gods and reach Your supreme abode. Those 
who offer the demigods their assigned shares in 
sacrificial performances encounter no such ob-
stacles. But because You are the direct protec-
tor of Your devotee, he is ab le to step over the 
head of whatever obstacle the demigods place 
before him. (10) Some men practice severe 
penances to cross beyond our influence, which 
is like an immeasurable ocean with endless 
waves of hunger, thirst, heat, cold and the other 
conditions  brought about by the passing of 
time, such as the sensuous wind and the urges 
of the tongue and sex organs. Nevertheless, alt-
hough crossing this ocean of sense gratification 
through severe penances, such persons fool-
ishly drown in a cow’s hoofprint when c on-
quered by useless anger. Thus they exhaust the 
benefit of their difficult austerities in vain. (11) 
While the demigods were thus praising the Su-
preme Lord, the all -powerful Lord suddenly 
manifested before their eyes many women, 
who were astonishingly gor geous, decorated 
with fine clothes and ornaments, and all faith-
fully engaging in the Lord’s service. (12) When 
the followers of the demigods gazed upon the 
fascinating mystic beauty of the women created 
by Nara -Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi and smelled the fra-
grance of the ir bodies, the minds of these fol-lowers became bewildered. Indeed, upon see-
ing the beauty and magnificence of such 
women, the representatives of the demigods 
were completely diminished in their own opu-
lence. (13) The Supreme Lord of lords then 
smiled sligh tly and told the representatives of 
heaven, who were bowing down before Him, 
“Please choose one of these women, whomever 
you find suitable for you. She will become the 
ornament of the heavenly planets.” (14) Vibrat-
ing the sacred syllable om, the servants o f the 
demigods selected Urvaśī, the best of the Ap-
sarās. Placing her in front of them out of re-
spect, they returned to the heavenly planets. 
(15) The servants of the demigods reached the 
assembly of Indra, and thus, while all the resi-
dents of the three hea vens listened, they ex-
plained to Indra the supreme power of 
Nārāya ṇa. When Indra heard of Nara -Nārāya ṇa 
Ṛṣi and became aware of his offense, he was 
both frightened and astonished. (16)  

The infallible Supreme Personality of God-
head, Vi ṣṇu, has descended in to this world by 
His various partial incarnations such as Lord 
Haṁsa [the swan], Dattātreya, the four 
Kumāras and our own father, the mighty 
Ṛṣabhadeva. By such incarnations, the Lord 
teaches the science of self -realization for the 
benefit of the whole uni verse. In His appear-
ance as Hayagrīva He killed the demon Madhu 
and thus brought the Vedas back from the hell-
ish planet Pātālaloka. (17) In His appearance as 
a fish, the Lord protected Satyavrata Manu, the 
earth and her valuable herbs. He protected them 
from the waters of annihilation. As a boar, the 
Lord killed Hira ṇyākṣa, the son of Diti, while 
delivering the earth from the universal waters. 
And as a tortoise, He lifted Mandara Mountain 
on His back so that nectar could be churned 
from the ocean. The Lord saved the surrendered 
king of the elephants, Gajendra, who was suf-
fering terrible distress from the grips of a croc-
odile. (18)  

The Lord also delivered the tiny ascetic 
sages called the Vālakhilyas when they fell into 
the water in a cow’s hoofprint and Ind ra was 
laughing at them. The Lord then saved Indra 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

810 
 when Indra was covered by darkness due to the 
sinful reaction for killing V ṛtrāsura. When the 
wives of the demigods were trapped in the pal-
ace of the demons without any shelter, the Lord 
saved them. In His  incarnation as N ṛsiṁha, the 
Lord killed Hira ṇyakaśipu, the king of demons, 
to free the saintly devotees from fear. (19) The 
Supreme Lord regularly takes advantage of the 
wars between the demons and demigods to kill 
the leaders of the demons. The Lord thus  en-
courages the demigods by protecting the uni-
verse through His various incarnations during 
the reigns of each Manu. The Lord also ap-
peared as Vāmana and took the earth away 
from Bali Mahārāja on the plea of begging 
three steps of land. The Lord then retur ned the 
entire world to the sons of Aditi. (20) Lord 
Paraśurāma appeared in the family of Bh ṛgu as 
a fire that burned to ashes the dynasty of 
Haihaya. Thus Lord Paraśurāma rid the earth of 
all kṣatriyas twenty -one times. The same Lord 
appeared as Rāmacandr a, the husband of 
Sītādevī, and thus He killed the ten -headed 
Rāva ṇa, along with all the soldiers of La ṅkā. 
May that Śrī Rāma, whose glories destroy the 
contamination of the world, be always victori-
ous. (21) To diminish the burden of the earth, 
the unborn Lord will take birth in the Yadu 
dynasty and perform feats impossible even for 
the demigods. Propounding speculative philos-
ophy, the Lord, as Buddha, will bewilder the 
unworthy performers of Vedic sacrifices. And 
as Kalki the Lord will kill all the low -class men 
posing as rulers at the end of the Age of Kali. 
(22) O mighty -armed King, there are innumer-
able appearances and activities of the Supreme 
Lord of the universe similar to those I have al-
ready mentioned. In fact, the glories of the Su-
preme Lord are un limited. (23)  

SB 11.5: Nārada Concludes His Teach-
ings to Vasudeva  

King Nimi further inquired:  My dear 
Yogendras, all of you are most perfect in 
knowledge of the science of the self. Therefore, 
kindly explain to me the destination of those 
who for the mos t part never worship the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who are unable to quench their material desires and who 
are not in control of their own selves. (1)  

Śrī Camasa said:  Each of the four social or-
ders, headed by the brāhma ṇas, was born 
through d ifferent combinations of the modes of 
nature, from the face, arms, thighs and feet of 
the Supreme Lord in His universal form. Thus 
the four spiritual orders were also generated. 
(2) If any of the members of the four var ṇas and 
four āśramas fail to worship or intentionally 
disrespect the Personality of Godhead, who is 
the source of their own creation, they will fall 
down from their position into a hellish state of 
life. (3) There are many persons who have little 
opportunity to take part in discussions about the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, and 
thus it is difficult for them to chant His infalli-
ble glories. Persons such as women, śūdras and 
other fallen classes always deserve the mercy 
of great personalities like yourself. (4) On the 
other hand, brāhma ṇas, members of the royal 
order and vaiśyas, even after being allowed to 
approach the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord, 
Hari, by receiving the second birth of Vedic in-
itiation, can become bewildered and adopt var-
ious materialistic philosophies. (5) Ignorant of 
the art of work, such arrogantly proud fools, en-
chanted and enlivened by the sweet words of 
the Vedas, pose as learned authorities and offer 
flattering entreaties to the demigods. (6) Due to 
the influence of the mode of passion, the mate-
rialistic follow ers of the Vedas become subject 
to violent desires and are excessively lusty. 
Their anger is like that of a snake. Deceitful, 
overly proud, and sinful in their behavior, they 
mock the devotees who are dear to Lord 
Acyuta. (7) The materialistic followers of  Ve-
dic rituals, giving up the worship of the Lord, 
instead practically worship their wives, and 
thus their homes become dedicated to sex life. 
Such materialistic householders encourage one 
another in such whimsical behavior. Under-
standing ritualistic sacri fice as a necessary item 
for bodily maintenance, they perform unau-
thorized ceremonies in which there is no distri-
bution of foodstuffs or charity to the brāhma ṇas 
and other respectable persons. Instead, they 
cruelly slaughter animals such as goats without 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

811 
 any understanding of the dark consequences of 
their activities. (8) The intelligence of cruel -
minded persons is blinded by false pride based 
on great wealth, opulence, prestigious family 
connections, education, renunciation, personal 
beauty, physical streng th and successful perfor-
mance of Vedic rituals. Being intoxicated with 
this false pride, such cruel persons blaspheme 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His 
devotees. (9) The Personality of Godhead is 
eternally situated within the heart of every em-
bodied being; still the Lord remains situated 
apart, just as the sky, which is all -pervading, 
does not mix with any material object. Thus the 
Lord is the supreme worshipable object and the 
absolute controller of everything. He is elabo-
rately glorified in the V edic literature, but those 
who are bereft of intelligence do not like to hear 
about Him. They prefer to waste their time dis-
cussing their own mental concoctions, which 
inevitably deal with gross material sense grati-
fication such as sex life and meat -eating . (10) 
In this material world the conditioned soul is 
always inclined to sex, meat -eating and intoxi-
cation. Therefore, religious scriptures never ac-
tually encourage such activities. Although the 
scriptural injunctions provide for sex through 
sacred marriag e, for meat -eating through sacri-
ficial offerings and for intoxication through the 
acceptance of ritual cups of wine, such ceremo-
nies are meant for the ultimate purpose of re-
nunciation. (11) The only proper fruit of ac-
quired wealth is religiosity, on the ba sis of 
which one can acquire a philosophical under-
standing of life that eventually matures into di-
rect perception of the Absolute Truth and thus 
liberation from all suffering. Materialistic per-
sons, however, utilize their wealth simply for 
the advancement of their family situation. They 
fail to see that insurmountable death will soon 
destroy the frail material body. (12) According 
to the Vedic injunctions, when wine is offered 
in sacrificial ceremonies it is later to be con-
sumed by smelling, and not by drin king. Simi-
larly, the sacrificial offering of animals is per-
mitted, but there is no provision for wide -scale 
animal slaughter. Religious sex life is also per-
mitted, but only in marriage for begetting chil-
dren, and not for sensuous exploitation of the body. Unfortunately, however, the less intelli-
gent materialists cannot understand that their 
duties in life should be performed purely on the 
spiritual platform. (13)  

Those sinful persons who are ignorant of ac-
tual religious principles, yet consider them-
selves to be completely pious, without com-
punction commit violence against innocent an-
imals who are fully trusting in them. In their 
next lives, such sinful persons will be eaten by 
the same creatures they have killed in this 
world. (14) The conditioned souls bec ome 
completely bound in affection to their own 
corpselike material bodies and their relatives 
and paraphernalia. In such a proud and foolish 
condition, the conditioned souls envy other liv-
ing entities as well as the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Hari, wh o resides in the heart of 
all beings. Thus enviously offending others, the 
conditioned souls gradually fall down into hell. 
(15) Those who have not achieved knowledge 
of the Absolute Truth, yet who are still beyond 
the darkness of complete ignorance, gener ally 
follow the threefold path of pious material life, 
namely religiosity, economic development and 
sense gratification. Not having time to reflect 
on any higher purpose, they become the killers 
of their own soul. (16) The killers of the soul 
are never pea ceful, because they consider that 
human intelligence is ultimately meant for ex-
panding material life. Thus neglecting their 
real, spiritual duties, they are always in distress. 
They are filled with great hopes and dreams, 
but unfortunately these are always  destroyed by 
the inevitable march of time. (17) Those who 
have turned away from the Supreme Lord, 
Vāsudeva, being under the spell of the Lord’s 
illusory energy, are eventually forced to give up 
their so -called homes, children, friends, wives 
and lovers, w hich were all created by the illu-
sory potency of the Supreme Lord, and enter 
against their will into the darkest regions of the 
universe. (18)  

King Nimi inquired:  In what colors and 
forms does the Supreme Personality of God-
head appear in each of the diffe rent ages, and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

812 
 with what names and by what types of regula-
tive principles is the Lord worshiped in human 
society? (19)  

Śrī Karabhājana replied:  In each of the 
four yugas, or agesK ṛta, Tretā, Dvāpara and 
KaliLord Keśava appears with various com-
plexions, na mes and forms and is thus wor-
shiped by various processes. (20) In Satya -yuga 
the Lord is white and four -armed, has matted 
locks and wears a garment of tree bark. He car-
ries a black deerskin, a sacred thread, prayer 
beads and the rod and waterpot of a brahm acārī. 
(21) People in Satya -yuga are peaceful, nonen-
vious, friendly to every creature and steady in 
all situations. They worship the Supreme Per-
sonality by austere meditation and by internal 
and external sense control. (22) In Satya -yuga 
the Lord is glorif ied by the names Ha ṁsa, Su-
parṇa, Vaiku ṇṭha, Dharma, Yogeśvara, Amala, 
Īśvara, Puru ṣa, Avyakta and Paramātmā. (23) 
In Tretā -yuga the Lord appears with a red com-
plexion. He has four arms, golden hair, and 
wears a triple belt representing initiation into 
each of the three Vedas. Embodying the 
knowledge of worship by sacrificial perfor-
mance, which is contained in the Ṛg, Sāma and 
Yajur Vedas, His symbols are the ladle, spoon 
and other implements of sacrifice. (24) In 
Tretā -yuga, those members of human society 
who are fixed in religiosity and are sincerely in-
terested in achieving the Absolute Truth wor-
ship Lord Hari, who contains within Himself all 
the demigods. The Lord is worshiped by the rit-
uals of sacrifice taught in the three Vedas. (25) 
In Tretā -yuga the Lo rd is glorified by the names 
Viṣṇu, Yajña, P ṛśnigarbha, Sarvadeva, 
Urukrama, V ṛṣākapi, Jayanta and Urugāya. 
(26) In Dvāpara -yuga the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead appears with a dark blue complex-
ion, wearing yellow garments. The Lord’s tran-
scendental body  is marked in this incarnation 
with Śrīvatsa and other distinctive ornaments, 
and He manifests His personal weapons. (27) 
My dear King, in Dvāpara -yuga men who de-
sire to know the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who is the supreme enjoyer, worship Him 
in the mood of honoring a great king, following 
the prescriptions of both the Vedas and tantras. (28) “Obeisances to You, O Supreme Lord 
Vāsudeva, and to Your forms of Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha. O Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, all obeisances unto Yo u. 
O Lord Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi, O creator of the universe, 
best of personalities, master of this cosmos and 
original form of the universe, O Supersoul of 
all created entities, all homage unto You.” (29 -
30) O King, in this way people in Dvāpara -
yuga glorified the L ord of the universe. In Kali -
yuga also people worship the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead by following various regula-
tions of the revealed scriptures. Now kindly 
hear of this from me. (31)  

In the Age of Kali, intelligent persons per-
form congregational chan ting to worship the 
incarnation of Godhead who constantly sings 
the names of K ṛṣṇa. Although His complexion 
is not blackish, He is K ṛṣṇa Himself. He is ac-
companied by His associates, servants, weap-
ons and confidential companions. (32) My dear 
Lord, You are  the Mahā -puruṣa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, and I worship Your lo-
tus feet, which are the only eternal object of 
meditation. Those feet destroy the embarrass-
ing conditions of material life and freely award 
the greatest desire of the soul, the atta inment of 
pure love of Godhead. My dear Lord, Your lo-
tus feet are the shelter of all holy places and of 
all saintly authorities in the line of devotional 
service and are honored by powerful demigods 
like Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā. My Lord, 
You are so kind that You willingly protect all 
those who simply bow down to You with re-
spect, and thus You mercifully relieve all the 
distress of Your servants. In conclusion, my 
Lord, Your lotus feet are actually the suitable 
boat for crossing over the ocean of birth and  
death, and therefore even Lord Brahmā and 
Lord Śiva seek shelter at Your lotus feet.” (33) 
O Mahā -puruṣa, I worship Your lotus feet. You 
gave up the association of the goddess of for-
tune and all her opulence, which is most diffi-
cult to renounce and is han kered after by even 
the great demigods. Being the most faithful fol-
lower of the path of religion, You thus left for 
the forest in obedience to a brāhma ṇa’s curse. 
Out of sheer mercifulness You chased after the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

813 
 fallen conditioned souls, who are always in pu r-
suit of the false enjoyment of illusion, and at 
the same time engaged in searching out Your 
own desired object, Lord Śyāmasundara. (34)  

Thus, O King, the Supreme Lord Hari is the 
giver of all desirable benefits of life. Intelligent 
human beings worship t he particular forms and 
names that the Lord manifests in different ages. 
(35) Those who are actually advanced in 
knowledge are able to appreciate the essential 
value of this Age of Kali. Such enlightened per-
sons worship Kali -yuga because in this fallen 
age all perfection of life can easily be achieved 
by the performance of sa ṅkīrtana. (36) Indeed, 
there is no higher possible gain for embodied 
souls forced to wander throughout the material 
world than the Supreme Lord’s sa ṅkīrtana 
movement, by which one can a ttain the su-
preme peace and free oneself from the cycle of 
repeated birth and death. (37) My dear King, 
the inhabitants of Satya -yuga and other ages ea-
gerly desire to take birth in this Age of Kali, 
since in this age there will be many devotees of 
the Supr eme Lord, Nārāya ṇa. These devotees 
will appear in various places but will be espe-
cially numerous in South India. O master of 
men, in the Age of Kali those persons who 
drink the waters of the holy rivers of Dravi ḍa-
deśa, such as the Tāmrapar ṇī, Krtamālā, 
Payasvinī, the extremely pious Kāverī and the 
Pratīcī Mahānadī, will almost all be pure-
hearted devotees of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Vāsudeva. (38 -40) 

O King, one who has given up all material 
duties and has taken full shelter of the lotus feet 
of Mukunda, who offers shelter to all, is not in-
debted to the demigods, great sages, ordinary 
living beings, relatives, friends, mankind or 
even one’s forefathers who have passed away. 
Since all such classes of living entities are part 
and parcel of the Supr eme Lord, one who has 
surrendered to the Lord’s service has no need 
to serve such persons separately. (41) One who 
has thus given up all other engagements and has 
taken full shelter at the lotus feet of Hari, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, is very dea r 
to the Lord. Indeed, if such a surrendered soul accidentally commits some sinful activity, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated 
within everyone’s heart, immediately takes 
away the reaction to such sin. (42)  

Nārada Muni said:  Having thus hea rd the 
science of devotional service, Nimi, the King 
of Mithilā, felt extremely satisfied and, along 
with the sacrificial priests, offered respectful 
worship to the sagacious sons of Jayantī. (43) 
The perfect sages then disappeared before the 
eyes of every one present. King Nimi faithfully 
practiced the principles of spiritual life he had 
learned from them, and thus he achieved the su-
preme goal of life. (44) O greatly fortunate 
Vasudeva, simply apply with faith these princi-
ples of devotional service which yo u have 
heard, and thus, being free from material asso-
ciation, you will attain the Supreme. (45) In-
deed, the whole world has become filled with 
the glories of you and your good wife because 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Hari, has taken the positi on of your son. (46) 
My dear Vasudeva, you and your good wife 
Devakī have manifested great transcendental 
love for K ṛṣṇa, accepting Him as your son. In-
deed, you are always seeing the Lord, embrac-
ing Him, speaking with Him, resting with Him, 
sitting togethe r with Him and taking your meals 
with Him. By such affectionate and intimate as-
sociation with the Lord, undoubtedly both of 
you have completely purified your hearts. In 
other words, you are already perfect. (47) Inim-
ical kings like Śiśupāla, Pau ṇḍraka and Śālva 
were always thinking about Lord K ṛṣṇa. Even 
while they were lying down, sitting or engaging 
in other activities, they enviously meditated 
upon the bodily movements of the Lord, His 
sporting pastimes, His loving glances upon His 
devotees, and other at tractive features dis-
played by the Lord. Being thus always ab-
sorbed in K ṛṣṇa, they achieved spiritual libera-
tion in the Lord’s own abode. What then can be 
said of the benedictions offered to those who 
constantly fix their minds on Lord K ṛṣṇa in a 
favorable , loving mood? (48) Do not think of 
Kṛṣṇa as an ordinary child, because He is the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, inexhausti-
ble and the Soul of all beings. The Lord has 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

814 
 concealed His inconceivable opulences and is 
thus outwardly appearing to be an ordinary  hu-
man being. (49) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead descended to kill the demoniac kings 
who were the burden of the earth and to protect 
the saintly devotees. However, both the de-
mons and the devotees are awarded liberation 
by the Lord’s mercy. Thus, His  transcendental 
fame has spread throughout the universe. (50)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  Having 
heard this narration, the greatly fortunate 
Vasudeva was completely struck with wonder. 
Thus he and his most blessed wife Devakī gave 
up all illusion and a nxiety that had entered their 
hearts. (51) Anyone who meditates on this pi-
ous historical narration with fixed attention will 
purify himself of all contamination in this very 
life and thus achieve the highest spiritual per-
fection. (52)  

SB 11.6: The Yadu Dy nasty Retires to 
Prabhāsa  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Lord Brahmā 
then set off for Dvārakā, accompanied by his 
own sons as well as by the demigods and the 
great Prajāpatis. Lord Śiva, the bestower of 
auspiciousness to all living beings, also went, 
surrounde d by many ghostly creatures. (1) The 
powerful Lord Indra, along with the Maruts, 
Ādityas, Vasus, Aśvinīs, Ṛbhus, A ṅgirās, Ru-
dras, Viśvedevas, Sādhyas, Gandharvas, Ap-
sarās, Nāgas, Siddhas, Cāra ṇas, Guhyakas, the 
great sages and forefathers and the Vidyādhar as 
and Kinnaras, arrived at the city of Dvārakā, 
hoping to see Lord K ṛṣṇa. By His transcenden-
tal form, K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, enchanted 
all human beings and spread His own fame 
throughout the worlds. The Lord’s glories de-
stroy all contamination within th e universe. (2 -
4) In that resplendent city of Dvārakā, rich with 
all superior opulences, the demigods beheld 
with unsatiated eyes the wonderful form of Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa. (5) The demigods covered the Supreme 
Lord of the universe with flower garlands 
brought from t he gardens of heaven. Then they 
praised Him, the best of the Yadu dynasty, with statements containing charming words and 
ideas. (6)  

The demigods began to speak:  Our dear 
Lord, advanced mystic yogīs, striving for liber-
ation from the severe bondage of mater ial 
work, meditate with great devotion upon Your 
lotus feet within their hearts. Dedicating our in-
telligence, senses, vital air, mind and power of 
speech to Your Lordship, we demigods bow 
down at Your lotus feet. (7) O unconquerable 
Lord, You engage Your i llusory energy, com-
posed of three modes, to unleash, maintain and 
devastate the inconceivable manifest cosmos, 
all within Your own self. As the supreme su-
perintendent of māyā, You appear to be situated 
in the interaction of the modes of nature; how-
ever, Yo u are never affected by material activ-
ities. In fact, You are directly engaged in Your 
own eternal, spiritual bliss, and thus You can-
not be accused of any material infection. (8) O 
greatest of all, those whose consciousness is 
polluted by illusion cannot p urify themselves 
merely by ordinary worship, study of the Ve-
das, charity, austerity and ritual activities. Our 
Lord, those pure souls who have developed a 
powerful transcendental faith in Your glories 
achieve a purified state of existence that can 
never be  attained by those lacking such faith. 
(9) Great sages, desiring the highest benefit in 
life, always cherish Your lotus feet within their 
hearts, which are melted by love for You. Sim-
ilarly, Your self -controlled devotees, desiring 
to cross beyond the mater ial kingdom of 
heaven to achieve opulence equal to Yours, 
worship Your lotus feet in the morning, at noon 
and in the evening. Thus, they meditate upon 
Your Lordship in Your quadruple expansion. 
Your lotus feet are just like a blazing fire that 
burns to ash es all the inauspicious desires for 
material sense gratification. (10) Those about 
to offer oblations into the fire of sacrifice in ac-
cordance with the Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma Vedas 
meditate on Your lotus feet. Similarly, the prac-
titioners of transcendental yog a meditate upon 
Your lotus feet, hoping for knowledge about 
Your divine mystic potency, and the most ele-
vated pure devotees perfectly worship Your lo-
tus feet, desiring to cross beyond Your illusory 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

815 
 potency. (11) O almighty Lord, You are so kind 
to Your ser vants that You have accepted the 
withered flower garland that we have placed on 
Your chest. Since the goddess of fortune makes 
her abode on Your transcendental chest, she 
will undoubtedly become agitated, like a jeal-
ous co -wife, upon seeing our offering al so 
dwelling there. Yet You are so merciful that 
You neglect Your eternal consort Lak ṣmī and 
accept our offering as most excellent worship. 
O merciful Lord, may Your lotus feet always 
act as a blazing fire to consume the inauspi-
cious desires within our hear ts. (12) O omnipo-
tent Lord, in Your incarnation as Trivikrama, 
You raised Your leg like a flagpole to break the 
shell of the universe, allowing the holy Ganges 
to flow down, like a banner of victory, in three 
branches throughout the three planetary sys-
tems . By three mighty steps of Your lotus feet, 
Your Lordship captured Bali Mahārāja, along 
with his universal kingdom. Your lotus feet in-
spire fear in the demons by driving them down 
to hell and fearlessness among Your devotees 
by elevating them to the perfec tion of heavenly 
life. We are sincerely trying to worship You, 
our Lord; therefore may Your lotus feet kindly 
free us from all of our sinful reactions. (13) You 
are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
transcendental entity who is superior to both 
mater ial nature and the enjoyer of nature. May 
Your lotus feet bestow transcendental pleasure 
upon us. All of the great demigods, beginning 
with Brahmā, are embodied living entities. 
Struggling painfully with one another under the 
strict control of Your time fa ctor, they are just 
like bulls dragged by ropes tied through their 
pierced noses. (14) You are the cause of the cre-
ation, maintenance and destruction of this uni-
verse. As time, You regulate the subtle and 
manifest states of material nature and control 
every living being. As the threefold wheel of 
time You diminish all things by Your imper-
ceptible actions, and thus You are the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. (15) My dear Lord, the 
original puru ṣa-avatāra, Mahā -Viṣṇu, acquires 
His creative potency from You. T hus with in-
fallible energy He impregnates material nature, 
producing the mahat -tattva. Then the mahat -tattva, the amalgamated material energy, en-
dowed with the potency of the Lord, produces 
from itself the primeval golden egg of the uni-
verse, which is cove red by various layers of 
material elements. (16) O Lord, You are the su-
preme creator of this universe and the ultimate 
controller of all moving and nonmoving living 
entities. You are H ṛṣīkeśa, the supreme control-
ler of all sensory activity, and thus You ne ver 
become contaminated or entangled in the 
course of Your supervision of the infinite sen-
sory activities within the material creation. On 
the other hand, other living entities, even yogīs 
and philosophers, are disturbed and frightened 
simply by rememberin g the material objects 
that they have supposedly renounced in their 
pursuit of enlightenment. (17) My Lord, You 
are living with sixteen thousand exquisitely 
beautiful, aristocratic wives. By their irresisti-
ble coy and smiling glances and by their lovely 
arching eyebrows, they send You messages of 
eager conjugal love. But they are completely 
unable to disturb the mind and senses of Your 
Lordship. (18) The nectar -bearing rivers of dis-
cussions about You, and also the holy rivers 
generated from the bathing of Y our lotus feet, 
are able to destroy all contamination within the 
three worlds. Those who are striving for purifi-
cation associate with the holy narrations of 
Your glories by hearing them with their ears, 
and they associate with the holy rivers flowing 
from Your lotus feet by physically bathing in 
them. (19)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī continued:  After 
Brahmā, along with Lord Śiva and the other 
demigods, thus offered prayers to the Supreme 
Lord, Govinda, Lord Brahmā situated himself 
in the sky and addressed the Lord  as follows. 
(20) 

Lord Brahmā said:  My dear Lord, previ-
ously we requested You to remove the burden 
of the earth. O unlimited Personality of God-
head, that request has certainly been fulfilled. 
(21) My Lord, You have reestablished the prin-
ciples of religion  among pious men who are al-
ways firmly bound to the truth. You have also 
distributed Your glories all over the world, and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

816 
 thus the whole world can be purified by hearing 
about You. (22) Descending into the dynasty of 
King Yadu, You have manifested Your uni que 
transcendental form, and for the benefit of the 
entire universe You have executed magnani-
mous transcendental activities. (23) My dear 
Lord, those pious and saintly persons who in 
the Age of Kali hear about Your transcendental 
activities and also glorif y them will easily cross 
over the darkness of the age. (24) O Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, O my Lord, You have 
descended into the Yadu dynasty, and thus You 
have spent one hundred twenty -five autumns 
with Your devotees. (25) My dear Lord, there 
is nothi ng remaining at this time for Your Lord-
ship to do on behalf of the demigods. You have 
already withdrawn Your dynasty by the curse 
of the brāhma ṇas. O Lord, You are the basis of 
everything, and if You so desire, kindly return 
now to Your own abode in the sp iritual world. 
At the same time, we humbly beg that You al-
ways protect us. We are Your humble servants, 
and on Your behalf we are managing the uni-
versal situation. We, along with our planets and 
followers, require Your constant protection. 
(26-27) 

The Sup reme Lord said:  O lord of the 
demigods, Brahmā, I understand your prayers 
and request. Having removed the burden of the 
earth, I have executed everything that was re-
quired on your behalf. (28) That very Yādava 
dynasty in which I appeared became greatly 
magnified in opulence, especially in their phys-
ical strength and courage, to the extent that they 
threatened to devour the whole world. There-
fore, I have stopped them, just as the shore 
holds back the great ocean. (29) If I were to 
leave this world without wi thdrawing the 
overly proud members of the Yadu dynasty, the 
whole world would be destroyed by the deluge 
of their unlimited expansion. (30) Now due to 
the brāhma ṇas’ curse, the annihilation of My 
family has already begun. O sinless Brahmā, 
when this annihi lation is finished and I am en-
route to Vaiku ṇṭha, I will pay a small visit to 
your abode. (31)  
 ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus ad-
dressed by the Lord of the universe, the self -
born Brahmā fell down in obeisances at the lo-
tus feet of the Lord. Surrounded by all the dem-
igods, the great Brahmā then returned to his 
personal abode. (32) Thereafter, the Personality 
of Godhead observed that tremendous disturb-
ances were taking place in the holy city of 
Dvārakā. Thus the Lord spoke to the assembled 
senior members of the Yadu dynasty as fol-
lows. (33)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  Our dynasty has been cursed by the 
brāhma ṇas. Such a curse is impossible to coun-
teract, and thus great disturbances are appear-
ing everywhere around us. (34) My dear re-
spected elder s, we must not remain any longer 
in this place if we wish to keep our lives intact. 
Let us go this very day to the most pious place 
Prabhāsa. We have no time to delay. (35) Once, 
the moon was afflicted with consumption be-
cause of the curse of Dak ṣa, but ju st by taking 
bath at Prabhāsa -kṣetra, the moon was immedi-
ately freed from his sinful reaction and again 
resumed the waxing of his phases. (36) By 
bathing at Prabhāsa -kṣetra, by offering sacri-
fice there to placate the forefathers and demi-
gods, by feeding th e worshipable brāhma ṇas 
with various delicious foodstuffs and by be-
stowing opulent gifts upon them as the most 
suitable candidates for charity, we will cer-
tainly cross over these terrible dangers through 
such acts of charity, just as one can cross over 
a great ocean in a suitable boat. (37 -38) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O favorite son of 
the Kurus, thus advised by the Personality of 
Godhead, the Yādavas made up their minds to 
go to that holy place, Prabhāsa -kṣetra, and thus 
yoked their horses to their chariots . (39) My 
dear King, Uddhava was a constantly faithful 
follower of Lord K ṛṣṇa. Upon seeing the immi-
nent departure of the Yādavas, hearing from 
them of the Lord’s instructions and taking note 
of the fearful omens, he approached the Person-
ality of Godhead in  a private place. He bowed 
down with his head at the lotus feet of the su-
preme controller of the universe and with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

817 
 folded hands addressed Him as follows. (40 -
41) 

Śrī Uddhava said:  O my Lord, O supreme 
God among all the demigods, real piety is in-
voked simp ly by hearing and chanting Your 
transcendental glories. My Lord, it appears that 
You will now withdraw Your dynasty, and thus 
You Yourself will finally give up Your pas-
times within this universe. You are the supreme 
controller and the master of all mystic power. 
But although You are fully capable of counter-
acting the brāhma ṇas’ curse against Your dyn-
asty, You are not doing so, and Your disappear-
ance is imminent. (42)  

O Lord Keśava, my dear master, I cannot 
tolerate giving up Your lotus feet even for a 
fraction of a moment. I urge You to take me 
along with You to Your own abode. (43) O my 
dear K ṛṣṇa, Your pastimes are supremely aus-
picious for mankind and are an intoxicating 
beverage for the ears. Tasting such pastimes, 
people forget their desires for other t hings. (44) 
My dear Lord, You are the Supreme Soul, and 
thus You are most dear to us. We are Your dev-
otees, and how can we possibly reject You or 
live without You even for a moment? Whether 
we are lying down, sitting, walking, standing, 
bathing, enjoying r ecreation, eating or doing 
anything else, we are constantly engaged in 
Your service. (45) Simply by decorating our-
selves with the garlands, fragrant oils, clothes 
and ornaments that You have already enjoyed, 
and by eating the remnants of Your meals, we, 
Your servants, will indeed conquer Your illu-
sory energy. (46) Naked sages who seriously 
endeavor in spiritual practice, who have raised 
their semen upward, who are peaceful and sin-
less members of the renounced order, attain the 
spiritual abode called Brahman . (47) O greatest 
of mystics, although we are conditioned souls 
wandering on the path of fruitive work, we will 
certainly cross beyond the darkness of this ma-
terial world simply by hearing about Your 
Lordship in the association of Your devotees. 
Thus we ar e always remembering and glorify-
ing the wonderful things You do and the won-
derful things You say. We ecstatically recall Your amorous pastimes with Your confidential 
conjugal devotees and how You boldly smile 
and move about while engaged in such youthful 
pastimes. My dear Lord, Your loving pastimes 
are bewilderingly similar to the activities of or-
dinary people within this material world. (48 -
49) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O King Parīk ṣit, 
thus addressed, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, K ṛṣṇa, the son of De vakī, began to 
reply confidentially to His dear, unalloyed 
servant Uddhava. (50)  

SB 11.7: Lord K ṛṣṇa Instructs Uddhava  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: O greatly fortunate Uddhava, you have 
accurately revealed My desire to withdraw the 
Yadu dynas ty from the earth and return to My 
own abode in Vaiku ṇṭha. Thus Lord Brahmā, 
Lord Śiva and all other planetary rulers are now 
praying for Me to resume My residence in 
Vaiku ṇṭha. (1) Answering the prayer of Lord 
Brahmā, I descended within this world along 
with My plenary portion, Lord Baladeva, and 
performed various activities on behalf of the 
demigods. I have now completed My mission 
here. (2) Now due to the brāhma ṇas’ curse the 
Yadu dynasty will certainly perish by fighting 
among themselves; and on the sev enth day 
from today the ocean will rise up and inundate 
this city of Dvārakā. (3) O saintly Uddhava, in 
the near future I will abandon this earth. Then, 
being overwhelmed by the Age of Kali, the 
earth will be bereft of all piety. (4) My dear Ud-
dhava, you s hould not remain here on the earth 
once I have abandoned this world. My dear 
devotee, you are sinless, but in Kali -yuga the 
people will be addicted to all types of sinful ac-
tivities; therefore do not stay here. (5) Now you 
should completely give up all att achment to 
your personal friends and relatives and fix your 
mind on Me. Thus being always conscious of 
Me, you should observe all things with equal 
vision and wander throughout the earth. (6) My 
dear Uddhava, the material universe that you 
perceive through  your mind, speech, eyes, ears 
and other senses is an illusory creation that one 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

818 
 imagines to be real due to the influence of 
māyā. In fact, you should know that all of the 
objects of the material senses are temporary. (7) 
One whose consciousness is bewilde red by il-
lusion perceives many differences in value and 
meaning among material objects. Thus one en-
gages constantly on the platform of material 
good and evil and is bound by such concep-
tions. Absorbed in material duality, such a per-
son contemplates the per formance of compul-
sory duties, nonperformance of such duties and 
performance of forbidden activities. (8) There-
fore, bringing all your senses under control and 
thus subduing the mind, you should see the en-
tire world as situated within the self, who is ex-
panded everywhere, and you should also see 
this individual self within Me, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. (9) Being fully en-
dowed with conclusive knowledge of the Ve-
das and having realized the ultimate purpose of 
such knowledge in practice, you will be able to 
perceive the pure self, and thus your mind will 
be satisfied. At that time you will become dear 
to all living beings, headed by the demigods, 
and you will never be hampered by any disturb-
ance in life. (10) One who has transcended ma-
terial good and evil automatically acts in ac-
cordance with religious injunctions and avoids 
forbidden activities. The self -realized person 
does this spontaneously, like an innocent child, 
and not because he is thinking in terms of ma-
terial good and evil. (11) One who is t he kind 
well-wisher of all living beings, who is peace-
ful and firmly fixed in knowledge and realiza-
tion, sees Me within all things. Such a person 
never again falls down into the cycle of birth 
and death. (12)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmi said:  O King, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
thus instructed His pure devotee Uddhava, who 
was eager to receive knowledge from the Lord. 
Uddhava then offered obeisances to the Lord 
and spoke as follows. (13)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Lord, You 
alone award the resu lts of yoga practice, and 
You are so kind that by Your own influence 
You distribute the perfection of yoga to Your devotee. Thus You are the Supreme Soul who 
is realized through yoga, and it is You who are 
the origin of all mystic power. For my supreme 
benefit You have explained the procedure for 
giving up the material world through the pro-
cess of sannyāsa, or renunciation. (14) My dear 
Lord, O Supreme Soul, for those whose minds 
are attached to sense gratification, and espe-
cially for those bereft of devoti on unto You, 
such renunciation of material enjoyment is 
most difficult to perform. That is my opinion. 
(15) O my Lord, I myself am most foolish be-
cause my consciousness is merged in the mate-
rial body and bodily relations, which are all 
manufactured by Your  illusory energy. Thus I 
am thinking, “I am this body, and all of these 
relatives are mine.” Therefore, my Lord, please 
instruct Your poor servant. Please tell me how 
I can very easily carry out Your instructions. 
(16) My dear Lord, You are the Absolute Tr uth, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and You 
reveal Yourself to Your devotees. Besides 
Your Lordship, I do not see anyone who can 
actually explain perfect knowledge to me. Such 
a perfect teacher is not to be found even among 
the demigods in heaven. Ind eed, all of the dem-
igods, headed by Lord Brahmā, are bewildered 
by Your illusory potency. They are conditioned 
souls who accept their own material bodies and 
bodily expansions to be the highest truth. (17) 
Therefore, O Lord, feeling weary of material 
life and tormented by its distresses, I now sur-
render unto You because You are the perfect 
master. You are the unlimited, all -knowing Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, whose spiritual 
abode in Vaiku ṇṭha is free from all disturb-
ances. In fact, You are known as Nār āyaṇa, the 
true friend of all living beings. (18)  

The Supreme Lord replied:  Generally 
those human beings who can expertly analyze 
the actual situation of the material world are 
able to raise themselves beyond the inauspi-
cious life of gross material gratif ication. (19) 
An intelligent person, expert in perceiving the 
world around him and in applying sound logic, 
can achieve real benefit through his own intel-
ligence. Thus sometimes one acts as one’s own 
instructing spiritual master. (20) In the human 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

819 
 form of life, those who are self -controlled and 
expert in the spiritual science of Sā ṅkhya can 
directly see Me along with all of My potencies. 
(21) In this world there are many kinds of cre-
ated bodiessome with one leg, others with two, 
three, four or more legs, an d still others with no 
legsbut of all these, the human form is actually 
dear to Me. (22) Although I, the Supreme Lord, 
can never be captured by ordinary sense per-
ception, those situated in human life may use 
their intelligence and other faculties of percep-
tion to directly search for Me through both ap-
parent and indirectly ascertained symptoms. 
(23) In this regard, sages cite a historical narra-
tion concerning the conversation between the 
greatly powerful King Yadu and an avadhūta. 
(24) Mahārāja Yadu once obs erved a certain 
brāhma ṇa avadhūta, who appeared to be quite 
young and learned, wandering about fearlessly. 
Being himself most learned in spiritual science, 
the King took the opportunity and inquired 
from him as follows. (25)  

Śrī Yadu said : O brāhma ṇa, I s ee that you 
are not engaged in any practical religious activ-
ity, and yet you have acquired a most expert un-
derstanding of all things and all people within 
this world. Kindly tell me, sir, how did you ac-
quire this extraordinary intelligence, and why 
are you  traveling freely throughout the world 
behaving as if you were a child? (26) Generally 
human beings work hard to cultivate religios-
ity, economic development, sense gratification 
and also knowledge of the soul, and their usual 
motive is to increase the dura tion of their lives, 
acquire fame and enjoy material opulence. (27) 
You, however, although capable, learned, ex-
pert, handsome and most eloquent, are not en-
gaged in doing anything, nor do you desire an-
ything; rather, you appear stupefied and mad-
dened as if you were a ghostly creature. (28) 
Although all people within the material world 
are burning in the great forest fire of lust and 
greed, you remain free and are not burned by 
that fire. You are just like an elephant who 
takes shelter from a forest fire by s tanding 
within the water of the Ganges River. (29) O 
brāhma ṇa, we see that you are devoid of any 
contact with material enjoyment and that you are traveling alone, without any companions or 
family members. Therefore, because we are 
sincerely inquiring from you, please tell us the 
cause of the great ecstasy that you are feeling 
within yourself. (30)  

Lord K ṛṣṇa continued:  The intelligent 
King Yadu, always respectful to the 
brāhma ṇas, waited with bowed head as the 
brāhma ṇa, pleased with the King’s attitude, be-
gan to reply. (31)  

The brāhma ṇa said:  My dear King, with 
my intelligence I have taken shelter of many 
spiritual masters. Having gained transcendental 
understanding from them, I now wander about 
the earth in a liberated condition. Please listen 
as I descri be them to you. (32) O King, I have 
taken shelter of twenty -four gurus, who are the 
following: the earth, air, sky, water, fire, moon, 
sun, pigeon and python; the sea, moth, honey-
bee, elephant and honey thief; the deer, the fish, 
the prostitute Pi ṅgalā, th e kurara bird and the 
child; and the young girl, arrow maker, serpent, 
spider and wasp. My dear King, by studying 
their activities I have learned the science of the 
self. (33 -35) Please listen, O son of Mahārāja 
Yayāti, O tiger among men, as I explain to y ou 
what I have learned from each of these gurus. 
(36) 

A sober person, even when harassed by 
other living beings, should understand that his 
aggressors are acting helplessly under the con-
trol of God, and thus he should never be dis-
tracted from progress on his own path. This rule 
I have learned from the earth. (37) A saintly 
person should learn from the mountain to de-
vote all his efforts to the service of others and 
to make the welfare of others the sole reason 
for his existence. Similarly, as the disciple o f 
the tree, he should learn to dedicate himself to 
others. (38)  

A learned sage should take his satisfaction 
in the simple maintenance of his existence and 
should not seek satisfaction through gratifying 
the material senses. In other words, one should 
care for the material body in such a way that 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

820 
 one’s higher knowledge is not destroyed and so 
that one’s speech and mind are not deviated 
from self -realization. (39) Even a transcenden-
talist is surrounded by innumerable material 
objects, which possess good and bad qualities. 
However, one who has transcended material 
good and evil should not become entangled 
even when in contact with the material objects; 
rather, he should act like the wind. (40) Alt-
hough a self -realized soul may live in various 
material bodies w hile in this world, experienc-
ing their various qualities and functions, he is 
never entangled, just as the wind which carries 
various aromas does not actually mix with 
them. (41)  

A thoughtful sage, even while living within 
a material body, should understa nd himself to 
be pure spirit soul. Similarly, one should see 
that the spirit soul enters within all forms of 
life, both moving and nonmoving, and that the 
individual souls are thus all -pervading. The 
sage should further observe that the Supreme 
Personality  of Godhead, as the Supersoul, is 
simultaneously present within all things. Both 
the individual soul and the Supersoul can be un-
derstood by comparing them to the nature of the 
sky: although the sky extends everywhere and 
everything rests within the sky, th e sky does not 
mix with anything, nor can it be divided by an-
ything. (42) Although the mighty wind blows 
clouds and storms across the sky, the sky is 
never implicated or affected by these activities. 
Similarly, the spirit soul is not actually changed 
or af fected by contact with the material nature. 
Although the living entity enters within a body 
made of earth, water and fire, and although he 
is impelled by the three modes of nature created 
by eternal time, his eternal spiritual nature is 
never actually affe cted. (43)  

O King, a saintly person is just like water 
because he is free from all contamination, gen-
tle by nature, and by speaking creates a beauti-
ful vibration like that of flowing water. Just by 
seeing, touching or hearing such a saintly per-
son, the li ving entity is purified, just as one is 
cleansed by contact with pure water. Thus a 
saintly person, just like a holy place, purifies all those who contact him because he always 
chants the glories of the Lord. (44)  

Saintly persons become powerful by execu-
tion of austerities. Their consciousness is un-
shakable because they do not try to enjoy any-
thing within the material world. Such naturally 
liberated sages accept foodstuffs that are of-
fered to them by destiny, and if by chance they 
happen to eat contaminate d food, they are not 
affected, just like fire, which burns up contam-
inated substances that are offered to it. (45) A 
saintly person, just like fire, sometimes appears 
in a concealed form and at other times reveals 
himself. For the welfare of the conditione d 
souls who desire real happiness, a saintly per-
son may accept the worshipable position of 
spiritual master, and thus like fire he burns to 
ashes all the past and future sinful reactions of 
his worshipers by mercifully accepting their of-
ferings. (46) Just as fire manifests differently in 
pieces of wood of different sizes and qualities, 
the omnipotent Supreme Soul, having entered 
the bodies of higher and lower life forms cre-
ated by His own potency, appears to assume the 
identity of each. (47)  

The various ph ases of one’s material life, 
beginning with birth and culminating in death, 
are all properties of the body and do not affect 
the soul, just as the apparent waxing and wan-
ing of the moon does not affect the moon itself. 
Such changes are enforced by the impe rceptible 
movements of time. (48) The flames of a fire 
appear and disappear at every moment, and yet 
this creation and destruction is not noticed by 
the ordinary observer. Similarly, the mighty 
waves of time flow constantly, like the power-
ful currents of a  river, and imperceptibly cause 
the birth, growth and death of innumerable ma-
terial bodies. And yet the soul, who is thus con-
stantly forced to change his position, cannot 
perceive the actions of time. (49)  

Just as the sun evaporates large quantities of 
water by its potent rays and later returns the wa-
ter to the earth in the form of rain, similarly, a 
saintly person accepts all types of material ob-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

821 
 jects with his material senses, and at the appro-
priate time, when the proper person has ap-
proached him to reque st them, he returns such 
material objects. Thus, both in accepting and 
giving up the objects of the senses, he is not en-
tangled. (50) Even when reflected in various 
objects, the sun is never divided, nor does it 
merge into its reflection. Only those with d ull 
brains would consider the sun in this way. Sim-
ilarly, although the soul is reflected through dif-
ferent material bodies, the soul remains undi-
vided and nonmaterial. (51)  

One should never indulge in excessive af-
fection or concern for anyone or anything;  oth-
erwise one will have to experience great suffer-
ing, just like the foolish pigeon. (52) There 
once was a pigeon who lived in the forest along 
with his wife. He had built a nest within a tree 
and lived there for several years in her com-
pany. (53) The two  pigeons were very much de-
voted to their household duties. Their hearts be-
ing tied together by sentimental affection, they 
were each attracted by the other’s glances, bod-
ily features and states of mind. Thus, they com-
pletely bound each other in affection. (54) 

Naively trusting in the future, they carried 
out their acts of resting, sitting, walking, stand-
ing, conversing, playing, eating and so forth as 
a loving couple among the trees of the forest. 
(55) Whenever she desired anything, O King, 
the she -pigeon would flatteringly cajole her 
husband, and he in turn would gratify her by 
faithfully doing whatever she wanted, even 
with great personal difficulty. Thus, he could 
not control his senses in her association. (56) 
Then the female pigeon experienced her firs t 
pregnancy. When the time arrived, the chaste 
lady delivered a number of eggs within the nest 
in the presence of her husband. (57) When the 
time was ripe, baby pigeons, with tender limbs 
and feathers created by the inconceivable po-
tencies of the Lord, wer e born from those eggs. 
(58) The two pigeons became most affectionate 
to their children and took great pleasure in lis-
tening to their awkward chirping, which 
sounded very sweet to the parents. Thus with 
love they began to raise the little birds who were bo rn of them. (59) The parent birds be-
came very joyful by observing the soft wings of 
their children, their chirping, their lovely inno-
cent movements around the nest and their at-
tempts to jump up and fly. Seeing their children 
happy, the parents were also ha ppy. (60) Their 
hearts bound to each other by affection, the 
foolish birds, completely bewildered by the il-
lusory energy of Lord Vi ṣṇu, continued to take 
care of the young offspring who had been born 
to them. (61) One day the two heads of the fam-
ily went o ut to find food for the children. Being 
very anxious to feed their offspring properly, 
they wandered all over the forest for a long 
time. (62) At that time a certain hunter who 
happened to be wandering through the forest 
saw the young pigeons moving about near their 
nest. Spreading out his net he captured them all. 
(63) The pigeon and his wife were always anx-
ious for the maintenance of their children, and 
they were wandering in the forest for that pur-
pose. Having obtained proper food, they now 
returned to t heir nest. (64) When the lady pi-
geon caught sight of her own children trapped 
within the hunter’s net, she was overwhelmed 
with anguish, and crying out, she rushed toward 
them as they cried out to her in return. (65)  

The lady pigeon had always allowed her self 
to be bound by the ropes of intense material af-
fection, and thus her mind was overwhelmed by 
anguish. Being in the grip of the illusory energy 
of the Lord, she completely forgot herself, and 
rushing forward to her helpless children, she 
was immediatel y bound in the hunter’s net. (66) 
Seeing his own children, who were more dear 
to him than life itself, fatally bound in the 
hunter’s net along with his dearmost wife, 
whom he considered equal in every way to him-
self, the poor male pigeon began to lament 
wretchedly. (67) The male pigeon said: Alas, 
just see how I am now destroyed! I am obvi-
ously a great fool, for I did not properly execute 
pious activities. I could not satisfy myself, nor 
could I fulfill the purpose of life. My dear fam-
ily, which was the bas is of my religiosity, eco-
nomic development and sense gratification, is 
now hopelessly ruined. (68) My wife and I 
were an ideal match. She always faithfully 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

822 
 obeyed me and in fact accepted me as her wor-
shipable deity. But now, seeing her children 
lost and he r home empty, she has left me behind 
and gone to heaven with our saintly children. 
(69) Now I am a wretched person living in an 
empty home. My wife is dead; my children are 
dead. Why should I possibly want to live? My 
heart is so pained by separation from my family 
that life itself has become simply suffering. 
(70) As the father pigeon wretchedly stared at 
his poor children trapped in the net and on the 
verge of death, pathetically struggling to free 
themselves, his mind went blank, and thus he 
himself fell  into the hunter’s net. (71) The cruel 
hunter, having fulfilled his desire by capturing 
the head pigeon, his wife and all of their chil-
dren, set off for his own home. (72) In this way, 
one who is too attached to family life becomes 
disturbed at heart. Like  the pigeon, he tries to 
find pleasure in mundane sex attraction. Busily 
engaged in maintaining his own family, the mi-
serly person is fated to suffer greatly, along 
with all his family members. (73) The doors of 
liberation are opened wide to one who has 
achieved human life. But if a human being 
simply devotes himself to family life like the 
foolish bird in this story, then he is to be con-
sidered as one who has climbed to a high place 
only to trip and fall down. (74)  

SB 11.8: The Story of Pi ṅgalā 

The saint ly brāhma ṇa said:  O King, the 
embodied living entity automatically experi-
ences unhappiness in heaven or hell. Similarly, 
happiness will also be experienced, even with-
out one’s seeking it. Therefore, a person of in-
telligent discrimination does not make any en-
deavor to obtain such material happiness. (1) 
Following the example of the python, one 
should give up material endeavors and accept 
for one’s maintenance food that comes of its 
own accord, whether such food be delicious or 
tasteless, ample or meager. (2)  If at any time 
food does not come, then a saintly person 
should fast for many days without making en-
deavor. He should understand that by God’s ar-
rangement he must fast. Thus, following the ex-
ample of the python, he should remain peaceful and patient. (3) A saintly person should remain 
peaceful and materially inactive, maintaining 
his body without much endeavor. Even though 
possessed of full sensual, mental and physical 
strength, a saintly person should not become 
active for material gain but rather should al-
ways remain alert to his actual self -interest. (4)  

A saintly sage is happy and pleasing in his 
external behavior, whereas internally he is most 
grave and thoughtful. Because his knowledge 
is immeasurable and unlimited he is never dis-
turbed, and thus in all respects he is like the 
tranquil waters of the unfathomable and unsur-
passable ocean. (5) During the rainy season the 
swollen rivers rush into the ocean, and during 
the dry summer the rivers, now shallow, se-
verely reduce their supply of water; yet the 
ocean does not swell up during the rainy sea-
son, nor does it dry up in the hot summer. In the 
same way, a saintly devotee who has accepted 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the 
goal of his life sometimes will receive by prov-
idence great material opulenc e, and sometimes 
he will find himself materially destitute. How-
ever, such a devotee of the Lord does not re-
joice in a flourishing condition, nor is he mo-
rose when poverty -stricken. (6)  

One who has failed to control his senses im-
mediately feels attraction upon seeing a 
woman’s form, which is created by the illusory 
energy of the Supreme Lord. Indeed, when the 
woman speaks with enticing words, smiles co-
quettishly and moves her body sensuously, his 
mind is immediately captured, and thus he falls 
blindly into the darkness of material existence, 
just as the moth maddened by the fire rushes 
blindly into its flames. (7) A foolish person 
with no intelligent discrimination is immedi-
ately aroused at the sight of a lusty woman 
beautifully decorated with golden ornamen ts, 
fine clothing and other cosmetic features. Be-
ing eager for sense gratification, such a fool 
loses all intelligence and is destroyed just like 
the moth who rushes into the blazing fire. (8)  

A saintly person should accept only enough 
food to keep his bo dy and soul together. He 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

823 
 should go from door to door accepting just a lit-
tle bit of food from each family. Thus he should 
practice the occupation of the honeybee. (9) 
Just as the honeybee takes nectar from all flow-
ers, big and small, an intelligent human b eing 
should take the essence from all religious scrip-
tures. (10) A saintly person should not think, 
“This food I will keep to eat tonight and this 
other food I can save for tomorrow.” In other 
words, a saintly person should not store food-
stuffs acquired by  begging. Rather, he should 
use his own hands as his plate and eat whatever 
fits on them. His only storage container should 
be his belly, and whatever conveniently fits into 
his belly should be his stock of food. Thus one 
should not imitate the greedy hone ybee who ea-
gerly collects more and more honey. (11) A 
saintly mendicant should not even collect food-
stuffs to eat later in the same day or the next 
day. If he disregards this injunction and like the 
honeybee collects more and more delicious 
foodstuffs, tha t which he has collected will in-
deed ruin him. (12)  

A saintly person should never touch a young 
girl. In fact, he should not even let his foot 
touch a wooden doll in the shape of a woman. 
By bodily contact with a woman he will surely 
be captured by illusi on, just as the elephant is 
captured by the she -elephant due to his desire 
to touch her body. (13) A man possessing intel-
ligent discrimination should not under any cir-
cumstances try to exploit the beautiful form of 
a woman for his sense gratification. Just  as an 
elephant trying to enjoy a she -elephant is killed 
by other bull elephants also enjoying her com-
pany, one trying to enjoy a lady’s company can 
at any moment be killed by her other lovers 
who are stronger than he. (14)  

A greedy person accumulates a l arge quan-
tity of money with great struggle and pain, but 
the person who has struggled so much to ac-
quire this wealth is not always allowed to enjoy 
it himself or give it in charity to others. The 
greedy man is like the bee who struggles to pro-
duce a large quantity of honey, which is then 
stolen by a man who will enjoy it personally or 
sell it to others. No matter how carefully one hides his hard -earned wealth or tries to protect 
it, there are those who are expert in detecting 
the whereabouts of valuable thi ngs, and they 
will steal it. (15)  

Just as a hunter takes away the honey labo-
riously produced by the honeybees, similarly, 
saintly mendicants such as brahmacārīs and 
sannyāsīs are entitled to enjoy the property 
painstakingly accumulated by householders 
dedicated to family enjoyment. (16)  

A saintly person dwelling in the forest in the 
renounced order of life should never listen to 
songs or music promoting material enjoyment. 
Rather, a saintly person should carefully study 
the example of the deer, who is bew ildered by 
the sweet music of the hunter’s horn and is thus 
captured and killed. (17) Becoming attracted to 
the worldly singing, dancing and musical enter-
tainment of beautiful women, even the great 
sage Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, the son of a deer, fell totally 
under thei r control, just like a pet animal. (18)  

Just as a fish, incited by the desire to enjoy 
his tongue, is fatally trapped on the fisherman’s 
hook, similarly, a foolish person is bewildered 
by the extremely disturbing urges of the tongue 
and thus is ruined. (1 9) By fasting, learned men 
quickly bring all of the senses except the tongue 
under control, because by abstaining from eat-
ing such men are afflicted with an increased de-
sire to gratify the sense of taste. (20) Although 
one may conquer all of the other sens es, as long 
as the tongue is not conquered it cannot be said 
that one has controlled his senses. However, if 
one is able to control the tongue, then one is 
understood to be in full control of all the senses. 
(21) 

O son of kings, previously in the city of 
Videha there dwelled a prostitute named 
Piṅgalā. Now please hear what I have learned 
from that lady. (22) Once that prostitute, desir-
ing to bring a lover into her house, stood out-
side in the doorway at night showing her beau-
tiful form. (23) O best among me n, this prosti-
tute was very anxious to get money, and as she 
stood on the street at night she studied all the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

824 
 men who were passing by, thinking, “Oh, this 
one surely has money. I know he can pay the 
price, and I am sure he would enjoy my com-
pany very much. ” Thus she thought about all 
the men on the street. (24)  

As the prostitute Pi ṅgalā stood in the door-
way, many men came and went, walking by her 
house. Her only means of sustenance was pros-
titution, and therefore she anxiously thought, 
“Maybe this one who is coming now is very 
rich… Oh, he is not stopping, but I am sure 
someone else will come. Surely this man who 
is coming now will want to pay me for my love, 
and he will probably give lots of money.” Thus, 
with vain hope, she remained leaning against 
the do orway, unable to finish her business and 
go to sleep. Out of anxiety she would some-
times walk out toward the street, and some-
times she went back into her house. In this way, 
the midnight hour gradually arrived. (25 -26) As 
the night wore on, the prostitute,  who intensely 
desired money, gradually became morose, and 
her face dried up. Thus being filled with anxi-
ety for money and most disappointed, she be-
gan to feel a great detachment from her situa-
tion, and happiness arose in her mind. (27) The 
prostitute felt  disgusted with her material situ-
ation and thus became indifferent to it. Indeed, 
detachment acts like a sword, cutting to pieces 
the binding network of material hopes and de-
sires. Now please hear from me the song sung 
by the prostitute in that situation. (28) O King, 
just as a human being who is bereft of spiritual 
knowledge never desires to give up his false 
sense of proprietorship over many material 
things, similarly, a person who has not devel-
oped detachment never desires to give up the 
bondage of the m aterial body. (29)  

The prostitute Pi ṅgalā said:  Just see how 
greatly illusioned I am! Because I cannot con-
trol my mind, just like a fool I desire lusty 
pleasure from an insignificant man. (30) I am 
such a fool that I have given up the service of 
that pers on who, being eternally situated within 
my heart, is actually most dear to me. That most 
dear one is the Lord of the universe, who is the 
bestower of real love and happiness and the source of all prosperity. Although He is in my 
own heart, I have completel y neglected Him. 
Instead I have ignorantly served insignificant 
men who can never satisfy my real desires and 
who have simply brought me unhappiness, 
fear, anxiety, lamentation and illusion. (31) Oh, 
how I have uselessly tortured my own soul! I 
have sold m y body to lusty, greedy men who 
are themselves objects of pity. Thus practicing 
the most abominable profession of a prostitute, 
I hoped to get money and sex pleasure. (32)  

This material body is like a house in which 
I, the soul, am living. The bones formi ng my 
spine, ribs, arms and legs are like the beams, 
crossbeams and pillars of the house, and the 
whole structure, which is full of stool and urine, 
is covered by skin, hair and nails. The nine 
doors leading into this body are constantly ex-
creting foul sub stances. Besides me, what 
woman could be so foolish as to devote herself 
to this material body, thinking that she might 
find pleasure and love in this contraption? (33) 
Certainly in this city of Videha I alone am com-
pletely foolish. I neglected the Supreme  Per-
sonality of Godhead, who awards us every-
thing, even our original spiritual form, and in-
stead I desired to enjoy sense gratification with 
many men. (34) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is absolutely the most dear one for all 
living beings because He is everyone’s well -
wisher and Lord. He is the Supreme Soul situ-
ated in everyone’s heart. Therefore, I will now 
pay the price of complete surrender, and thus 
purchasing the Lord I will enjoy with Him just 
like Lak ṣmīdevī. (35) Men provide sense grati-
ficatio n for women, but all these men, and even 
the demigods in heaven, have a beginning and 
an end. They are all temporary creations who 
will be dragged away by time. Therefore, how 
much actual pleasure or happiness could any of 
them ever give to their wives? (3 6) Although I 
most stubbornly hoped to enjoy the material 
world, somehow or other detachment has arisen 
in my heart, and it is making me very happy. 
Therefore, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Vi ṣṇu, must be pleased with me. Without 
even knowing it, I m ust have performed some 
activity satisfying to Him. (37) A person who 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

825 
 has developed detachment can give up the 
bondage of material society, friendship and 
love, and a person who undergoes great suffer-
ing gradually becomes, out of hopelessness, de-
tached and  indifferent to the material world. 
Thus, due to my great suffering, such detach-
ment awoke in my heart; yet how could I have 
undergone such merciful suffering if I were ac-
tually unfortunate? Therefore, I am in fact for-
tunate and have received the mercy of the Lord. 
He must somehow or other be pleased with me. 
(38) With devotion I accept the great benefit 
that the Lord has bestowed upon me. Having 
given up my sinful desires for ordinary sense 
gratification, I now take shelter of Him, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. (39) I am now 
completely satisfied, and I have full faith in the 
Lord’s mercy. Therefore, I will maintain my-
self with whatever comes of its own accord. I 
shall enjoy life with only the Lord, because He 
is the real source of love and happiness. (40) 
The intelligence of the living entity is stolen 
away by activities of sense gratification, and 
thus he falls into the dark well of material ex-
istence. Within that well he is then seized by 
the deadly serpent of time. Who else but the Su-
preme Personali ty of Godhead could save the 
poor living entity from such a hopeless condi-
tion? (41) When the living entity sees that the 
entire universe has been seized by the serpent 
of time, he becomes sober and sane and at that 
time detaches himself from all material sense 
gratification. In that condition the living entity 
is qualified to be his own protector. (42)  

The avadhūta said:  Thus, her mind com-
pletely made up, Pi ṅgalā cut off all her sinful 
desires to enjoy sex pleasure with lovers, and 
she became situated in perfect peace. Then she 
sat down on her bed. (43) Material desire is un-
doubtedly the cause of the greatest unhappi-
ness, and freedom from such desire is the cause 
of the greatest happiness. Therefore, com-
pletely cutting off her desire to enjoy so -called 
lovers, Pi ṅgalā very happily went to sleep. (44)  

SB 11.9: Detachment from All that Is Ma-
terial  
 The saintly brāhma ṇa said:  Everyone con-
siders certain things within the material world 
to be most dear to him, and because of attach-
ment to such things one eventu ally becomes 
miserable. One who understands this gives up 
material possessiveness and attachment and 
thus achieves unlimited happiness. (1) Once a 
group of large hawks who were unable to find 
any prey attacked another, weaker hawk who 
was holding some meat . At that time, being in 
danger of his life, the hawk gave up his meat 
and experienced actual happiness. (2)  

In family life, the parents are always in anx-
iety about their home, children and reputation. 
But I have nothing to do with these things. I do 
not worry at all about any family, and I do not 
care about honor and dishonor. I enjoy only the 
life of the soul, and I find love on the spiritual 
platform. Thus I wander the earth like a child. 
(3) In this world two types of people are free 
from all anxiety a nd merged in great happiness: 
one who is a retarded and childish fool and one 
who has approached the Supreme Lord, who is 
beyond the three modes of material nature. (4) 
Once a marriageable young girl was alone in 
her house because her parents and relatives  had 
gone that day to another place. At that time a 
few men arrived at the house, specifically de-
siring to marry her. She received them with all 
hospitality. (5)  

The girl went to a private place and began to 
make preparations so that the unexpected male 
guests could eat. As she was beating the rice, 
the conchshell bracelets on her arms were col-
liding and making a loud noise. (6) The young 
girl feared that the men would consider her 
family to be poor because their daughter was 
busily engaged in the menial t ask of husking 
rice. Being very intelligent, the shy girl broke 
the shell bracelets from her arms, leaving just 
two on each wrist. (7) Thereafter, as the young 
girl continued to husk the rice, the two bracelets 
on each wrist continued to collide and make 
noise. Therefore, she took one bracelet off each 
arm, and with only one left on each wrist there 
was no more noise. (8) O subduer of the enemy, 
I travel throughout the surface of the earth 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

826 
 learning constantly about the nature of this 
world, and thus I perso nally witnessed the les-
son of the young girl. (9) When many people 
live together in one place there will undoubt-
edly be quarreling. And even if only two people 
live together there will be frivolous conversa-
tion and disagreement. Therefore, to avoid con-
flict, one should live alone, as we learn from the 
example of the bracelet of the young girl. (10)  

Having perfected the yoga sitting postures 
and conquered the breathing process, one 
should make the mind steady by detachment 
and the regulated practice of yoga . Thus one 
should carefully fix the mind on the single goal 
of yoga practice. (11) The mind can be con-
trolled when it is fixed on the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead. Having achieved a stable sit-
uation, the mind becomes free from polluted 
desires to execute  material activities; thus as 
the mode of goodness increases in strength, one 
can completely give up the modes of passion 
and ignorance, and gradually one transcends 
even the material mode of goodness. When the 
mind is freed from the fuel of the modes of n a-
ture, the fire of material existence is extin-
guished. Then one achieves the transcendental 
platform of direct relationship with the object 
of his meditation, the Supreme Lord. (12) Thus, 
when one’s consciousness is completely fixed 
on the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, one no longer sees duality, or in-
ternal and external reality. The example is 
given of the arrow maker who was so absorbed 
in making a straight arrow that he did not even 
see or notice the king himself, who was passing 
right next to him. (13)  

A saintly person should remain alone and 
constantly travel without any fixed residence. 
Being alert, he should remain secluded and 
should act in such a way that he is not recog-
nized or noticed by others. Moving without 
companions, he  should not speak more than re-
quired. (14) When a person living in a tempo-
rary material body tries to construct a happy 
home, the result is fruitless and miserable. The 
snake, however, enters a home that has been 
built by others and prospers happily. (15)   
The Lord of the universe, Nārāya ṇa, is the 
worshipable God of all living entities. Without 
extraneous assistance, the Lord creates this uni-
verse by His own potency, and at the time of 
annihilation the Lord destroys the universe 
through His personal expans ion of time and 
withdraws all of the cosmos, including all the 
conditioned living entities, within Himself. 
Thus, His unlimited Self is the shelter and res-
ervoir of all potencies. The subtle pradhāna, the 
basis of all cosmic manifestation, is conserved 
within the Lord and is in this way not different 
from Him. In the aftermath of annihilation the 
Lord stands alone. (16) When the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead displays His own potency 
in the form of time and guides His material po-
tencies, such as the mode of  goodness, into a 
neutral condition of equilibrium, He remains as 
the supreme controller of that neutral state, 
called pradhāna, as well as of the living entities. 
He is also the supreme worshipable object for 
all beings, including liberated souls, demigod s 
and ordinary conditioned souls. The Lord is 
eternally free from any material designation, 
and He constitutes the totality of spiritual bliss, 
which one experiences by seeing the Lord’s 
spiritual form. The Lord thus exhibits the full-
est meaning of the wor d “liberation.” (17 -18) O 
subduer of the enemies, at the time of creation 
the Personality of Godhead expands His own 
transcendental potency in the form of time, and 
agitating His material energy, māyā, composed 
of the three modes of material nature, He cre-
ates the mahat -tattva. (19) According to great 
sages, that which is the basis of the three modes 
of material nature and which manifests the var-
iegated universe is called the sūtra or mahat -
tattva. Indeed, this universe is resting within 
that mahat -tattva, and due to its potency the liv-
ing entity undergoes material existence. (20) 
Just as from within himself the spider expands 
thread through his mouth, plays with it for 
some time and eventually swallows it, simi-
larly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead ex-
pands His personal potency from within Him-
self. Thus, the Lord displays the network of 
cosmic manifestation, utilizes it according to 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

827 
 His purpose and eventually withdraws it com-
pletely within Himself. (21)  

If out of love, hate or fear an embodied soul 
fixes his mind with intelligence and complete 
concentration upon a particular bodily form, he 
will certainly attain the form that he is meditat-
ing upon. (22) O King, once a wasp forced a 
weaker insect to enter his hive and kept him 
trapped there. In great fear t he weak insect con-
stantly meditated upon his captor, and without 
giving up his body, he gradually achieved the 
same state of existence as the wasp. Thus one 
achieves a state of existence according to one’s 
constant concentration. (23)  

O King, from all the se spiritual masters I 
have acquired great wisdom. Now please listen 
as I explain what I learned from my own body. 
(24) The material body is also my spiritual mas-
ter because it teaches me detachment. Being 
subject to creation and destruction, it always 
comes to a painful end. Thus, although using 
my body to acquire knowledge, I always re-
member that it will ultimately be consumed by 
others, and remaining detached, I move about 
this world. (25) A man attached to the body ac-
cumulates money with great struggle to expand 
and protect the position of his wife, children, 
property, domestic animals, servants, homes, 
relatives, friends, and so on. He does all this for 
the gratification of his own body. As a tree be-
fore dying produces the seed of a future tree, 
the dyi ng body manifests the seed of one’s next 
material body in the form of one’s accumulated 
karma. Thus assuring the continuation of mate-
rial existence, the material body sinks down 
and dies. (26) A man who has many wives is 
constantly harassed by them. He is responsible 
for their maintenance, and thus all the ladies 
constantly pull him in different directions, each 
struggling for her self -interest. Similarly, the 
material senses harass the conditioned soul, 
pulling him in many different directions at 
once. On one side the tongue is pulling him to 
arrange tasty food; then thirst drags him to get 
a suitable drink. Simultaneously the sex organs 
clamor for satisfaction, and the sense of touch demands soft, sensuous objects. The belly har-
asses him until it is filled , the ears demand to 
hear pleasing sounds, the sense of smell hank-
ers for pleasant aromas, and the fickle eyes 
clamor for pleasing sights. Thus the senses, or-
gans and limbs, all desiring satisfaction, pull 
the living entity in many directions. (27) The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, expanding 
His own potency, māyā -śakti, created innumer-
able species of life to house the conditioned 
souls. Yet by creating the forms of trees, rep-
tiles, animals, birds, snakes and so on, the Lord 
was not satisfied within His he art. Then He cre-
ated human life, which offers the conditioned 
soul sufficient intelligence to perceive the Ab-
solute Truth, and became pleased. (28) After 
many, many births and deaths one achieves the 
rare human form of life, which, although tem-
porary, affo rds one the opportunity to attain the 
highest perfection. Thus a sober human being 
should quickly endeavor for the ultimate per-
fection of life as long as his body, which is al-
ways subject to death, has not fallen down and 
died. After all, sense gratificati on is available 
even in the most abominable species of life, 
whereas K ṛṣṇa consciousness is possible only 
for a human being. (29) Having learned from 
my spiritual masters, I remain situated in reali-
zation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
and, fully re nounced and enlightened by real-
ized spiritual knowledge, wander the earth 
without attachment or false ego. (30) Although 
the Absolute Truth is one without a second, the 
sages have described Him in many different 
ways. Therefore, one may not be able to acqu ire 
very firm or complete knowledge from one 
spiritual master. (31)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
Having thus spoken to King Yadu, the wise 
brāhma ṇa accepted obeisances and worship 
from the King and felt pleased within himself. 
Then bidding far ewell, he left exactly as he had 
come. (32) O Uddhava, hearing the words of 
the avadhūta, the saintly King Yadu, who is the 
forefather of our own ancestors, became free 
from all material attachment, and thus his mind 
was evenly fixed on the spiritual platf orm. (33)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

828 
 SB 11.10: The Nature of Fruitive Activity  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  Taking full shelter in Me, with the mind 
carefully fixed in the devotional service of the 
Lord as spoken by Me, one should live without 
personal desire and pract ice the social and oc-
cupational system called var ṇāśrama. (1) A pu-
rified soul should see that because the condi-
tioned souls who are dedicated to sense gratifi-
cation have falsely accepted the objects of 
sense pleasure as truth, all of their endeavors 
are do omed to failure. (2) One who is sleeping 
may see many objects of sense gratification in 
a dream, but such pleasurable things are merely 
creations of the mind and are thus ultimately 
useless. Similarly, the living entity who is 
asleep to his spiritual ident ity also sees many 
sense objects, but these innumerable objects of 
temporary gratification are creations of the 
Lord’s illusory potency and have no permanent 
existence. One who meditates upon them, im-
pelled by the senses, uselessly engages his in-
telligence . (3) One who has fixed Me within his 
mind as the goal of life should give up activities 
based on sense gratification and should instead 
execute work governed by the regulative prin-
ciples for advancement. When, however, one is 
fully engaged in searching ou t the ultimate 
truth of the soul, one should not accept the 
scriptural injunctions governing fruitive activi-
ties. (4) One who has accepted Me as the su-
preme goal of life should strictly observe the 
scriptural injunctions forbidding sinful activi-
ties and, a s far as possible, should execute the 
injunctions prescribing minor regulative duties 
such as cleanliness. Ultimately, however, one 
should approach a bona fide spiritual master 
who is full in knowledge of Me as I am, who is 
peaceful, and who by spiritual e levation is not 
different from Me. (5) The servant or disciple 
of the spiritual master should be free from false 
prestige, never considering himself to be the 
doer. He should be active and never lazy and 
should give up all sense of proprietorship over 
the objects of the senses, including his wife, 
children, home and society. He should be en-
dowed with feelings of loving friendship to-ward the spiritual master and should never be-
come deviated or bewildered. The servant or 
disciple should always desire advancem ent in 
spiritual understanding, should not envy any-
one and should always avoid useless conversa-
tion. (6) One should see one’s real self -interest 
in life in all circumstances and should therefore 
remain detached from wife, children, home, 
land, relatives, f riends, wealth and so on. (7) 
Just as fire, which burns and illuminates, is dif-
ferent from firewood, which is to be burned to 
give illumination, similarly the seer within the 
body, the self -enlightened spirit soul, is differ-
ent from the material body, whic h is to be illu-
minated by consciousness. Thus the spirit soul 
and the body possess different characteristics 
and are separate entities. (8) Just as fire may 
appear differently as dormant, manifest, weak, 
brilliant and so on, according to the condition 
of the fuel, similarly, the spirit soul enters a ma-
terial body and accepts particular bodily char-
acteristics. (9)  

The subtle and gross material bodies are cre-
ated by the material modes of nature, which ex-
pand from the potency of the Supreme Person-
ality of God head. Material existence occurs 
when the living entity falsely accepts the qual-
ities of the gross and subtle bodies as being his 
own factual nature. This illusory state, how-
ever, can be destroyed by real knowledge. (10) 
Therefore, by the cultivation of kno wledge one 
should approach the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead situated within oneself. By under-
standing the Lord’s pure, transcendental exist-
ence, one should gradually give up the false vi-
sion of the material world as independent real-
ity. (11) The spiritua l master can be compared 
to the lower kindling stick, the disciple to the 
upper kindling stick, and the instruction given 
by the guru to the third stick placed in between. 
The transcendental knowledge communicated 
from guru to disciple is compared to the f ire 
arising from the contact of these, which burns 
the darkness of ignorance to ashes, bringing 
great happiness both to guru and disciple. (12) 
By submissively hearing from an expert spir-
itual master, the expert disciple develops pure 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

829 
 knowledge, which repe ls the onslaught of ma-
terial illusion arising from the three modes of 
material nature. Finally this pure knowledge it-
self ceases, just as fire ceases when the stock of 
fuel has been consumed. (13)  

My dear Uddhava, I have thus explained to 
you perfect know ledge. There are philosophers, 
however, who challenge My conclusion. They 
state that the natural position of the living entity 
is to engage in fruitive activities, and they see 
him as the enjoyer of the happiness and unhap-
piness that accrue from his own wo rk. Accord-
ing to this materialistic philosophy, the world, 
time, the revealed scriptures and the self are all 
variegated and eternal, existing as a perpetual 
flow of transformations. Knowledge, moreo-
ver, cannot be one or eternal, because it arises 
from the  different and changing forms of ob-
jects; thus knowledge itself is always subject to 
change. Even if you accept such a philosophy, 
My dear Uddhava, there will still be perpetual 
birth, death, old age and disease, since all living 
entities must accept a mat erial body subject to 
the influence of time. (14 -16) Although the per-
former of fruitive activities desires perpetual 
happiness, it is clearly observed that material-
istic workers are often unhappy and only occa-
sionally satisfied, thus proving that they are not 
independent or in control of their destiny. 
When a person is always under the superior 
control of another, how can he expect any val-
uable results from his own fruitive actions? 
(17) It is observed within the material world 
that sometimes even an intell igent person is not 
happy. Similarly, sometimes even a great fool 
is happy. The concept of becoming happy 
through expertly performing material activities 
is simply a useless exhibition of false egotism. 
(18) Even if people know how to achieve hap-
piness and  avoid unhappiness, they still do not 
know the process by which death will not be 
able to exert its power over them. (19) Death is 
not at all pleasing, and since everyone is ex-
actly like a condemned man being led to the 
place of execution, what possible ha ppiness can 
people derive from material objects or the grat-
ification they provide? (20)  
 That material happiness of which we hear, 
such as promotion to heavenly planets for ce-
lestial enjoyment, is just like that material hap-
piness we have already experienc ed. Both are 
polluted by jealousy, envy, decay and death. 
Therefore, just as an attempt to raise crops be-
comes fruitless if there are many problems like 
crop disease, insect plague or drought, simi-
larly, the attempt to attain material happiness, 
either on earth or on the heavenly planets, is al-
ways fruitless because of innumerable obsta-
cles. (21) If one performs Vedic sacrifices and 
fruitive rituals without any mistake or contam-
ination, one will achieve a heavenly situation in 
the next life. But even this r esult, which is only 
achieved by perfect performance of fruitive rit-
uals, will be vanquished by time. Now hear of 
this. (22) If on earth one performs sacrifices for 
the satisfaction of the demigods, he goes to the 
heavenly planets, where, just like a demig od, he 
enjoys all of the heavenly pleasures he has 
earned by his performances. (23) Having 
achieved the heavenly planets, the performer of 
ritualistic sacrifices travels in a glowing air-
plane, which he obtains as the result of his piety 
on earth. Being glo rified by songs sung by the 
Gandharvas and dressed in wonderfully charm-
ing clothes, he enjoys life surrounded by heav-
enly goddesses. (24) Accompanied by heav-
enly women, the enjoyer of the fruits of sacri-
fice goes on pleasure rides in a wonderful air-
plane, which is decorated with circles of tin-
kling bells and which flies wherever he desires. 
Being relaxed, comfortable and happy in the 
heavenly pleasure gardens, he does not con-
sider that he is exhausting the fruits of his piety 
and will soon fall down to the mortal world. 
(25) Until his pious results are used up, the per-
former of sacrifice enjoys life in the heavenly 
planets. When the pious results are exhausted, 
however, he falls down from the pleasure gar-
dens of heaven, being moved against his desire 
by the force of eternal time. (26)  

If a human being is engaged in sinful, irreli-
gious activities, either because of bad associa-
tion or because of his failure to control his 
senses, then such a person will certainly de-
velop a personality full of material desires.  He 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

830 
 thus becomes miserly toward others, greedy 
and always anxious to exploit the bodies of 
women. When the mind is so polluted one be-
comes violent and aggressive and without the 
authority of Vedic injunctions slaughters inno-
cent animals for sense gratifica tion. Worship-
ing ghosts and spirits, the bewildered person 
falls fully into the grip of unauthorized activi-
ties and thus goes to hell, where he receives a 
material body infected by the darkest modes of 
nature. In such a degraded body, he unfortu-
nately cont inues to perform inauspicious activ-
ities that greatly increase his future unhappi-
ness, and therefore he again accepts a similar 
material body. What possible happiness can 
there be for one who engages in activities inev-
itably terminating in death? (27 -29) 

In all the planetary systems, from the heav-
enly to the hellish, and for all of the great dem-
igods who live for one thousand yuga cycles, 
there is fear of Me in My form of time. Even 
Brahmā, who possesses the supreme life span 
of 311,040,000,000,000 years, is also afraid of 
Me. (30) The material senses create material 
activities, either pious or sinful, and the modes 
of nature set the material senses into motion. 
The living entity, being fully engaged by the 
material senses and modes of nature, experi-
ences t he various results of fruitive work. (31) 
As long as the living entity thinks that the 
modes of material nature have separate exist-
ences, he will be obliged to take birth in many 
different forms and will experience varieties of 
material existence. Therefor e, the living entity 
remains completely dependent on fruitive ac-
tivities under the modes of nature. (32) The 
conditioned soul who remains dependent on 
fruitive activities under the material modes of 
nature will continue to fear Me, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, since I impose the re-
sults of one’s fruitive activities. Those who ac-
cept the material concept of life, taking the var-
iegatedness of the modes of nature to be fac-
tual, devote themselves to material enjoyment 
and are therefore always absorbed in  lamenta-
tion and grief. (33) When there is agitation and 
interaction of the material modes of nature, the 
living entities then describe Me in various ways such as all -powerful time, the Self, Vedic 
knowledge, the universe, one’s own nature, re-
ligious cerem onies and so on. (34)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  O my Lord, a living en-
tity situated within the material body is sur-
rounded by the modes of nature and the happi-
ness and distress that are born of activities 
caused by these modes. How is it possible that 
he is not b ound by this material encirclement? 
It may also be said that the living entity is ulti-
mately transcendental and has nothing to do 
with the material world. Then how is he ever 
bound by material nature? (35) O my Lord, 
Acyuta, the same living entity is somet imes de-
scribed as eternally conditioned and at other 
times as eternally liberated. I am not able to un-
derstand, therefore, the actual situation of the 
living entity. You, my Lord, are the best of 
those who are expert in answering philosophi-
cal questions. P lease explain to me the symp-
toms by which one can tell the difference be-
tween a living entity who is eternally liberated 
and one who is eternally conditioned. In what 
various ways would they remain situated, enjoy 
life, eat, evacuate, lie down, sit or move  about? 
(36-37) 

SB 11.11: The Symptoms of Conditioned 
and Liberated Living Entities  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: My dear Uddhava, due to the influence of 
the material modes of nature, which are under 
My control, the living entity is sometimes  des-
ignated as conditioned and sometimes as liber-
ated. In fact, however, the soul is never really 
bound up or liberated, and since I am the Su-
preme Lord of māyā, which is the cause of the 
modes of nature, I also am never to be consid-
ered liberated or in bo ndage. (1) Just as a dream 
is merely a creation of one’s intelligence but 
has no actual substance, similarly, material 
lamentation, illusion, happiness, distress and 
the acceptance of the material body under the 
influence of māyā are all creations of My il lu-
sory energy. In other words, material existence 
has no essential reality. (2) O Uddhava, both 
knowledge and ignorance, being products of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

831 
 māyā, are expansions of My potency. Both 
knowledge and ignorance are beginningless 
and perpetually award liberation a nd bondage 
to embodied living beings. (3) O most intelli-
gent Uddhava, the living entity, called jīva, is 
part and parcel of Me, but due to ignorance he 
has been suffering in material bondage since 
time immemorial. By knowledge, however, he 
can be liberated . (4) Thus, My dear Uddhava, 
in the same material body we find opposing 
characteristics, such as great happiness and 
misery. That is because both the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is eternally liberated, 
as well as the conditioned soul are within the  
body. I shall now speak to you about their dif-
ferent characteristics. (5) By chance, two birds 
have made a nest together in the same tree. The 
two birds are friends and are of a similar nature. 
One of them, however, is eating the fruits of the 
tree, where as the other, who does not eat the 
fruits, is in a superior position due to His po-
tency. (6) The bird who does not eat the fruits 
of the tree is the Supreme Personality of God-
head, who by His omniscience perfectly under-
stands His own position and that of t he condi-
tioned living entity, represented by the eating 
bird. That living entity, on the other hand, does 
not understand himself or the Lord. He is cov-
ered by ignorance and is thus called eternally 
conditioned, whereas the Personality of God-
head, being ful l of perfect knowledge, is eter-
nally liberated. (7) One who is enlightened in 
self-realization, although living within the ma-
terial body, sees himself as transcendental to 
the body, just as one who has arisen from a 
dream gives up identification with the d ream 
body. A foolish person, however, although not 
identical with his material body but transcen-
dental to it, thinks himself to be situated in the 
body, just as one who is dreaming sees himself 
as situated in an imaginary body. (8) An en-
lightened person wh o is free from the contami-
nation of material desire does not consider him-
self to be the performer of bodily activities; ra-
ther, he knows that in all such activities it is 
only the senses, born of the modes of nature, 
that are contacting sense objects born of the 
same modes of nature. (9) An unintelligent per-son situated within the body created by his pre-
vious fruitive activities thinks, “I am the per-
former of action.” Bewildered by false ego, 
such a foolish person is therefore bound up by 
fruitive activitie s, which are in fact carried out 
by the modes of nature. (10)  

An enlightened person fixed in detachment 
engages his body in lying down, sitting, walk-
ing, bathing, seeing, touching, smelling, eating, 
hearing and so on, but is never entangled by 
such activi ties. Indeed, remaining as a witness 
to all bodily functions, he merely engages his 
bodily senses with their objects and does not 
become entangled like an unintelligent person. 
(11) Although the sky, or space, is the resting 
place of everything, the sky do es not mix with 
anything, nor is it entangled. Similarly, the sun 
is not at all attached to the water in which it is 
reflected within innumerable reservoirs, and 
the mighty wind blowing everywhere is not af-
fected by the innumerable aromas and atmos-
pheres t hrough which it passes. In the same 
way, a self -realized soul is completely detached 
from the material body and the material world 
around it. He is like a person who has awakened 
and arisen from a dream. With expert vision 
sharpened by detachment, the self -realized soul 
cuts all doubts to pieces through knowledge of 
the self and completely withdraws his con-
sciousness from the expansion of material vari-
ety. (12 -13) A person is considered to be com-
pletely liberated from the gross and subtle ma-
terial bodies wh en all the functions of his vital 
energy, senses, mind and intelligence are per-
formed without material desire. Such a person, 
although situated within the body, is not entan-
gled. (14)  

Sometimes for no apparent reason one’s 
body is attacked by cruel people  or violent ani-
mals. At other times and in other places, one 
will suddenly be offered great respect or wor-
ship. One who becomes neither angry when at-
tacked nor satisfied when worshiped is actually 
intelligent. (15) A saintly sage sees with equal 
vision and  therefore is not affected by that 
which is materially good or bad. Indeed, alt-
hough he observes others performing good and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

832 
 bad work and speaking properly and improp-
erly, the sage does not praise or criticize any-
one. (16) For the purpose of maintaining his  
body, a liberated sage should not act, speak or 
contemplate in terms of material good or bad. 
Rather, he should be detached in all material 
circumstances, and taking pleasure in self -real-
ization, he should wander about engaged in this 
liberated lifestyle,  appearing like a retarded 
person to outsiders. (17)  

If through meticulous study one becomes 
expert in reading Vedic literature but makes no 
endeavor to fix one’s mind on the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, then one’s endeavor is 
certainly like that of a man who works very 
hard to take care of a cow that gives no milk. In 
other words, the fruit of one’s laborious study 
of Vedic knowledge will simply be the labor it-
self. There will be no other tangible result. (18) 
My dear Uddhava, that man is certainly mos t 
miserable who takes care of a cow that gives no 
milk, an unchaste wife, a body totally depend-
ent on others, useless children or wealth not uti-
lized for the right purpose. Similarly, one who 
studies Vedic knowledge devoid of My glories 
is also most misera ble. (19) My dear Uddhava, 
an intelligent person should never take to liter-
atures that do not contain descriptions of My 
activities, which purify the whole universe. In-
deed, I create, maintain and annihilate the en-
tire material manifestation. Among all My pas-
time incarnations, the most beloved are K ṛṣṇa 
and Balarāma. Any so -called knowledge that 
does not recognize these activities of Mine is 
simply barren and is not acceptable to those 
who are actually intelligent. (20)  

Coming to this conclusion of all kno wledge, 
one should give up the false conception of ma-
terial variety that one imposes upon the soul 
and thus cease one’s material existence. The 
mind should be fixed on Me, since I am all -per-
vading. (21) My dear Uddhava, if you are not 
able to free your min d from all material disturb-
ance and thus absorb it completely on the spir-
itual platform, then perform all your activities 
as an offering to Me, without trying to enjoy the 
fruits. (22) My dear Uddhava, narrations of My pastimes and qualities are all -auspic ious and 
purify the entire universe. A faithful person 
who constantly hears, glorifies and remembers 
such transcendental activities, who through 
dramatic performances relives My pastimes, 
beginning with My appearance, and who takes 
full shelter of Me, dedi cating his religious, sen-
sual and occupational activities for My satisfac-
tion, certainly obtains unflinching devotional 
service to Me, the eternal Personality of God-
head. (23 -24) 

One who has obtained pure devotional ser-
vice by association with My devotees  always 
engages in worshiping Me. Thus he very easily 
goes to My abode, which is revealed by My 
pure devotees. (25)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Lord, O Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, what type of 
person do You consider to be a true devotee, 
and what type o f devotional service is approved 
by great devotees as worthy of being offered to 
Your Lordship? My dear ruler of the universal 
controllers, O Lord of Vaiku ṇṭha and almighty 
God of the universe, I am Your devotee, and 
because I love You I have no other shel ter than 
You. Therefore, please explain this to me. (26 -
27) My dear Lord, as the Absolute Truth You 
are transcendental to material nature, and like 
the sky You are never entangled in any way. 
Still, being controlled by Your devotees’ love, 
You accept many different forms, incarnating 
according to Your devotees’ desires. (28)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: O Uddhava, a saintly person is merciful 
and never injures others. Even if others are ag-
gressive he is tolerant and forgiving toward all 
living entities. His strength and meaning in life 
come from the truth itself, he is free from all 
envy and jealousy, and his mind is equal in ma-
terial happiness and distress. Thus, he dedicates 
his time to work for the welfare of all others. 
His intelligence is n ever bewildered by material 
desires, and he has controlled his senses. His 
behavior is always pleasing, never harsh and al-
ways exemplary, and he is free from posses-
siveness. He never endeavors in ordinary, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

833 
 worldly activities, and he strictly controls his 
eating. He therefore always remains peaceful 
and steady. A saintly person is thoughtful and 
accepts Me as his only shelter. Such a person is 
very cautious in the execution of his duties and 
is never subject to superficial transformations, 
because he is stea dy and noble, even in a dis-
tressing situation. He has conquered over the 
six material qualitiesnamely hunger, thirst, 
lamentation, illusion, old age and death. He is 
free from all desire for prestige and offers 
honor to others. He is expert in reviving the  
Kṛṣṇa consciousness of others and therefore 
never cheats anyone. Rather, he is a well -wish-
ing friend to all, being most merciful. Such a 
saintly person must be considered the most 
learned of men. He perfectly understands that 
the ordinary religious duties  prescribed by Me 
in various Vedic scriptures possess favorable 
qualities that purify the performer, and he 
knows that neglect of such duties constitutes a 
discrepancy in one’s life. Having taken com-
plete shelter at My lotus feet, however, a saintly 
person  ultimately renounces such ordinary reli-
gious duties and worships Me alone. He is thus 
considered to be the best among all living enti-
ties. (29 -32) 

My devotees may or may not know exactly 
what I am, who I am and how I exist, but if they 
worship Me with un alloyed love, then I con-
sider them to be the best of devotees. (33)  

My dear Uddhava, one can give up false 
pride and prestige by engaging in the following 
devotional activities. One may purify oneself 
by seeing, touching, worshiping, serving, and 
offering  prayers of glorification and obeisances 
to My form as the Deity and to My pure devo-
tees. One should also glorify My transcendental 
qualities and activities, hear with love and faith 
the narrations of My glories and constantly 
meditate on Me. One should of fer to Me what-
ever one acquires, and accepting oneself as My 
eternal servant, one should give oneself com-
pletely to Me. One should always discuss My 
birth and activities and enjoy life by participat-
ing in festivals, such as Janmā ṣṭamī, which glo-
rify My pas times. In My temple, one should also participate in festivals and ceremonies by 
singing, dancing, playing musical instruments 
and discussing Me with other Vai ṣṇavas. One 
should observe all the regularly celebrated an-
nual festivals by attending ceremonies, pil-
grimages and making offerings. One should 
also observe religious vows such as Ekādaśī 
and take initiation by the procedures mentioned 
in the Vedas, Pañcarātra and other, similar lit-
eratures. One should faithfully and lovingly 
support the installation of  My Deity, and indi-
vidually or in cooperation with others one 
should work for the construction of K ṛṣṇa con-
scious temples and cities as well as flower gar-
dens, fruit gardens and special areas to cele-
brate My pastimes. One should consider one-
self to be My h umble servant, without duplic-
ity, and thus should help to clean the temple, 
which is My home. First one should sweep and 
dust thoroughly, and then one should further 
cleanse with water and cow dung. Having dried 
the temple, one should sprinkle scented wate r 
and decorate the temple with ma ṇḍalas. One 
should thus act just like My servant. A devotee 
should never advertise his devotional activities; 
therefore his service will not be the cause of 
false pride. One should never use lamps that are 
offered to Me for  other purposes simply be-
cause there is need of illumination, and simi-
larly, one should never offer to Me anything 
that has been offered to or used by others. 
Whatever is most desired by one within this 
material world, and whatever is most dear to 
oneselfo ne should offer that very thing to Me. 
Such an offering qualifies one for eternal life. 
(34-41) 

O saintly Uddhava, please know that you 
may worship Me in the sun, fire, brāhma ṇas, 
cows, Vai ṣṇavas, sky, wind, water, earth, indi-
vidual soul and all living en tities. (42)  

My dear Uddhava, one should worship Me 
within the sun by chanting selected Vedic man-
tras and by performing worship and offering 
obeisances. One may worship Me within fire by 
offering oblations of ghee, and one may wor-
ship Me among the brāhma ṇas by respectfully 
receiving them as guests, even when uninvited. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

834 
 I can be worshiped within the cows by offerings 
of grass and other suitable grains and parapher-
nalia for the pleasure and health of the cows, 
and one may worship Me within the Vai ṣṇavas 
by offering loving friendship to them and hon-
oring them in all respects. Through steady med-
itation I am worshiped within the inner space of 
the heart, and within the air I can be worshiped 
by knowledge that prā ṇa, the life air, is the 
chief among elements. I a m worshiped within 
water by offerings of water itself, along with 
other elements such as flowers and tulasī 
leaves, and one may worship Me within the 
earth by proper application of confidential seed 
mantras. One may worship Me within the indi-
vidual living entity by offering food and other 
enjoyable substances, and one may worship Me 
within all living entities by seeing the Super-
soul within all of them, thus maintaining equal 
vision. (43 -45) Thus, in the previously men-
tioned places of worship and according t o the 
processes I have described, one should medi-
tate on My peaceful, transcendental form with 
four arms holding a conchshell, Sudarśana disc, 
club and lotus flower. In this way, one should 
worship Me with fixed attention. (46) One who 
has executed sacrifi cial performances and pi-
ous works for My satisfaction, and who thus 
worships Me with fixed attention, obtains un-
flinching devotional service unto Me. By the 
excellent quality of his service such a wor-
shiper obtains realized knowledge of Me. (47) 
My dear Ud dhava, I am personally the ultimate 
shelter and way of life for saintly liberated per-
sons, and thus if one does not engage in My 
loving devotional service, which is made pos-
sible by associating with My devotees, then for 
all practical purposes, one possess es no effec-
tive means for escaping from material exist-
ence. (48) My dear Uddhava, O beloved of the 
Yadu dynasty, because you are My servant, 
well-wisher and friend, I shall now speak to 
you the most confidential knowledge. Please 
hear as I explain these gr eat mysteries to you. 
(49) 

SB 11.12: Beyond Renunciation and 
Knowledge  
 The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava, by associating with 
My pure devotees one can destroy one’s attach-
ment for all objects of material sense gratifica-
tion. Such p urifying association brings Me un-
der the control of My devotee. One may per-
form the a ṣṭāṅga-yoga system, engage in phil-
osophical analysis of the elements of material 
nature, practice nonviolence and other ordinary 
principles of piety, chant the Vedas, perf orm 
penances, take to the renounced order of life, 
execute sacrificial performances and dig wells, 
plant trees and perform other public welfare ac-
tivities, give in charity, carry out severe vows, 
worship the demigods, chant confidential man-
tras, visit holy  places or accept major and minor 
disciplinary injunctions, but even by perform-
ing such activities one does not bring Me under 
his control. (1 -2) In every yuga many living en-
tities entangled in the modes of passion and ig-
norance gained the association of M y devotees. 
Thus, such living entities as the Daityas, 
Rākṣasas, birds, beasts, Gandharvas, Apsarās, 
Nāgas, Siddhas, Cāra ṇas, Guhyakas and 
Vidyādharas, as well as such lower -class hu-
man beings as the vaiśyas, śūdras, women and 
others, were able to achieve My supreme 
abode. V ṛtrāsura, Prahlāda Mahārāja and others 
like them also achieved My abode by associa-
tion with My devotees, as did personalities such 
as Vṛṣaparvā, Bali Mahārāja, Bā ṇāsura, Maya, 
Vibhī ṣaṇa, Sugrīva, Hanumān, Jāmbavān, 
Gajendra, Ja ṭāyu, Tulā dhāra, Dharma -vyādha, 
Kubjā, the gopīs in V ṛndāvana and the wives of 
the brāhma ṇas who were performing sacrifice. 
(3-6) The persons I have mentioned did not un-
dergo serious studies of the Vedic literature, 
nor did they worship great saintly persons, nor 
did they execute severe vows or austerities. 
Simply by association with Me and My devo-
tees, they achieved Me. (7) The inhabitants of 
Vṛndāvana, including the gopīs, cows, unmov-
ing creatures such as the twin arjuna trees, ani-
mals, living entities with stunted  consciousness 
such as bushes and thickets, and snakes such as 
Kāliya, all achieved the perfection of life by un-
alloyed love for Me and thus very easily 
achieved Me. (8) Even though one engages 
with great endeavor in the mystic yoga system, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

835 
 philosophical s peculation, charity, vows, pen-
ances, ritualistic sacrifices, teaching of Vedic 
mantras to others, personal study of the Vedas, 
or the renounced order of life, still one cannot 
achieve Me. (9) The residents of V ṛndāvana, 
headed by the gopīs, were always com pletely 
attached to Me with deepest love. Therefore, 
when My uncle Akrūra brought My brother 
Balarāma and Me to the city of Mathurā, the 
residents of V ṛndāvana suffered extreme men-
tal distress because of separation from Me and 
could not find any other sour ce of happiness. 
(10) Dear Uddhava, all of those nights that the 
gopīs spent with Me, their most dearly beloved, 
in the land of V ṛndāvana seemed to them to 
pass in less than a moment. Bereft of My asso-
ciation, however, the gopīs felt that those same 
nights  dragged on forever, as if each night were 
equal to a day of Brahmā. (11) My dear Ud-
dhava, just as great sages in yoga trance merge 
into self -realization, like rivers merging into 
the ocean, and are thus not aware of material 
names and forms, similarly, th e gopīs of 
Vṛndāvana were so completely attached to Me 
within their minds that they could not think of 
their own bodies, or of this world, or of their 
future lives. Their entire consciousness was 
simply bound up in Me. (12) All those hun-
dreds of thousands of gopīs, understanding Me 
to be their most charming lover and ardently 
desiring Me in that way, were unaware of My 
actual position. Yet by intimately associating 
with Me, the gopīs attained Me, the Supreme 
Absolute Truth. (13) Therefore, My dear Ud-
dhava, abandon the Vedic mantras as well as 
the procedures of supplementary Vedic litera-
tures and their positive and negative injunc-
tions. Disregard that which has been heard and 
that which is to be heard. Simply take shelter of 
Me alone, for I am the Supreme Per sonality of 
Godhead, situated within the heart of all condi-
tioned souls. Take shelter of Me wholeheart-
edly, and by My grace be free from fear in all 
circumstances. (14 -15) 

Śrī Uddhava said:  O Lord of all masters of 
mystic power, I have heard Your words, b ut the 
doubt in my heart does not go away; thus my 
mind is bewildered. (16)   
The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava, the Supreme Lord 
gives life to every living being and is situated 
within the heart along with the life air and pri-
mal sou nd vibration. The Lord can be perceived 
in His subtle form within the heart by one’s 
mind, since the Lord controls the minds of eve-
ryone, even great demigods like Lord Śiva. The 
Supreme Lord also assumes a gross form as the 
various sounds of the Vedas, com posed of short 
and long vowels and consonants of different in-
tonations. (17) When sticks of kindling wood 
are vigorously rubbed together, heat is pro-
duced by contact with air, and a spark of fire 
appears. Once the fire is kindled, ghee is added 
and the fir e blazes. Similarly, I become mani-
fest in the sound vibration of the Vedas. (18) 
The functions of the working sensesthe organ 
of speech, the hands, the legs, the genitals and 
the anusand the functions of the knowledge -ac-
quiring sensesthe nose, tongue, eyes , skin and 
earsalong with the functions of the subtle 
senses of mind, intelligence, consciousness and 
false ego, as well as the function of the subtle 
pradhāna and the interaction of the three modes 
of material natureall these should be under-
stood as My ma terially manifest form. (19) 
When many seeds are placed in an agricultural 
field, innumerable manifestations of trees, 
bushes, vegetables and so on will arise from a 
single source, the soil. Similarly, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who gives life to all 
and is eternal, originally exists beyond the 
scope of the cosmic manifestation. In the 
course of time, however, the Lord, who is the 
resting place of the three modes of nature and 
the source of the universal lotus flower, in 
which the cosmic manifestat ion takes place, di-
vides His material potencies and thus appears 
to be manifest in innumerable forms, although 
He is one. (20) Just as woven cloth rests on the 
expansion of lengthwise and crosswise threads, 
similarly the entire universe is expanded on the 
lengthwise and crosswise potency of the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead and is situated 
within Him. The conditioned soul has been ac-
cepting material bodies since time immemorial, 
and these bodies are like great trees sustaining 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

836 
 one’s material existence. Jus t as a tree first 
blossoms and then produces fruit, similarly the 
tree of material existence, one’s material body, 
produces the various results of material exist-
ence. (21)  

This tree of material existence has two 
seeds, hundreds of roots, three lower trunk s and 
five upper trunks. It produces five flavors and 
has eleven branches and a nest made by two 
birds. The tree is covered by three types of 
bark, gives two fruits and extends up to the sun. 
Those lusty after material enjoyment and dedi-
cated to family lif e enjoy one of the tree’s 
fruits, and swanlike men in the renounced order 
of life enjoy the other fruit. One who with the 
help of the bona fide spiritual masters can un-
derstand this tree to be a manifestation of the 
potency of the one Supreme Truth appeari ng in 
many forms actually knows the meaning of the 
Vedic literature. (22 -23) With steady intelli-
gence you should develop unalloyed devotional 
service by careful worship of the spiritual mas-
ter, and with the sharpened ax of transcendental 
knowledge you shou ld cut off the subtle mate-
rial covering of the soul. Upon realizing the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, you should then 
give up that ax of analytic knowledge. (24)  

SB 11.13: The Ha ṁsa-avatāra Answers 
the Questions of the Sons of Brahmā  

The Supreme Person ality of Godhead 
said: The three modes of material nature, 
namely goodness, passion and ignorance, per-
tain to material intelligence and not to the spirit 
soul. By development of material goodness one 
can conquer the modes of passion and igno-
rance, and by c ultivation of transcendental 
goodness one may free oneself even from ma-
terial goodness. (1) When the living entity be-
comes strongly situated in the mode of good-
ness, then religious principles, characterized by 
devotional service to Me, become prominent. 
One can strengthen the mode of goodness by 
cultivation of those things that are already situ-
ated in goodness, and thus religious principles 
arise. (2) Religious principles, strengthened by 
the mode of goodness, destroy the influence of passion and ignorance.  When passion and igno-
rance are overcome, their original cause, irreli-
gion, is quickly vanquished. (3) According to 
the quality of religious scriptures, water, one’s 
association with one’s children or with people 
in general, the particular place, the time,  activ-
ities, birth, meditation, chanting of mantras, 
and purificatory rituals, the modes of nature be-
come differently prominent. (4) Among the ten 
items I have just mentioned, the great sages 
who understand Vedic knowledge have praised 
and recommended thos e that are in the mode of 
goodness, criticized and rejected those in the 
mode of ignorance, and shown indifference to 
those in the mode of passion. (5)  

Until one revives one’s direct knowledge of 
the spirit soul and drives away the illusory iden-
tification  with the material body and mind 
caused by the three modes of nature, one must 
cultivate those things in the mode of goodness. 
By increasing the mode of goodness, one auto-
matically can understand and practice religious 
principles, and by such practice tran scendental 
knowledge is awakened. (6) In a bamboo forest 
the wind sometimes rubs the bamboo stalks to-
gether, and such friction generates a blazing 
fire that consumes the very source of its birth, 
the bamboo forest. Thus, the fire is automati-
cally calmed by  its own action. Similarly, by 
the competition and interaction of the material 
modes of nature, the subtle and gross material 
bodies are generated. If one uses his mind and 
body to cultivate knowledge, then such enlight-
enment destroys the influence of the modes of 
nature that generated one’s body. Thus, like the 
fire, the body and mind are pacified by their 
own actions in destroying the source of their 
birth. (7)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear K ṛṣṇa, gener-
ally human beings know that material life 
brings great f uture unhappiness, and still they 
try to enjoy material life. My dear Lord, how 
can one in knowledge act just like a dog, an ass 
or a goat? (8)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

837 
 The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava, a person bereft of in-
telligence first falsely identif ies himself with 
the material body and mind, and when such 
false knowledge arises within one’s conscious-
ness, material passion, the cause of great suf-
fering, pervades the mind, which by nature is 
situated in goodness. Then the mind, contami-
nated by passion , becomes absorbed in making 
and changing many plans for material advance-
ment. Thus, by constantly thinking of the 
modes of material nature, a foolish person is af-
flicted with unbearable material desires. (9 -10) 
One who does not control the material senses  
comes under the control of material desires and 
is thus bewildered by the strong waves of the 
mode of passion. Such a person executes mate-
rial activities, although clearly seeing that the 
result will be future unhappiness. (11) Alt-
hough the intelligence o f a learned person may 
be bewildered by the modes of passion and ig-
norance, he should again carefully bring the 
mind under control. By clearly seeing the con-
tamination of the modes of nature, he does not 
become attached. (12) A person should be at-
tentive a nd grave and never lazy or morose. 
Mastering the yoga procedures of breathing and 
sitting properly, one should practice fixing the 
mind on Me at dawn, noon and sunset, and thus 
gradually the mind should be completely ab-
sorbed in Me. (13)  

The actual yoga s ystem as taught by My 
devotees, headed by Sanaka -kumāra, is simply 
this: Having withdrawn the mind from all other 
objects, one should directly and appropriately 
absorb it in Me. (14)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Keśava, at what 
time and in what form did You instruct the sci-
ence of yoga to Sanaka and his brothers? I now 
desire to know about these things. (15)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: Once, the mental sons of Lord Brahmā, 
namely, the sages headed by Sanaka, inquired 
from their father about the difficult subject mat-
ter of the supreme goal of yoga. (16)  
 The sages headed by Sanaka said:  O Lord, 
people’s minds are naturally attracted to mate-
rial sense objects, and similarly the sense ob-
jects in the form of desire enter within the mind. 
Therefore, h ow can a person who desires liber-
ation, who desires to cross over activities of 
sense gratification, destroy this mutual rela-
tionship between the sense objects and the 
mind? Please explain this to us. (17)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava, Brahmā himself, who 
is born directly from the body of the Lord and 
who is the creator of all living entities within 
the material world, being the best of the demi-
gods, seriously contemplated the question of 
his sons headed by Sanaka. The intellige nce of 
Brahmā, however, was affected by his own ac-
tivities of creation, and thus he could not dis-
cover the essential answer to this question. (18) 
Lord Brahmā desired to attain the answer to the 
question that was puzzling him, and thus he 
fixed his mind on  Me, the Supreme Lord. At 
that time, in My form of Ha ṁsa, I became vis-
ible to Lord Brahmā. (19) Thus seeing Me, the 
sages, placing Brahmā in the lead, came for-
ward and worshiped My lotus feet. Then they 
frankly asked Me, “Who are You?” (20) My 
dear Uddhava , the sages, being eager to under-
stand the ultimate truth of the yoga system, thus 
inquired from Me. Now please hear as I explain 
that which I spoke unto the sages. (21) My dear 
brāhma ṇas, if, when asking Me who I am, you 
believe that I am also a jīva soul  and that there 
is no ultimate difference between ussince all 
souls are ultimately one without individuali-
tythen how is your question possible or appro-
priate? Ultimately, what is the real situation or 
resting place both of yourselves and of Me? 
(22) 

If by  asking Me “Who are You?” you were 
referring to the material body, then I must point 
out that all material bodies are constituted of 
five elements, namely earth, water, fire, air and 
ether. Thus, you should have asked, “Who are 
you five?” If you consider t hat all material bod-
ies are ultimately one, being constituted essen-
tially of the same elements, then your question 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

838 
 is still meaningless, since there would be no 
deep purpose in distinguishing one body from 
another. Thus, it appears that in asking My 
identi ty, you are merely speaking words, with-
out any real meaning or purpose. (23) Within 
this world, whatever is perceived by the mind, 
speech, eyes or other senses is Me alone and 
nothing besides Me. All of you please under-
stand this by a straightforward analy sis of the 
facts. (24) My dear sons, the mind has a natural 
proclivity to enter into the material sense ob-
jects, and similarly the sense objects enter into 
the mind; but both this material mind and the 
sense objects are merely designations that 
cover the s pirit soul, who is part and parcel of 
Me. (25) A person who has thus achieved Me 
by understanding that he is not different from 
Me realizes that the material mind is lodged 
within the sense objects because of constant 
sense gratification, and that the mate rial objects 
are existing prominently within the material 
mind. Having understood My transcendental 
nature, he gives up both the material mind and 
its objects. (26) Waking, sleeping and deep 
sleep are the three functions of the intelligence 
and are caused by the modes of material nature. 
The living entity within the body is ascertained 
to possess characteristics different from these 
three states and thus remains as a witness to 
them. (27) The spirit soul is trapped in the 
bondage of material intelligence, w hich awards 
him constant engagement in the illusory modes 
of nature. But I am the fourth stage of con-
sciousness, beyond wakefulness, dreaming and 
deep sleep. Becoming situated in Me, the soul 
should give up the bondage of material con-
sciousness. At that ti me, the living entity will 
automatically renounce the material sense ob-
jects and the material mind. (28) The false ego 
of the living entity places him in bondage and 
awards him exactly the opposite of what he re-
ally desires. Therefore, an intelligent perso n 
should give up his constant anxiety to enjoy 
material life and remain situated in the Lord, 
who is beyond the functions of material con-
sciousness. (29) According to My instructions, 
one should fix the mind on Me alone. If, how-
ever, one continues to see m any different val-ues and goals in life rather than seeing every-
thing within Me, then although apparently 
awake, one is actually dreaming due to incom-
plete knowledge, just as one may dream that 
one has wakened from a dream. (30) Those 
states of existence th at are conceived of as sep-
arate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
have no actual existence, although they create 
a sense of separation from the Absolute Truth. 
Just as the seer of a dream imagines many dif-
ferent activities and rewards, similarly, bec ause 
of the sense of an existence separate from the 
Lord’s existence, the living entity falsely per-
forms fruitive activities, thinking them to be the 
cause of future rewards and destinations. (31)  

While awake the living entity enjoys with all 
of his sense s the fleeting characteristics of the 
material body and mind; while dreaming he en-
joys similar experiences within the mind; and 
in deep dreamless sleep all such experiences 
merge into ignorance. By remembering and 
contemplating the succession of wakefulnes s, 
dreaming and deep sleep, the living entity can 
understand that he is one throughout the three 
stages of consciousness and is transcendental. 
Thus, he becomes the lord of the senses. (32) 
You should consider how, by the influence of 
My illusory energy, t hese three states of the 
mind, caused by the modes of nature, have been 
artificially imagined to exist in Me. Having def-
initely ascertained the truth of the soul, you 
should utilize the sharpened sword of 
knowledge, acquired by logical reflection and 
from the instructions of sages and Vedic litera-
tures, to completely cut off the false ego, which 
is the breeding ground of all doubts. All of you 
should then worship Me, who am situated 
within the heart. (33)  

One should see that the material world is a 
distinc t illusion appearing in the mind, because 
material objects have an extremely flickering 
existence and are here today and gone tomor-
row. They can be compared to the streaking red 
line created by whirling a fiery stick. The spirit 
soul by nature exists in th e single state of pure 
consciousness. However, in this world he ap-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

839 
 pears in many different forms and stages of ex-
istence. The modes of nature divide the soul’s 
consciousness into normal wakefulness, 
dreaming and dreamless sleep. All such varie-
ties of percep tion, however, are actually māyā 
and exist only like a dream. (34) Having under-
stood the temporary illusory nature of material 
things, and thus having pulled one’s vision 
away from illusion, one should remain without 
material desires. By experiencing the h appiness 
of the soul, one should give up material speak-
ing and activities. If sometimes one must ob-
serve the material world, one should remember 
that it is not ultimate reality and therefore one 
has given it up. By such constant remembrance 
up till the tim e of death, one will not again fall 
into illusion. (35) Just as a drunken man does 
not notice if he is wearing his coat or shirt, sim-
ilarly, one who is perfect in self -realization and 
who has thus achieved his eternal identity does 
not notice whether the t emporary body is sitting 
or standing. Indeed, if by God’s will the body 
is finished or if by God’s will he obtains a new 
body, a self -realized soul does not notice, just 
as a drunken man does not notice the situation 
of his outward dress. (36)  

The materia l body certainly moves under the 
control of supreme destiny and therefore must 
continue to live along with the senses and vital 
air as long as one’s karma is in effect. A self -
realized soul, however, who is awakened to the 
absolute reality and who is thus highly situated 
in the perfect stage of yoga, will never again 
surrender to the material body and its manifold 
manifestations, knowing it to be just like a body 
visualized in a dream. (37) My dear brāhma ṇas, 
I have now explained to you the confidential 
knowledge of Sā ṅkhya, by which one philo-
sophically distinguishes matter from spirit, and 
of aṣṭāṅga-yoga, by which one links up with the 
Supreme. Please understand that I am the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, Vi ṣṇu, and that 
I have appeared before you desiri ng to explain 
your actual religious duties. (38) O best of the 
brāhma ṇas, please know that I am the supreme 
shelter of the yoga system, analytic philosophy, 
virtuous action, truthful religious principles, 
power, beauty, fame and self -control. (39) All superior transcendental qualities, such as being 
beyond the modes of nature, detached, the well -
wisher, the most dear, the Supersoul, equally 
situated everywhere, and free from material en-
tanglementall such qualities, free from the 
transformations of material qualities, find their 
shelter and worshipable object in Me. (40)  

[Lord K ṛṣṇa continued:]  My dear Ud-
dhava, thus all of the doubts of the sages headed 
by Sanaka were destroyed by My words. Fully 
worshiping Me with transcendental love and 
devotion, they chan ted My glories with excel-
lent hymns. (41) The greatest of sages, headed 
by Sanaka Ṛṣi, thus perfectly worshiped and 
glorified Me, and as Lord Brahmā looked on, I 
returned to My own abode. (42)  

SB 11.14: Lord K ṛṣṇa Explains the Yoga 
System to Śrī Uddhava  

ŚrīUddhava said:  My dear K ṛṣṇa, the 
learned sages who explain Vedic literature rec-
ommend various processes for perfecting one’s 
life. Considering these varieties of viewpoint, 
my Lord, please tell me whether all these pro-
cesses are equally important, or wh ether one of 
them is supreme. (1) My dear Lord, You have 
clearly explained the process of unalloyed de-
votional service, by which a devotee removes 
all material association from his life, enabling 
him to fix his mind on You. (2)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  By the influence of time, the transcenden-
tal sound of Vedic knowledge was lost at the 
time of annihilation. Therefore, when the sub-
sequent creation took place, I spoke the Vedic 
knowledge to Brahmā because I Myself am the 
religious principles  enunciated in the Vedas. 
(3) Lord Brahmā spoke this Vedic knowledge 
to his eldest son, Manu, and the seven great 
sages headed by Bh ṛgu Muni then accepted the 
same knowledge from Manu. (4) From the fore-
fathers headed by Bh ṛgu Muni and other sons 
of Brahmā appeared many children and de-
scendants, who assumed different forms as 
demigods, demons, human beings, Guhyakas, 
Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas, Cāra ṇas, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

840 
 Kindevas, Kinnaras, Nāgas, Kimpuru ṣas, and 
so on. All of the many universal species, along 
with thei r respective leaders, appeared with dif-
ferent natures and desires generated from the 
three modes of material nature. Therefore, be-
cause of the different characteristics of the liv-
ing entities within the universe, there are a great 
many Vedic rituals, mantr as and rewards. (5 -7) 
Thus, due to the great variety of desires and na-
tures among human beings, there are many dif-
ferent theistic philosophies of life, which are 
handed down through tradition, custom and 
disciplic succession. There are other teachers 
who d irectly support atheistic viewpoints. (8) O 
best among men, the intelligence of human be-
ings is bewildered by My illusory potency, and 
thus, according to their own activities and 
whims, they speak in innumerable ways about 
what is actually good for people.  (9) Some say 
that people will be happy by performing pious 
religious activities. Others say that happiness is 
attained through fame, sense gratification, 
truthfulness, self -control, peace, self -interest, 
political influence, opulence, renunciation, 
consum ption, sacrifice, penance, charity, vows, 
regulated duties or strict disciplinary regula-
tion. Each process has its proponents. (10) All 
the persons I have just mentioned obtain tem-
porary fruits from their material work. Indeed, 
the meager and miserable sit uations they 
achieve bring future unhappiness and are based 
on ignorance. Even while enjoying the fruits of 
their work, such persons are filled with lamen-
tation. (11)  

O learned Uddhava, those who fix their con-
sciousness on Me, giving up all material de-
sires, share with Me a happiness that cannot 
possibly be experienced by those engaged in 
sense gratification. (12) One who does not de-
sire anything within this world, who has 
achieved peace by controlling his senses, 
whose consciousness is equal in all condit ions 
and whose mind is completely satisfied in Me 
finds only happiness wherever he goes. (13) 
One who has fixed his consciousness on Me de-
sires neither the position or abode of Lord 
Brahmā or Lord Indra, nor an empire on the 
earth, nor sovereignty in the l ower planetary systems, nor the eightfold perfection of yoga, 
nor liberation from birth and death. Such a per-
son desires Me alone. (14) My dear Uddhava, 
neither Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, Lord 
Saṅkarṣaṇa, the goddess of fortune nor indeed 
My own self are as d ear to Me as you are. (15) 
With the dust of My devotees’ lotus feet I de-
sire to purify the material worlds, which are sit-
uated within Me. Thus, I always follow the 
footsteps of My pure devotees, who are free 
from all personal desire, rapt in thought of My 
pastimes, peaceful, without any feelings of en-
mity, and of equal disposition everywhere. (16) 
Those who are without any desire for personal 
gratification, whose minds are always attached 
to Me, who are peaceful, without false ego and 
merciful to all living  entities, and whose con-
sciousness is never affected by opportunities 
for sense gratificationsuch persons enjoy in Me 
a happiness that cannot be known or achieved 
by those lacking such detachment from the ma-
terial world. (17)  

My dear Uddhava, if My devote e has not 
fully conquered his senses, he may be harassed 
by material desires, but because of his unflinch-
ing devotion for Me, he will not be defeated by 
sense gratification. (18) My dear Uddhava, just 
as a blazing fire turns firewood into ashes, sim-
ilarly,  devotion unto Me completely burns to 
ashes sins committed by My devotees. (19) My 
dear Uddhava, the unalloyed devotional service 
rendered to Me by My devotees brings Me un-
der their control. I cannot be thus controlled by 
those engaged in mystic yoga, Sā ṅkhya philos-
ophy, pious work, Vedic study, austerity or re-
nunciation. (20) Only by practicing unalloyed 
devotional service with full faith in Me can one 
obtain Me, the Supreme Personality of God-
head. I am naturally dear to My devotees, who 
take Me as the onl y goal of their loving service. 
By engaging in such pure devotional service, 
even the dog -eaters can purify themselves from 
the contamination of their low birth. (21) Nei-
ther religious activities endowed with honesty 
and mercy nor knowledge obtained with g reat 
penance can completely purify one’s con-
sciousness if they are bereft of loving service to 
Me. (22) If one’s hairs do not stand on end, how 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

841 
 can the heart melt? And if the heart does not 
melt, how can tears of love flow from the eyes? 
If one does not cr y in spiritual happiness, how 
can one render loving service to the Lord? And 
without such service, how can the conscious-
ness be purified? (23) A devotee whose speech 
is sometimes choked up, whose heart melts, 
who cries continually and sometimes laughs, 
who feels ashamed and cries out loudly and 
then dancesa devotee thus fixed in loving ser-
vice to Me purifies the entire universe. (24) Just 
as gold, when smelted in fire, gives up its im-
purities and returns to its pure brilliant state, 
similarly, the spirit so ul, absorbed in the fire of 
bhakti -yoga, is purified of all contamination 
caused by previous fruitive activities and re-
turns to its original position of serving Me in 
the spiritual world. (25) When a diseased eye is 
treated with medicinal ointment it gradu ally re-
covers its power to see. Similarly, as a con-
scious living entity cleanses himself of material 
contamination by hearing and chanting the pi-
ous narrations of My glories, he regains his 
ability to see Me, the Absolute Truth, in My 
subtle spiritual form . (26)  

The mind of one meditating upon the objects 
of sense gratification is certainly entangled in 
such objects, but if one constantly remembers 
Me, then the mind is absorbed in Me. (27) 
Therefore, one should reject all material pro-
cesses of elevation, w hich are like the mental 
creations of a dream, and should completely ab-
sorb one’s mind in Me. By constantly thinking 
of Me, one becomes purified. (28) Being con-
scious of the eternal self, one should give up 
association with women and those intimately 
assoc iated with women. Sitting fearlessly in a 
solitary place, one should concentrate the mind 
on Me with great attention. (29) Of all kinds of 
suffering and bondage arising from various at-
tachments, none is greater than the suffering 
and bondage arising from a ttachment to women 
and intimate contact with those attached to 
women. (30)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear lotus -eyed 
Kṛṣṇa, by what process should one who desires 
liberation meditate upon You, of what specific nature should his meditation be, and upon 
which fo rm should he meditate? Kindly explain 
to me this topic of meditation. (31)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  Sitting on a level seat that is not too high 
or too low, keeping the body straight and erect 
yet comfortable, placing the two hands on one’ s 
lap and focusing the eyes on the tip of one’s 
nose, one should purify the pathways of breath-
ing by practicing the mechanical exercises of 
pūraka, kumbhaka and recaka, and then one 
should reverse the procedure(recaka, 
kumbhaka, pūraka). Having fully contr olled the 
senses, one may thus practice prā ṇāyāma step 
by step. (32 -33) Beginning from the 
mūlādhāra -cakra, one should move the life air 
continuously upward like the fibers in the lotus 
stalk until one reaches the heart, where the sa-
cred syllable om is sit uated like the sound of a 
bell. One should thus continue raising the sa-
cred syllable upward the distance of twelve 
aṅgulas, and there the o ṁkāra should be joined 
together with the fifteen vibrations produced 
with anusvāra. (34) Being fixed in the o ṁkāra, 
one should carefully practice the prā ṇāyāma 
system ten times at each sunrise, noon and sun-
set. Thus, after one month one will have con-
quered the life air. (35)  

Keeping the eyes half closed and fixed on 
the tip of one’s nose, being enlivened and alert, 
one should meditate on the lotus flower situated 
within the heart. This lotus has eight petals and 
is situated on an erect lotus stalk. One should 
meditate on the sun, moon and fire, placing 
them one after the other within the whorl of that 
lotus flower. Placi ng My transcendental form 
within the fire, one should meditate upon it as 
the auspicious goal of all meditation. That form 
is perfectly proportioned, gentle and cheerful. 
It possesses four beautiful long arms, a charm-
ing, beautiful neck, a handsome forehea d, a 
pure smile and glowing, shark -shaped earrings 
suspended from two identical ears. That spir-
itual form is the color of a dark rain cloud and 
is garbed in golden -yellowish silk. The chest of 
that form is the abode of Śrīvatsa and the god-
dess of fortune, and that form is also decorated 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

842 
 with a conchshell, disc, club, lotus flower and 
garland of forest flowers. The two brilliant lo-
tus feet are decorated with ankle bells and 
bracelets, and that form exhibits the Kaustubha 
gem along with an effulgent crown. Th e upper 
hips are beautified by a golden belt, and the 
arms are decorated with valuable bracelets. All 
of the limbs of that beautiful form capture the 
heart, and the face is beautified by merciful 
glancing. Pulling the senses back from the 
sense objects, on e should be grave and self -
controlled and should use the intelligence to 
strongly fix the mind upon all of the limbs of 
My transcendental body. Thus one should med-
itate upon that most delicate transcendental 
form of Mine. (36 -42) 

One should then pull the consciousness back 
from all the limbs of that transcendental body. 
At that time, one should meditate only on the 
wonderfully smiling face of the Lord. (43) Be-
ing established in meditation on the Lord’s 
face, one should then withdraw the conscious-
ness and f ix it in the sky. Then giving up such 
meditation, one should become established in 
Me and give up the process of meditation alto-
gether. (44) One who has completely fixed his 
mind on Me should see Me within his own soul 
and should see the individual soul wi thin Me, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus, he 
sees the individual souls united with the Su-
preme Soul, just as one sees the sun’s rays com-
pletely united with the sun. (45) When the yogī 
thus controls his mind by intensely concen-
trated meditation, hi s illusory identification 
with material objects, knowledge and activities 
is very quickly extinguished. (46)  

SB 11.15: Lord K ṛṣṇa’s Description of 
Mystic Yoga Perfections  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava, the mystic perfections 
of yoga are acquired by a yogī who has con-
quered his senses, steadied his mind, conquered 
the breathing process and fixed his mind on 
Me. (1)  
 Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Lord Acyuta, 
by what process can mystic perfection be 
achieved, and what is the nature of  such perfec-
tion? How many mystic perfections are there? 
Please explain these things to me. Indeed, You 
are the bestower of all mystic perfections. (2)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  The masters of the yoga system have de-
clared that there are ei ghteen types of mystic 
perfection and meditation, of which eight are 
primary, having their shelter in Me, and ten are 
secondary, appearing from the material mode 
of goodness. (3) Among the eight primary mys-
tic perfections, the three by which one trans-
forms  one’s own body are a ṇimā, becoming 
smaller than the smallest; mahimā, becoming 
greater than the greatest; and laghimā, becom-
ing lighter than the lightest. Through the per-
fection of prāpti one acquires whatever one de-
sires, and through prākāmya -siddhi one experi-
ences any enjoyable object, either in this world 
or the next. Through īśitā -siddhi one can ma-
nipulate the subpotencies of māyā, and through 
the controlling potency called vaśitā -siddhi one 
is unimpeded by the three modes of nature. One 
who has acquir ed kāmāvasāyitā -siddhi can ob-
tain anything from anywhere, to the highest 
possible limit. My dear gentle Uddhava, these 
eight mystic perfections are considered to be 
naturally existing and unexcelled within this 
world. (4 -5) The ten secondary mystic perfec-
tions arising from the modes of nature are the 
powers of freeing oneself from hunger and 
thirst and other bodily disturbances, hearing 
and seeing things far away, moving the body at 
the speed of the mind, assuming any form one 
desires, entering the bodies o f others, dying 
when one desires, witnessing the pastimes be-
tween the demigods and the celestial girls 
called Apsarās, completely executing one’s de-
termination and giving orders whose fulfill-
ment is unimpeded. (6 -7) The power to know 
past, present and futu re; tolerance of heat, cold 
and other dualities; knowing the minds of oth-
ers; checking the influence of fire, sun, water, 
poison, and so on; and remaining unconquered 
by othersthese constitute five perfections of the 
mystic process of yoga and meditation. I am 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

843 
 simply listing these here according to their 
names and characteristics. Now please learn 
from Me how specific mystic perfections arise 
from specific meditations and also of the par-
ticular processes involved. (8 -9) 

One who worships Me in My atomic for m 
pervading all subtle elements, fixing his mind 
on that alone, obtains the mystic perfection 
called a ṇimā. (10) One who absorbs his mind 
in the particular form of the mahat -tattva and 
thus meditates upon Me as the Supreme Soul of 
the total material existe nce achieves the mystic 
perfection called mahimā. By further absorbing 
the mind in the situation of each individual el-
ement such as the sky, air, fire, and so on, one 
progressively acquires the greatness of each 
material element. (11) I exist within everyt hing, 
and I am therefore the essence of the atomic 
constituents of material elements. By attaching 
his mind to Me in this form, the yogī may 
achieve the perfection called laghimā, by which 
he realizes the subtle atomic substance of time. 
(12) Fixing his mi nd completely in Me within 
the element of false ego generated from the 
mode of goodness, the yogī obtains the power 
of mystic acquisition, by which he becomes the 
proprietor of the senses of all living entities. He 
obtains such perfection because his mind is ab-
sorbed in Me. (13) One who concentrates all 
mental activities in Me as the Supersoul of that 
phase of the mahat -tattva which manifests the 
chain of fruitive activities obtains from Me, 
whose appearance is beyond material percep-
tion, the most excellent  mystic perfection 
called prākāmya. (14) One who places his con-
sciousness on Vi ṣṇu, the Supersoul, the prime 
mover and Supreme Lord of the external en-
ergy consisting of three modes, obtains the 
mystic perfection of controlling other condi-
tioned souls, thei r material bodies and their 
bodily designations. (15) The yogī who places 
his mind in My form of Nārāya ṇa, known as the 
fourth factor, full of all opulences, becomes en-
dowed with My nature and thus obtains the 
mystic perfection called vaśitā. (16) One who 
fixes his pure mind on Me in My manifestation 
as the impersonal Brahman obtains the greatest happiness, wherein all his desires are com-
pletely fulfilled. (17) A human being who con-
centrates on Me as the upholder of religious 
principles, the personification  of purity and the 
Lord of Śvetadvīpa obtains the pure existence 
in which he is freed from the six waves of ma-
terial disturbance, namely hunger, thirst, decay, 
death, grief and illusion. (18) That purified liv-
ing entity who fixes his mind on the extraordi-
nary sound vibrations occurring within Me as 
the personified sky and total life air is then able 
to perceive within the sky the speaking of all 
living entities. (19) Merging one’s sight into the 
sun planet and then the sun planet into one’s 
eyes, one should  meditate on Me as existing 
within the combination of sun and vision; thus 
one acquires the power to see any distant thing. 
(20) The yogī who completely absorbs his mind 
in Me, and who then makes use of the wind that 
follows the mind to absorb the material  body in 
Me, obtains through the potency of meditation 
on Me the mystic perfection by which his body 
immediately follows his mind wherever it goes. 
(21) When the yogī, applying his mind in a cer-
tain way, desires to assume a particular form, 
that very form immediately appears. Such per-
fection is possible by absorbing the mind in the 
shelter of My inconceivable mystic potency, by 
which I assume innumerable forms. (22) When 
a perfect yogī desires to enter another’s body, 
he should meditate upon himself within the 
other body, and then, giving up his own gross 
body, he should enter the other’s body through 
the pathways of air, as easily as a bee leaves 
one flower and flies into another. (23) The yogī 
who has achieved the mystic perfection called 
svacchanda -mṛtyu blocks the anus with the heel 
of the foot and then lifts the soul from the heart 
to the chest, to the neck and finally to the head. 
Situated within the brahma -randhra, the yogī 
then gives up his material body and guides the 
spirit soul to the selected dest ination. (24) The 
yogī who desires to enjoy in the pleasure gar-
dens of the demigods should meditate on the 
purified mode of goodness, which is situated 
within Me, and then the heavenly women, gen-
erated from the mode of goodness, will ap-
proach him in airpla nes. (25)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

844 
 A yogī who has faith in Me, absorbing his 
mind in Me and knowing that My purpose is 
always fulfilled, will always achieve his pur-
pose by the very means he has determined to 
follow. (26) A person who perfectly meditates 
on Me acquires My nature o f being the supreme 
ruler and controller. His order, like Mine, can 
never be frustrated by any means. (27) A yogī 
who has purified his existence by devotion to 
Me and who thus expertly knows the process of 
meditation obtains knowledge of past, present 
and future. He can therefore see the birth and 
death of himself and others. (28) Just as the 
bodies of aquatics cannot be injured by water, 
similarly, the body of a yogī whose conscious-
ness is pacified by devotion to Me and who is 
fully developed in yoga scien ce cannot be in-
jured by fire, sun, water, poison, and so forth. 
(29) My devotee becomes unconquerable by 
meditating on My opulent incarnations, which 
are decorated with Śrīvatsa and various weap-
ons and are endowed with imperial parapherna-
lia such as flags,  ornamental umbrellas and 
fans. (30)  

A learned devotee who worships Me 
through yoga meditation certainly obtains in all 
respects the mystic perfections that I have de-
scribed. (31) For a sage who has conquered his 
senses, breathing and mind, who is self -con-
trolled and always absorbed in meditation on 
Me, what mystic perfection could possibly be 
difficult to achieve? (32) Learned experts in de-
votional service state that the mystic perfec-
tions of yoga that I have mentioned are actually 
impediments and are a w aste of time for one 
who is practicing the supreme yoga, by which 
one achieves all perfection in life directly from 
Me. (33) Whatever mystic perfections can be 
achieved by good birth, herbs, austerities and 
mantras can all be achieved by devotional ser-
vice to Me; indeed, one cannot achieve the ac-
tual perfection of yoga by any other means. 
(34) My dear Uddhava, I am the cause, the pro-
tector and the Lord of all mystic perfections, of 
the yoga system, of analytic knowledge, of pure 
activity and of the communit y of learned Vedic 
teachers. (35) Just as the same material ele-
ments exist within and outside of all material bodies, similarly, I cannot be covered by any-
thing else. I exist within everything as the Su-
persoul and outside of everything in My all -
pervading feature. (36)  

SB 11.16: The Lord’s Opulence  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Lord, You are 
beginningless and endless, the Absolute Truth 
Himself, unlimited by anything else. You are 
the protector and life -giver, the destruction and 
creation of all things that e xist. (1) My dear 
Lord, although it is difficult for the impious to 
understand that You are situated in all superior 
and inferior creations, those brāhma ṇas who 
are actual knowers of the Vedic conclusion 
worship You in truth. (2) Please tell me of the 
perfections that great sages achieve by wor-
shiping You with devotion. Also, kindly ex-
plain which of Your different forms they wor-
ship. (3) O my Lord, maintainer of all, although 
You are the Supersoul of the living entities, 
You remain hidden. Thus being bewild ered by 
You, the living entities cannot see You, alt-
hough You are seeing them. (4) O supremely 
potent Lord, please explain to me Your innu-
merable potencies, which You manifest on the 
earth, in heaven, in hell and indeed in all direc-
tions. I offer my humble  obeisances at Your lo-
tus feet, which are the shelter of all holy places. 
(5) 

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  O best of those who know how to inquire, 
on the Battlefield of Kuruk ṣetra, Arjuna, desir-
ing to fight with his rivals, asked Me the same 
question that you are now posing. (6)  

On the Battlefield of Kuruk ṣetra Arjuna 
thought that killing his relatives would be an 
abominable, irreligious activity, motivated 
only by his desire to acquire a kingdom. He 
therefore desisted from the battle, thinki ng, “I 
would be the killer of my relatives. They would 
be destroyed.” Thus Arjuna was afflicted with 
mundane consciousness. (7) At that time I en-
lightened Arjuna, the tiger among men, with 
logical arguments, and thus in the front of the 
battle Arjuna addre ssed Me with questions in 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

845 
 the same way that you are now inquiring. (8) 
My dear Uddhava, I am the Supersoul of all liv-
ing entities, and therefore I am naturally their 
well-wisher and supreme controller. Being the 
creator, maintainer and annihilator of all e nti-
ties, I am not different from them. (9) I am the 
ultimate goal of all those seeking progress, and 
I am time among those who exert control. I am 
the equilibrium of the modes of material nature, 
and I am natural virtue among the pious. (10) 
Among things p ossessing qualities I am the pri-
mary manifestation of nature, and among great 
things I am the total material creation. Among 
subtle things I am the spirit soul, and of things 
that are difficult to conquer I am the mind. (11) 
Among the Vedas I am their orig inal teacher, 
Lord Brahmā, and of all mantras I am the three -
lettered o ṁkāra. Among letters I am the first 
letter, “a,” and among sacred meters I am the 
Gāyatrī mantra. (12) Among the demigods I am 
Indra, and among the Vasus I am Agni, the god 
of fire. I a m Vi ṣṇu among the sons of Aditi, and 
among the Rudras I am Lord Śiva. (13) Among 
saintly brāhma ṇas I am Bh ṛgu Muni, and I am 
Manu among saintly kings. I am Nārada Muni 
among saintly demigods, and I am Kāmadhenu 
among cows. (14) I am Lord Kapila among per-
fected beings and Garu ḍa among birds. I am 
Dakṣa among the progenitors of mankind, and 
I am Aryamā among the forefathers. (15) My 
dear Uddhava, among the demoniac sons of 
Diti know Me to be Prahlāda Mahārāja, the 
saintly lord of the asuras. Among the stars a nd 
herbs I am their lord, Candra(the moon), and 
among Yak ṣas and Rāk ṣasas I am the lord of 
wealth, Kuvera. (16) I am Airāvata among 
lordly elephants, and among aquatics I am Var-
uṇa, the lord of the seas. Among all things that 
heat and illuminate I am the s un, and among 
human beings I am the king. (17) Among 
horses I am Uccai ḥśravā, and I am gold among 
metals. I am Yamarāja among those who sup-
press and punish, and among serpents I am 
Vāsuki. (18) O sinless Uddhava, among the 
best of snakes I am Anantadeva, a nd among 
those animals with sharp horns or teeth I am the 
lion. Among the social orders I am the fourth, 
or the renounced order of life, and among the 
occupational divisions I am the first, the brāhma ṇas. (19) Among sacred and flowing 
things I am the holy Ganges, and among steady 
bodies of water I am the ocean. Among weap-
ons I am the bow, and of the wielders of weap-
ons I am Lord Śiva. (20)  

Among residences I am Mount Sumeru, and 
of impervious places I am the Himālayas. 
Among trees I am the holy fig tree, a nd among 
plants I am those that bear grains. (21) Among 
priests I am Vasi ṣṭha Muni, and among those 
highly situated in Vedic culture I am B ṛhaspati. 
I am Kārtikeya among great military leaders, 
and among those advancing in superior ways of 
life I am the gr eat personality Lord Brahmā. 
(22) Among sacrifices I am study of the Veda, 
and I am nonviolence among vows. Among all 
things that purify I am the wind, fire, the sun, 
water and speech. (23) Among the eight pro-
gressive states of yoga I am the final stage, 
samādhi, in which the soul is completely sepa-
rated from illusion. Among those desiring vic-
tory I am prudent political counsel, and among 
processes of expert discrimination I am the sci-
ence of the soul, by which one distinguishes 
spirit from matter. Among al l speculative phi-
losophers I am diversity of perception. (24) 
Among ladies I am Śatarūpā, and among male 
personalities I am her husband, Svāyambhuva 
Manu. I am Nārāya ṇa among the sages and 
Sanat -kumāra among brahmacārīs. (25) 
Among religious principles I a m renunciation, 
and of all types of security I am consciousness 
of the eternal soul within. Of secrets I am pleas-
ant speech and silence, and among sexual pairs 
I am Brahmā. (26) Among the vigilant cycles 
of time I am the year, and among seasons I am 
spring . Among months I am Mārgaśīr ṣa, and 
among lunar houses I am the auspicious Abhi-
jit. (27) Among ages I am the Satya -yuga, the 
age of truth, and among steady sages I am 
Devala and Asita. Among those who have di-
vided the Vedas I am K ṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Veda-
vyāsa,  and among learned scholars I am 
Śukrācārya, the knower of spiritual science. 
(28) Among those entitled to the name Bhaga-
vān I am Vāsudeva, and indeed, you, Uddhava, 
represent Me among the devotees. I am 
Hanumān among the Kimpuru ṣas, and among 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

846 
 the Vidyādha ras I am Sudarśana. (29) Among 
jewels I am the ruby, and among beautiful 
things I am the lotus cup. Among all types of 
grass I am the sacred kuśa, and of oblations I 
am ghee and other ingredients obtained from 
the cow. (30) Among the enterprising I am for-
tune, and among the cheaters I am gambling. I 
am the forgiveness of the tolerant and the good 
qualities of those in the mode of goodness. (31) 
Of the powerful I am bodily and mental 
strength, and I am the devotional activities of 
My devotees. My devotees wo rship Me in nine 
different forms, among which I am the original 
and primary Vāsudeva. (32) Among the 
Gandharvas I am Viśvāvasu, and I am 
Pūrvacitti among the heavenly Apsaras. I am 
the steadiness of mountains and the fragrant 
aroma of the earth. (33) I am the sweet taste of 
water, and among brilliant things I am the sun. 
I am the effulgence of the sun, moon and stars, 
and I am the transcendental sound that vibrates 
in the sky. (34) Among those dedicated to brah-
minical culture I am Bali Mahārāja, the son of 
Virocana, and I am Arjuna among heroes. In-
deed, I am the creation, maintenance and anni-
hilation of all living entities. (35) I am the func-
tions of the five working sensesthe legs, 
speech, anus, hands and sex organsas well as 
those of the five knowledge -acquiring sens-
estouch, sight, taste, hearing and smell. I am 
also the potency by which each of the senses 
experiences its particular sense object. (36) I 
am form, taste, aroma, touch and sound; false 
ego; the mahat -tattva; earth, water, fire, air and 
sky; the  living entity; material nature; the 
modes of goodness, passion and ignorance; and 
the transcendental Lord. All these items, along 
with knowledge of their individual symptoms 
and the steady conviction that results from this 
knowledge, represent Me. (37) As  the Supreme 
Lord I am the basis of the living entity, of the 
modes of nature and of the mahat -tattva. Thus 
I am everything, and nothing whatsoever can 
exist without Me. (38) Even though over a pe-
riod of time I might count all the atoms of the 
universe, I could not count all of My opulences 
which I manifest within innumerable universes. 
(39) Whatever power, beauty, fame, opulence, humility, renunciation, mental pleasure, for-
tune, strength, tolerance or spiritual knowledge 
there may be is simply an expansion  of My op-
ulence. (40)  

I have briefly described to you all My spir-
itual opulences and also the extraordinary ma-
terial features of My creation, which are per-
ceived by the mind and defined in different 
ways according to circumstances. (41) There-
fore, control  your speaking, subdue the mind, 
conquer the life air, regulate the senses and 
through purified intelligence bring your ra-
tional faculties under control. In this way you 
will never again fall onto the path of material 
existence. (42) A transcendentalist wh o does 
not completely control his words and mind by 
superior intelligence will find that his spiritual 
vows, austerities and charity flow away just as 
water flows out of an unbaked clay pot. (43) 
Being surrendered to Me, one should control 
the speech, mind  and life air, and then through 
loving devotional intelligence one will com-
pletely fulfill the mission of life. (44)  

SB 11.17: Lord K ṛṣṇa’s Description of 
the Var ṇāśrama System  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Lord, previ-
ously You described the principles of de vo-
tional service that are to be practiced by follow-
ers of the var ṇāśrama system and even ordi-
nary, unregulated human beings. My dear lo-
tus-eyed Lord, now please explain to me how 
all human beings can achieve loving service 
unto You by the execution of thei r prescribed 
duties. (1 -2) My dear Lord, O mighty -armed 
one, previously in Your form of Lord Ha ṁsa 
You spoke to Lord Brahmā those religious 
principles that bring supreme happiness to the 
practitioner. My dear Mādhava, now much time 
has passed, and that whi ch You previously in-
structed will soon practically cease to exist, O 
subduer of the enemy. (3 -4) My dear Lord 
Acyuta, there is no speaker, creator and protec-
tor of supreme religious principles other than 
Your Lordship, either on the earth or even in 
the as sembly of Lord Brahmā, where the per-
sonified Vedas reside. Thus, my dear Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

847 
 Madhusūdana, when You, who are the very 
creator, protector and speaker of spiritual 
knowledge, abandon the earth, who will again 
speak this lost knowledge? (5 -6) Therefore, my 
Lord, since You are the knower of all religious 
principles, please describe to me the human be-
ings who may execute the path of loving ser-
vice to You and how such service is to be ren-
dered. (7)  

ŚrīŚukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Śrī Uddhava, 
the best of devotees, thu s inquired from the 
Lord. Hearing his question, the Personality of 
Godhead, Śrī K ṛṣṇa, was pleased and for the 
welfare of all conditioned souls spoke those re-
ligious principles that are eternal. (8)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava , your question is faith-
ful to religious principles and thus gives rise to 
the highest perfection in life, pure devotional 
service, for both ordinary human beings and the 
followers of the var ṇāśrama system. Now 
please learn from Me those supreme religious 
principles. (9) In the beginning, in Satya -yuga, 
there is only one social class, called ha ṁsa, to 
which all human beings belong. In that age all 
people are unalloyed devotees of the Lord from 
birth, and thus learned scholars call this first 
age K ṛta-yuga, or the age in which all religious 
duties are perfectly fulfilled. (10) In Satya -yuga 
the undivided Veda is expressed by the syllable 
om, and I am the only object of mental activi-
ties. I become manifest as the four -legged bull 
of religion, and thus the inha bitants of Satya -
yuga, fixed in austerity and free from all sins, 
worship Me as Lord Ha ṁsa. (11) O greatly for-
tunate one, at the beginning of Tretā -yuga Ve-
dic knowledge appeared from My heart, which 
is the abode of the air of life, in three divi-
sionsas Ṛg, Sāma and Yajur. Then from that 
knowledge I appeared as threefold sacrifice. 
(12) In Tretā -yuga the four social orders were 
manifested from the universal form of the Per-
sonality of Godhead. The brāhma ṇas appeared 
from the Lord’s face, the k ṣatriyas from th e 
Lord’s arms, the vaiśyas from the Lord’s thighs 
and the śūdras from the legs of that mighty 
form. Each social division was recognized by its particular duties and behavior. (13) The mar-
ried order of life appeared from the loins of My 
universal form, and the celibate students came 
from My heart. The forest -dwelling retired or-
der of life appeared from My chest, and the re-
nounced order of life was situated within the 
head of My universal form. (14)  

The various occupational and social divi-
sions of human soci ety appeared according to 
inferior and superior natures manifest in the sit-
uation of the individual’s birth. (15) Peaceful-
ness, self -control, austerity, cleanliness, satis-
faction, tolerance, simple straightforwardness, 
devotion to Me, mercy and truthfulnes s are the 
natural qualities of the brāhma ṇas. (16) Dy-
namic power, bodily strength, determination, 
heroism, tolerance, generosity, great endeavor, 
steadiness, devotion to the brāhma ṇas and lead-
ership are the natural qualities of the k ṣatriyas. 
(17) Faith in  Vedic civilization, dedication to 
charity, freedom from hypocrisy, service to the 
brāhma ṇas and perpetually desiring to accumu-
late more money are the natural qualities of the 
vaiśyas. (18) Service without duplicity to the 
brāhma ṇas, cows, demigods and oth er worship-
able personalities, and complete satisfaction 
with whatever income is obtained in such ser-
vice, are the natural qualities of śūdras. (19) 
Dirtiness, dishonesty, thievery, faithlessness, 
useless quarrel, lust, anger and hankering con-
stitute the na ture of those in the lowest position 
outside the var ṇāśrama system. (20) Nonvio-
lence, truthfulness, honesty, desire for the hap-
piness and welfare of all others and freedom 
from lust, anger and greed constitute duties for 
all members of society. (21)  

The t wice -born member of society achieves 
second birth through the sequence of purifica-
tory ceremonies culminating in Gāyatrī initia-
tion. Being summoned by the spiritual master, 
he should reside within the guru’s āśrama and 
with a self -controlled mind carefully  study the 
Vedic literature. (22) The brahmacārī should 
regularly dress with a belt of straw and deerskin 
garments. He should wear matted hair, carry a 
rod and waterpot and be decorated with ak ṣa 
beads and a sacred thread. Carrying pure kuśa 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

848 
 grass in his h and, he should never accept a lux-
urious or sensuous sitting place. He should not 
unnecessarily polish his teeth, nor should he 
bleach and iron his clothes. (23) A brahmacārī 
should always remain silent while bathing, eat-
ing, attending sacrificial performan ces, chant-
ing japa or passing stool and urine. He should 
not cut his nails and hair, including the armpit 
and pubic hair. (24) One observing the vow of 
celibate brahmacārī life should never pass se-
men. If the semen by chance spills out by itself, 
the brahm acārī should immediately take bath in 
water, control his breath by prā ṇāyāma and 
chant the Gāyatrī mantra. (25) Purified and 
fixed in consciousness, the brahmacārī should 
worship the fire -god, sun, ācārya, cows, 
brāhma ṇas, guru, elderly respectable persons  
and demigods. He should perform such wor-
ship at sunrise and sunset, without speaking but 
by silently chanting or murmuring the appro-
priate mantras. (26) One should know the 
ācārya as Myself and never disrespect him in 
any way. One should not envy him, thi nking 
him an ordinary man, for he is the representa-
tive of all the demigods. (27) In the morning 
and evening one should collect foodstuffs and 
other articles and deliver them to the spiritual 
master. Then, being self -controlled, one should 
accept for onese lf that which is allotted by the 
ācārya. (28) While engaged in serving the spir-
itual master one should remain as a humble 
servant, and thus when the guru is walking the 
servant should humbly walk behind. When the 
guru lies down to sleep, the servant should  also 
lie down nearby, and when the guru has awak-
ened, the servant should sit near him, massag-
ing his lotus feet and rendering other, similar 
services. When the guru is sitting down on his 
āsana, the servant should stand nearby with 
folded hands, awaiting the guru’s order. In this 
way one should always worship the spiritual 
master. (29) Until the student has completed his 
Vedic education he should remain engaged in 
the āśrama of the spiritual master, should re-
main completely free of material sense gratifi-
cation and should not break his vow of celibacy 
[brahmacarya]. (30)  
 If the brahmacārī student desires to ascend 
to the Maharloka or Brahmaloka planets, then 
he should completely surrender his activities to 
the spiritual master and, observing the powerful 
vow of perpetual celibacy, dedicate himself to 
superior Vedic studies. (31) Thus enlightened 
in Vedic knowledge by service to the spiritual 
master, freed from all sins and duality, one 
should worship Me as the Supersoul, as I ap-
pear within fire, the spiritua l master, one’s own 
self and all living entities. (32) Those who are 
not marriedsannyāsīs, vānaprasthas and brah-
macārīsshould never associate with women by 
glancing, touching, conversing, joking or sport-
ing. Neither should they ever associate with any 
living entity engaged in sexual activities. (33) 
My dear Uddhava, general cleanliness, wash-
ing the hands, bathing, performing religious 
services at sunrise, noon and sunset, worship-
ing Me, visiting holy places, chanting japa, 
avoiding that which is untouchable , uneatable 
or not to be discussed, and remembering My 
existence within all living entities as the Super-
soulthese principles should be followed by all 
members of society through regulation of the 
mind, words and body. (34 -35) A brāhma ṇa ob-
serving the great  vow of celibacy becomes bril-
liant like fire and by serious austerity burns to 
ashes the propensity to perform material activ-
ities. Free from the contamination of material 
desire, he becomes My devotee. (36)  

A brahmacārī who has completed his Vedic 
educat ion and desires to enter household life 
should offer proper remuneration to the spir-
itual master, bathe, cut his hair, put on proper 
clothes, and so on. Then, taking permission 
from the guru, he should go back to his home. 
(37) A brahmacārī desiring to ful fill his mate-
rial desires should live at home with his family, 
and a householder who is eager to purify his 
consciousness should enter the forest, whereas 
a purified brāhma ṇa should accept the re-
nounced order of life. One who is not surren-
dered to Me shoul d move progressively from 
one āśrama to another, never acting otherwise. 
(38) 

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

849 
 One who desires to establish family life 
should marry a wife of his own caste, who is 
beyond reproach and younger in age. If one de-
sires to accept many wives he must marry them 
after the first marriage, and each wife should be 
of a successively lower caste. (39) All twice -
born menbrāhma ṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyasmust 
perform sacrifice, study the Vedic literature 
and give charity. Only the brāhma ṇas, how-
ever, accept charity, teach the Vedic knowledge 
and perform sacrifice on behalf of others. (40) 
A brāhma ṇa who considers that accepting char-
ity from others will destroy his austerity, spir-
itual influence and fame should maintain him-
self by the other two brahminical occupations, 
namel y teaching Vedic knowledge and per-
forming sacrifice. If the brāhma ṇa considers 
that those two occupations also compromise his 
spiritual position, then he should collect re-
jected grains in agricultural fields and live 
without any dependence on others. (41) The 
body of a brāhma ṇa is not intended to enjoy in-
significant material sense gratification; rather, 
by accepting difficult austerities in his life, a 
brāhma ṇa will enjoy unlimited happiness after 
death. (42)  

A brāhma ṇa householder should remain sat-
isfied in mind by gleaning rejected grains from 
agricultural fields and marketplaces. Keeping 
himself free of personal desire, he should prac-
tice magnanimous religious principles, with 
consciousness absorbed in Me. In this way a 
brāhma ṇa may stay at home as a hou seholder 
without very much attachment and thus achieve 
liberation. (43) Just as a ship rescues those who 
have fallen into the ocean, similarly, I very 
quickly rescue from all calamities those per-
sons who uplift brāhma ṇas and devotees suffer-
ing in a poverty -stricken condition. (44) Just as 
the chief bull elephant protects all other ele-
phants in his herd and defends himself as well, 
similarly, a fearless king, just like a father, must 
save all of the citizens from difficulty and also 
protect himself. (45) An earthly king who pro-
tects himself and all citizens by removing all 
sins from his kingdom will certainly enjoy with 
Lord Indra in airplanes as brilliant as the sun. 
(46) If a brāhma ṇa cannot support himself through his regular duties and is thus suffering, 
he may adopt the occupation of a merchant and 
overcome his destitute condition by buying and 
selling material things. If he continues to suffer 
extreme poverty even as a merchant, then he 
may adopt the occupation of a k ṣatriya, taking 
sword in hand. But he  cannot in any circum-
stances become like a dog, accepting an ordi-
nary master. (47) A king or other member of 
the royal order who cannot maintain himself by 
his normal occupation may act as a vaiśya, may 
live by hunting or may act as a brāhma ṇa by 
teaching others Vedic knowledge. But he may 
not under any circumstances adopt the profes-
sion of a śūdra. (48) A vaiśya, or mercantile 
man, who cannot maintain himself may adopt 
the occupation of a śūdra, and a śūdra who can-
not find a master can engage in simple act ivities 
like making baskets and mats of straw. How-
ever, all members of society who have adopted 
inferior occupations in emergency situations 
must give up those substitute occupations when 
the difficulties have passed. (49) One in the 
gṛhastha order of life  should daily worship the 
sages by Vedic study, the forefathers by offer-
ing the mantra svadhā, the demigods by chant-
ing svāhā, all living entities by offering shares 
of one’s meals, and human beings by offering 
grains and water. Thus considering the demi-
gods, sages, forefathers, living entities and hu-
man beings to be manifestations of My po-
tency, one should daily perform these five sac-
rifices. (50) A householder should comfortably 
maintain his dependents either with money that 
comes of its own accord or wit h that gathered 
by honest execution of one’s duties. According 
to one’s means, one should perform sacrifices 
and other religious ceremonies. (51)  

A householder taking care of many depend-
ent family members should not become materi-
ally attached to them, nor  should he become 
mentally unbalanced, considering himself to be 
the lord. An intelligent householder should see 
that all possible future happiness, just like that 
which he has already experienced, is tempo-
rary. (52) The association of children, wife, rel-
atives and friends is just like the brief meeting 
of travelers. With each change of body one is 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

850 
 separated from all such associates, just as one 
loses the objects one possesses in a dream when 
the dream is over. (53) Deeply considering the 
actual situation, a liberated soul should live at 
home just like a guest, without any sense of 
proprietorship or false ego. In this way he will 
not be bound or entangled by domestic affairs. 
(54) A householder devotee who worships Me 
by execution of his family duties may re main at 
home, go to a holy place or, if he has a respon-
sible son, take sannyāsa. (55) But a house-
holder whose mind is attached to his home and 
who is thus disturbed by ardent desires to enjoy 
his money and children, who is lusty after 
women, who is possess ed of a miserly mental-
ity and who unintelligently thinks, “Everything 
is mine and I am everything,” is certainly 
bound in illusion. (56) “O my poor elderly par-
ents, and my wife with a mere infant in her 
arms, and my other young children! Without 
me they ha ve absolutely no one to protect them 
and will suffer unbearably. How can my poor 
relatives possibly live without me?” (57) Thus, 
because of his foolish mentality, a householder 
whose heart is overwhelmed by family attach-
ment is never satisfied. Constantly meditating 
on his relatives, he dies and enters into the dark-
ness of ignorance. (58)  

SB 11.18: Description of Var ṇāśrama -
dharma  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  One who desires to adopt the third order 
of life, vānaprastha, should enter the fores t with 
a peaceful mind, leaving his wife with his ma-
ture sons, or else taking her along with him. (1) 
Having adopted the vānaprastha order of life, 
one should arrange one’s sustenance by eating 
uncontaminated bulbs, roots and fruits that 
grow in the forest . One may dress oneself with 
tree bark, grass, leaves or animal skins. (2) The 
vānaprastha should not groom the hair on his 
head, body or face, should not manicure his 
nails, should not pass stool and urine at irregu-
lar times and should not make a special en-
deavor for dental hygiene. He should be content 
to take bath in water three times daily and 
should sleep on the ground. (3) Thus engaged as a vānaprastha, one should execute penance 
during the hottest summer days by subjecting 
oneself to burning fires on  four sides and the 
blazing sun overhead; during the rainy season 
one should remain outside, subjecting oneself 
to torrents of rain; and in the freezing winter 
one should remain submerged in water up to 
one’s neck. (4) One may eat foodstuffs pre-
pared with fire, such as grains, or fruits ripened 
by time. One may grind one’s food with mortar 
and stone or with one’s own teeth. (5) The 
vānaprastha should personally collect whatever 
he requires for his bodily maintenance, care-
fully considering the time, place an d his own 
capacity. He should never collect provisions for 
the future. (6) One who has accepted the 
vānaprastha order of life should perform sea-
sonal sacrifices by offering oblations of caru 
and sacrificial cakes prepared from rice and 
other grains found i n the forest. The 
vānaprastha, however, may never offer animal 
sacrifices to Me, even those sacrifices men-
tioned in the Vedas. (7) The vānaprastha should 
perform the agnihotra, darśa and paur ṇamāsa 
sacrifices, as he did while in the g ṛhastha -
āśrama. He sho uld also perform the vows and 
sacrifices of cāturmāsya, since all of these ritu-
als are enjoined for the vānaprastha -āśrama by 
expert knowers of the Vedas. (8) The saintly 
vānaprastha, practicing severe penances and 
accepting only the bare necessities of li fe, be-
comes so emaciated that he appears to be mere 
skin and bones. Thus worshiping Me through 
severe penances, he goes to the Maharloka 
planet and then directly achieves Me. (9) One 
who with long endeavor executes this painful 
but exalted penance, which a wards ultimate lib-
eration, simply to achieve insignificant sense 
gratification must be considered the greatest 
fool. (10)  

If the vānaprastha is overtaken by old age 
and because of his trembling body is no longer 
able to execute his prescribed duties, he s hould 
place the sacrificial fire within his heart by 
meditation. Then, fixing his mind on Me, he 
should enter into the fire and give up his body. 
(11) If the vānaprastha, understanding that even 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

851 
 promotion to Brahmaloka is a miserable situa-
tion, develops co mplete detachment from all 
possible results of fruitive activities, then he 
may take the sannyāsa order of life. (12) Hav-
ing worshiped Me according to scriptural in-
junctions and having given all one’s property to 
the sacrificial priest, one should place th e fire 
sacrifice within oneself. Thus, with the mind 
completely detached, one should enter the 
sannyāsa order of life. (13) “This man taking 
sannyāsa is going to surpass us and go back 
home, back to Godhead.” Thus thinking, the 
demigods create stumbling bl ocks on the path 
of the sannyāsī by appearing before him in the 
shape of his former wife or other women and 
attractive objects. But the sannyāsī should pay 
the demigods and their manifestations no heed. 
(14) 

If the sannyāsī desires to wear something be-
sides a mere kaupīna, he may use another cloth 
around his waist and hips to cover the kaupīna. 
Otherwise, if there is no emergency, he should 
not accept anything besides his da ṇḍa and wa-
terpot. (15) A saintly person should step or 
place his foot on the ground  only after verifying 
with his eyes that there are no living creatures, 
such as insects, who might be injured by his 
foot. He should drink water only after filtering 
it through a portion of his cloth, and he should 
speak only words that possess the purity of 
truth. Similarly, he should perform only those 
activities his mind has carefully ascertained to 
be pure. (16) One who has not accepted the 
three internal disciplines of avoiding useless 
speech, avoiding useless activities and control-
ling the life air ca n never be considered a 
sannyāsī merely because of his carrying bam-
boo rods. (17) Rejecting those houses that are 
polluted and untouchable, one should approach 
without previous calculation seven houses and 
be satisfied with that which is obtained there by 
begging. According to necessity, one may ap-
proach each of the four occupational orders of 
society. (18) Taking the food gathered through 
begging, one should leave the populated areas 
and go to a reservoir of water in a secluded 
place. There, having taken a  bath and washed 
one’s hands thoroughly, one should distribute portions of the food to others who may request 
it. One should do this without speaking. Then, 
having thoroughly cleansed the remnants, one 
should eat everything on one’s plate, leaving 
nothing for future consumption. (19) Without 
any material attachment, with senses fully con-
trolled, remaining enthusiastic, and satisfied in 
realization of the Supreme Lord and his own 
self, the saintly person should travel about the 
earth alone. Having equal visi on everywhere, 
he should be steady on the spiritual platform. 
(20) Dwelling in a safe and solitary place, his 
mind purified by constant thought of Me, the 
sage should concentrate on the soul alone, real-
izing it to be nondifferent from Me. (21) By 
steady kn owledge a sage should clearly ascer-
tain the nature of the soul’s bondage and liber-
ation. Bondage occurs when the senses are de-
viated to sense gratification, and complete con-
trol of the senses constitutes liberation. (22) 
Therefore, completely controlling t he five 
senses and the mind by K ṛṣṇa consciousness, a 
sage, having experienced spiritual bliss within 
the self, should live detached from insignificant 
material sense gratification. (23) The sage 
should travel in sanctified places, by flowing 
rivers and wi thin the solitude of mountains and 
forests. He should enter the cities, towns and 
pasturing grounds and approach ordinary work-
ing men only to beg his bare sustenance. (24) 
One in the vānaprastha order of life should al-
ways practice taking charity from othe rs, for 
one is thereby freed from illusion and quickly 
becomes perfect in spiritual life. Indeed, one 
who subsists on food grains obtained in such a 
humble manner purifies his existence. (25)  

One should never see as ultimate reality 
those material things which obviously will per-
ish. With consciousness free from material at-
tachment, one should retire from all activities 
meant for material progress in this life and the 
next. (26)  

One should logically consider the universe, 
which is situated within the Lord,  and one’s 
own material body, which is composed of 
mind, speech and life air, to be ultimately prod-
ucts of the Lord’s illusory energy. Thus situated 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

852 
 in the self, one should give up one’s faith in 
these things and should never again make them 
the object of one’s meditation. (27) A learned 
transcendentalist dedicated to the cultivation of 
knowledge and thus detached from external ob-
jects, or My devotee who is detached even from 
desire for liberationboth neglect those duties 
based on external rituals or paraph ernalia. Thus 
their conduct is beyond the range of rules and 
regulations. (28) Although most wise, the par-
amaha ṁsa should enjoy life like a child, obliv-
ious to honor and dishonor; although most ex-
pert, he should behave like a stunted, incompe-
tent person; a lthough most learned, he should 
speak like an insane person; and although a 
scholar learned in Vedic regulations, he should 
behave in an unrestricted manner. (29) A devo-
tee should never engage in the fruitive rituals 
mentioned in the karma -kāṇḍa section of  the 
Vedas, nor should he become atheistic, acting 
or speaking in opposition to Vedic injunctions. 
Similarly, he should never speak like a mere lo-
gician or skeptic or take any side whatsoever in 
useless arguments. (30) A saintly person should 
never let oth ers frighten or disturb him and, 
similarly, should never frighten or disturb other 
people. He should tolerate the insults of others 
and should never himself belittle anyone. He 
should never create hostility with anyone for 
the sake of the material body, fo r he would thus 
be no better than an animal. (31) The one Su-
preme Lord is situated within all material bod-
ies and within everyone’s soul. Just as the 
moon is reflected in innumerable reservoirs of 
water, the Supreme Lord, although one, is pre-
sent within ev eryone. Thus every material body 
is ultimately composed of the energy of the one 
Supreme Lord. (32)  

If at times one does not obtain proper food 
one should not be depressed, and when one ob-
tains sumptuous food one should not rejoice. 
Being fixed in determi nation, one should un-
derstand both situations to be under the control 
of God. (33) If required, one should endeavor 
to get sufficient foodstuffs, because it is always 
necessary and proper to maintain one’s health. 
When the senses, mind and life air are fit , one can contemplate spiritual truth, and by under-
standing the truth one is liberated. (34) A sage 
should accept the food, clothing and beddingbe 
they of excellent or inferior qualitythat come of 
their own accord. (35) Just as I, the Supreme 
Lord, execute  regulative duties by My own free 
will, similarly, one who has realized 
knowledge of Me should maintain general 
cleanliness, purify his hands with water, take 
bath and execute other regulative duties not by 
force but by his own free will. (36) A realized 
soul no longer sees anything as separate from 
Me, for his realized knowledge of Me has de-
stroyed such illusory perception. Since the ma-
terial body and mind were previously accus-
tomed to this kind of perception, it may some-
times appear to recur; but at the t ime of death 
the self -realized soul achieves opulences equal 
to Mine. (37)  

One who is detached from sense gratifica-
tion, knowing its result to be miserable, and 
who desires spiritual perfection, but who has 
not seriously analyzed the process for obtaining  
Me, should approach a bona fide and learned 
spiritual master. (38) Until a devotee has 
clearly realized spiritual knowledge, he should 
continue with great faith and respect and with-
out envy to render personal service to the guru, 
who is nondifferent from Me. (39) One who has 
not controlled the six forms of illusion [lust, an-
ger, greed, excitement, false pride and intoxica-
tion], whose intelligence, the leader of the 
senses, is extremely attached to material things, 
who is bereft of knowledge and detachment,  
who adopts the sannyāsa order of life to make 
a living, who denies the worshipable demigods, 
his own self and the Supreme Lord within him-
self, thus ruining all religious principles, and 
who is still infected by material contamination, 
is deviated and lost  both in this life and the 
next. (40 -41) The main religious duties of a 
sannyāsī are equanimity and nonviolence, 
whereas for the vānaprastha austerity and phil-
osophical understanding of the difference be-
tween the body and soul are prominent. The 
main dutie s of a householder are to give shelter 
to all living entities and perform sacrifices, and 
the brahmacārī is mainly engaged in serving the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

853 
 spiritual master. (42) A householder may ap-
proach his wife for sex only at the time pre-
scribed for begetting children.  Otherwise, the 
householder should practice celibacy, austerity, 
cleanliness of mind and body, satisfaction in his 
natural position, and friendship toward all liv-
ing entities. Worship of Me is to be practiced 
by all human beings, regardless of social or oc-
cupational divisions. (43) One who worships 
Me by his prescribed duty, having no other ob-
ject of worship, and who remains conscious of 
Me as present in all living entities, achieves un-
flinching devotional service unto Me. (44) My 
dear Uddhava, I am the Sup reme Lord of all 
worlds, and I create and destroy this universe, 
being its ultimate cause. I am thus the Absolute 
Truth, and one who worships Me with unfailing 
devotional service comes to Me. (45) Thus, one 
who has purified his existence by execution of 
his prescribed duties, who fully understands 
My supreme position and who is endowed with 
scriptural and realized knowledge, very soon 
achieves Me. (46) Those who are followers of 
this var ṇāśrama system accept religious princi-
ples according to authorized trad itions of 
proper conduct. When such var ṇāśrama duties 
are dedicated to Me in loving service, they 
award the supreme perfection of life. (47) My 
dear saintly Uddhava, I have now described to 
you, just as you inquired, the means by which 
My devotee, perfectl y engaged in his pre-
scribed duty, can come back to Me, the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead. (48)  

SB 11.19: The Perfection of Spiritual 
Knowledge  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: A self -realized person who has cultivated 
scriptural knowledge up to the point of enlight-
enment and who is free from impersonal spec-
ulation, understanding the material universe to 
be simply illusion, should surrender unto Me 
both that knowledge and the means by which 
he achieved it. (1) For learned, self -realized 
philosophe rs I am the only object of worship, 
the desired goal of life, the means for achieving 
that goal, and the settled conclusion of all 
knowledge. Indeed, because I am the cause of their happiness and their freedom from unhap-
piness, such learned souls have no e ffective 
purpose or dear object in life except Me. (2) 
Those who have achieved complete perfection 
through philosophical and realized knowledge 
recognize My lotus feet to be the supreme tran-
scendental object. Thus the learned transcen-
dentalist is most dear  to Me, and by his perfect 
knowledge he maintains Me in happiness. (3) 
That perfection which is produced by a small 
fraction of spiritual knowledge cannot be dupli-
cated by performing austerities, visiting holy 
places, chanting silent prayers, giving in cha r-
ity or engaging in other pious activities. (4)  

Therefore, My dear Uddhava, through 
knowledge you should understand your actual 
self. Then, advancing by clear realization of 
Vedic knowledge, you should worship Me in 
the mood of loving devotion. (5) Former ly, 
great sages, through the sacrifice of Vedic 
knowledge and spiritual enlightenment, wor-
shiped Me within themselves, knowing Me to 
be the Supreme Lord of all sacrifice and the Su-
persoul in everyone’s heart. Thus coming to 
Me, these sages achieved the sup reme perfec-
tion. (6) My dear Uddhava, the material body 
and mind, composed of the three modes of ma-
terial nature, attach themselves to you, but they 
are actually illusion, since they appear only at 
the present, having no original or ultimate ex-
istence. How  is it possible, therefore, that the 
various stages of the body, namely birth, 
growth, reproduction, maintenance, dwindling 
and death, can have any relation to your eternal 
self? These phases relate only to the material 
body, which previously did not exist  and ulti-
mately will not exist. The body exists merely at 
the present moment. (7)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  O Lord of the universe! 
O form of the universe! Please explain to me 
that process of knowledge which automatically 
brings detachment and direct perception of the 
truth, which is transcendental, and which is tra-
ditional among great spiritual philosophers. 
This knowledge, sought by elevated personali-
ties, describes loving devotional service unto 
Your Lordship. (8) My dear Lord, for one who 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

854 
 is being tormented o n the terrible path of birth 
and death and is constantly overwhelmed by 
the threefold miseries, I do not see any possible 
shelter other than Your two lotus feet, which 
are just like a refreshing umbrella that pours 
down showers of delicious nectar. (9) O a l-
mighty Lord, please be merciful and uplift this 
hopeless living entity who has fallen into the 
dark hole of material existence, where the 
snake of time has bitten him. In spite of such 
abominable conditions, this poor living entity 
has tremendous desire t o relish the most insig-
nificant material happiness. Please save me, my 
Lord, by pouring down the nectar of Your in-
structions, which awaken one to spiritual free-
dom. (10)  
The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava, just as you are now in-
quirin g from Me, similarly, in the past King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira, who considered no one his enemy, 
inquired from the greatest of the upholders of 
religious principles, Bhī ṣma, while all of us 
were carefully listening. (11) When the great 
Battle of Kuruk ṣetra had ended, King 
Yudhi ṣṭhira was overwhelmed by the death of 
many beloved well -wishers, and thus, after lis-
tening to instructions about many religious 
principles, he finally inquired about the path of 
liberation. (12) I will now speak unto you those 
religious principl es of Vedic knowledge, de-
tachment, self -realization, faith and devotional 
service that were heard directly from the mouth 
of Bhī ṣmadeva. (13) I personally approve of 
that knowledge by which one sees the combi-
nation of nine, eleven, five and three elements 
in all living entities, and ultimately one element 
within those twenty -eight. (14) When one no 
longer sees the twenty -eight separated material 
elements, which arise from a single cause, but 
rather sees the cause itself, the Personality of 
Godheadat that ti me one’s direct experience is 
called viJnana, or self -realization. (15) Com-
mencement, termination and maintenance are 
the stages of material causation. That which 
consistently accompanies all these material 
phases from one creation to another and re-
mains a lone when all material phases are anni-
hilated is the one eternal. (16) From the four types of evidenceVedic knowledge, direct ex-
perience, traditional wisdom and logical induc-
tionone can understand the temporary, insub-
stantial situation of the material worl d, by 
which one becomes detached from the duality 
of this world. (17) An intelligent person should 
see that any material activity is subject to con-
stant transformation and that even on the planet 
of Lord Brahmā there is thus simply unhappi-
ness. Indeed, a w ise man can understand that 
just as all that he has seen is temporary, simi-
larly, all things within the universe have a be-
ginning and an end. (18)  

O sinless Uddhava, because you love Me, I 
previously explained to you the process of de-
votional service. Now  I will again explain the 
supreme process for achieving loving service 
unto Me. (19) Firm faith in the blissful narra-
tions of My pastimes, constant chanting of My 
glories, unwavering attachment to ceremonial 
worship of Me, praising Me through beautiful 
hymns, great respect for My devotional service, 
offering obeisances with the entire body, per-
forming first -class worship of My devotees, 
consciousness of Me in all living entities, offer-
ing of ordinary, bodily activities in My devo-
tional service, use of words  to describe My 
qualities, offering the mind to Me, rejection of 
all material desires, giving up wealth for My 
devotional service, renouncing material sense 
gratification and happiness, and performing all 
desirable activities such as charity, sacrifice, 
chanting, vows and austerities with the purpose 
of achieving Methese constitute actual reli-
gious principles, by which those human beings 
who have actually surrendered themselves to 
Me automatically develop love for Me. What 
other purpose or goal could remain  for My dev-
otee? (20 -24) 

When one’s peaceful consciousness, 
strengthened by the mode of goodness, is fixed 
on the Personality of Godhead, one achieves re-
ligiosity, knowledge, detachment and opu-
lence. (25) When consciousness is fixed on the 
material body, home and other, similar objects 
of sense gratification, one spends one’s life 
chasing after material objects with the help of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

855 
 the senses. Consciousness, thus powerfully af-
fected by the mode of passion, becomes dedi-
cated to impermanent things, and in this w ay 
irreligion, ignorance, attachment and wretched-
ness arise. (26) Actual religious principles are 
stated to be those that lead one to My devo-
tional service. Real knowledge is the awareness 
that reveals My all -pervading presence. De-
tachment is complete disi nterest in the objects 
of material sense gratification, and opulence is 
the eight mystic perfections, such as a ṇimā-sid-
dhi. (27)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Lord K ṛṣṇa, O 
chastiser of the enemies, please tell me how 
many types of disciplinary regulations an d reg-
ular daily duties there are. Also, my Lord, tell 
me what is mental equilibrium, what is self -
control, and what is the actual meaning of tol-
erance and steadfastness. What are charity, aus-
terity and heroism, and how are reality and 
truth to be described ? What is renunciation, and 
what is wealth? What is desirable, what is sac-
rifice, and what is religious remuneration? My 
dear Keśava, O most fortunate one, how am I 
to understand the strength, opulence and profit 
of a particular person? What is the best ed uca-
tion, what is actual humility, and what is real 
beauty? What are happiness and unhappiness? 
Who is learned, and who is a fool? What are the 
true and the false paths in life, and what are 
heaven and hell? Who is indeed a true friend, 
and what is one’s re al home? Who is a rich 
man, and who is a poor man? Who is wretched, 
and who is an actual controller? O Lord of the 
devotees, kindly explain these matters to me, 
along with their opposites. (28 -32) 

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: Nonviolence, trut hfulness, not coveting 
or stealing the property of others, detachment, 
humility, freedom from possessiveness, trust in 
the principles of religion, celibacy, silence, 
steadiness, forgiveness and fearlessness are the 
twelve primary disciplinary principles. I nternal 
cleanliness, external cleanliness, chanting the 
holy names of the Lord, austerity, sacrifice, 
faith, hospitality, worship of Me, visiting holy 
places, acting and desiring only for the supreme interest, satisfaction, and service to the spiritual 
master are the twelve elements of regular pre-
scribed duties. These twenty -four elements be-
stow all desired benedictions upon those per-
sons who devotedly cultivate them. (33 -35) 
Absorbing the intelligence in Me constitutes 
mental equilibrium, and complete disc ipline of 
the senses is self -control. Tolerance means pa-
tiently enduring unhappiness, and steadfastness 
occurs when one conquers the tongue and gen-
itals. The greatest charity is to give up all ag-
gression toward others, and renunciation of lust 
is understoo d to be real austerity. Real heroism 
is to conquer one’s natural tendency to enjoy 
material life, and reality is seeing the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead everywhere. Truthful-
ness means to speak the truth in a pleasing way, 
as declared by great sages. Clea nliness is de-
tachment in fruitive activities, whereas renun-
ciation is the sannyāsa order of life. The true 
desirable wealth for human beings is religious-
ness, and I, the Supreme Personality of God-
head, am sacrifice. Religious remuneration is 
devotion to th e ācārya with the purpose of ac-
quiring spiritual instruction, and the greatest 
strength is the prā ṇāyāma system of breath con-
trol. (36 -39) Actual opulence is My own nature 
as the Personality of Godhead, through which I 
exhibit the six unlimited opulences. The su-
preme gain in life is devotional service to Me, 
and actual education is nullifying the false per-
ception of duality within the soul. Real modesty 
is to be disgusted with improper activities, and 
beauty is to possess good qualities such as de-
tachment. Real happiness is to transcend mate-
rial happiness and unhappiness, and real misery 
is to be implicated in searching for sex pleas-
ure. A wise man is one who knows the process 
of freedom from bondage, and a fool is one who 
identifies with his material body a nd mind. The 
real path in life is that which leads to Me, and 
the wrong path is sense gratification, by which 
consciousness is bewildered. Actual heaven is 
the predominance of the mode of goodness, 
whereas hell is the predominance of ignorance. 
I am everyo ne’s true friend, acting as the spir-
itual master of the entire universe, and one’s 
home is the human body. My dear friend Ud-
dhava, one who is enriched with good qualities 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

856 
 is actually said to be rich, and one who is un-
satisfied in life is actually poor. A w retched 
person is one who cannot control his senses, 
whereas one who is not attached to sense grati-
fication is a real controller. One who attaches 
himself to sense gratification is the opposite, a 
slave. Thus, Uddhava, I have elucidated all of 
the matters about which you inquired. There is 
no need for a more elaborate description of 
these good and bad qualities, since to con-
stantly see good and bad is itself a bad quality. 
The best quality is to transcend material good 
and evil. (40 -45) 

SB 11.20: Pure Devo tional Service Sur-
passes Knowledge and Detachment  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear lotus -eyed 
Kṛṣṇa, You are the Supreme Lord, and thus the 
Vedic literatures, consisting of positive and 
negative injunctions, constitute Your order. 
Such literatures focus upon the  good and bad 
qualities of work. (1) According to Vedic liter-
ature, the superior and inferior varieties found 
in the human social system, var ṇāśrama, are 
due to pious and sinful modes of family plan-
ning. Thus piety and sin are constant points of 
reference in the Vedic analysis of the compo-
nents of a given situationnamely the material 
ingredients, place, age and time. Indeed, the 
Vedas reveal the existence of material heaven 
and hell, which are certainly based on piety and 
sin. (2) Without seeing the differe nce between 
piety and sin, how can one understand Your 
own instructions in the form of Vedic litera-
tures, which order one to act piously and forbid 
one to act sinfully? Furthermore, without such 
authorized Vedic literatures, which ultimately 
award liberati on, how can human beings 
achieve the perfection of life? (3) My dear 
Lord, to understand those things beyond direct 
experiencesuch as spiritual liberation or the at-
tainment of heaven and similar material enjoy-
mentsand in general to understand the means 
and end of all things, it is imperative that the 
forefathers, demigods and human beings con-
sult the Vedic literatures, for these literatures, 
being Your own laws, constitute the highest ev-
idence and revelation. (4) My dear Lord, the distinction observed betwe en piety and sin 
comes from Your own Vedic knowledge and 
does not arise by itself. If the same Vedic liter-
ature subsequently nullifies such distinction be-
tween piety and sin, there will certainly be con-
fusion. (5)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava, because I desire that 
human beings may achieve perfection, I have 
presented three paths of advancementthe path 
of knowledge, the path of work and the path of 
devotion. Besides these three there is abso-
lutely no other means of elevation. (6 ) Among 
these three paths, Jnana -yoga, the path of phil-
osophical speculation, is recommended for 
those who are disgusted with material life and 
are thus detached from ordinary, fruitive activ-
ities. Those who are not disgusted with material 
life, having man y desires yet to fulfill, should 
seek perfection through the path of karma -
yoga. (7) If somehow or other by good fortune 
one develops faith in hearing and chanting My 
glories, such a person, being neither disgusted 
with nor very much attached to material l ife, 
should achieve perfection through the path of 
loving devotion to Me. (8) As long as one is not 
satiated by fruitive activity and has not awak-
ened his taste for devotional service by 
śrava ṇaṁ kīrtana ṁ viṣṇoḥ, one has to act ac-
cording to the regulative principles of the Vedic 
injunctions. (9) My dear Uddhava, a person 
who is situated in his prescribed duty, properly 
worshiping by Vedic sacrifices but not desiring 
the fruitive result of such worship, will not go 
to the heavenly planets; similarly, by not per-
forming forbidden activities he will not go to 
hell. (10) One who is situated in his prescribed 
duty, free from sinful activities and cleansed of 
material contamination, in this very life obtains 
transcendental knowledge or, by fortune, devo-
tional servi ce unto Me. (11) The residents of 
both heaven and hell desire human birth on the 
earth planet because human life facilitates the 
achievement of transcendental knowledge and 
love of Godhead, whereas neither heavenly nor 
hellish bodies efficiently provide su ch opportu-
nities. (12) A human being who is wise should 
never desire promotion to heavenly planets or 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

857 
 residence in hell. Indeed, a human being should 
also never desire permanent residence on the 
earth, for by such absorption in the material 
body one become s foolishly negligent of one’s 
actual self -interest. (13) A wise person, know-
ing that although the material body is subject to 
death it can still award the perfection of one’s 
life, should not foolishly neglect to take ad-
vantage of this opportunity before death ar-
rives. (14) Without attachment, a bird gives up 
the tree in which his nest was constructed when 
that tree is cut down by cruel men who are like 
death personified, and thus the bird achieves 
happiness in another place. (15) Knowing that 
one’s durati on of life is being similarly cut 
down by the passing of days and nights, one 
should be shaken by fear. In this way, giving up 
all material attachment and desire, one under-
stands the Supreme Lord and achieves perfect 
peace. (16) The human body, which can a ward 
all benefit in life, is automatically obtained by 
the laws of nature, although it is a very rare 
achievement. This human body can be com-
pared to a perfectly constructed boat having the 
spiritual master as the captain and the instruc-
tions of the Person ality of Godhead as favora-
ble winds impelling it on its course. Consider-
ing all these advantages, a human being who 
does not utilize his human life to cross the 
ocean of material existence must be considered 
the killer of his own soul. (17)  

A transcendent alist, having become dis-
gusted and hopeless in all endeavors for mate-
rial happiness, completely controls the senses 
and develops detachment. By spiritual practice 
he should then fix the mind on the spiritual plat-
form without deviation. (18) Whenever the 
mind, being concentrated on the spiritual plat-
form, is suddenly deviated from its spiritual po-
sition, one should carefully bring it under the 
control of the self by following the prescribed 
means. (19) One should never lose sight of the 
actual goal of mental  activities, but rather, con-
quering the life air and senses and utilizing in-
telligence strengthened by the mode of good-
ness, one should bring the mind under the con-
trol of the self. (20) An expert horseman, desir-
ing to tame a headstrong horse, first lets t he horse have his way for a moment and then, pull-
ing the reins, gradually places the horse on the 
desired path. Similarly, the supreme yoga pro-
cess is that by which one carefully observes the 
movements and desires of the mind and gradu-
ally brings them unde r full control. (21) Until 
one’s mind is fixed in spiritual satisfaction, one 
should analytically study the temporary nature 
of all material objects, whether cosmic, earthly 
or atomic. One should constantly observe the 
process of creation through the natur al progres-
sive function and the process of annihilation 
through the regressive function. (22) When a 
person is disgusted with the temporary, illusory 
nature of this world and is thus detached from 
it, his mind, guided by the instructions of his 
spiritual m aster, considers again and again the 
nature of this world and eventually gives up the 
false identification with matter. (23) Through 
the various disciplinary regulations and the pu-
rificatory procedures of the yoga system, 
through logic and spiritual educat ion or 
through worship and adoration of Me, one 
should constantly engage his mind in remem-
bering the Personality of Godhead, the goal of 
yoga. No other means should be employed for 
this purpose. (24)  

If, because of momentary inattention, a yogī 
accidental ly commits an abominable activity, 
then by the very practice of yoga he should 
burn to ashes the sinful reaction, without at any 
time employing any other procedure. (25) It is 
firmly declared that the steady adherence of 
transcendentalists to their respect ive spiritual 
positions constitutes real piety and that sin oc-
curs when a transcendentalist neglects his pre-
scribed duty. One who adopts this standard of 
piety and sin, sincerely desiring to give up all 
past association with sense gratification, is able 
to subdue materialistic activities, which are by 
nature impure. (26)  

Having awakened faith in the narrations of 
My glories, being disgusted with all material 
activities, knowing that all sense gratification 
leads to misery, but still being unable to re-
nounc e all sense enjoyment, My devotee 
should remain happy and worship Me with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

858 
 great faith and conviction. Even though he is 
sometimes engaged in sense enjoyment, My 
devotee knows that all sense gratification leads 
to a miserable result, and he sincerely repent s 
such activities. (27 -28) When an intelligent 
person engages constantly in worshiping Me 
through loving devotional service as described 
by Me, his heart becomes firmly situated in Me. 
Thus all material desires within the heart are 
destroyed. (29) The knot  in the heart is pierced, 
all misgivings are cut to pieces and the chain of 
fruitive actions is terminated when I am seen as 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (30) 
Therefore, for a devotee engaged in My loving 
service, with mind fixed on Me, the cultivat ion 
of knowledge and renunciation is generally not 
the means of achieving the highest perfection 
within this world. (31) Everything that can be 
achieved by fruitive activities, penance, 
knowledge, detachment, mystic yoga, charity, 
religious duties and all other means of perfect-
ing life is easily achieved by My devotee 
through loving service unto Me. If somehow or 
other My devotee desires promotion to heaven, 
liberation, or residence in My abode, he easily 
achieves such benedictions. (32 -33) Because 
My devot ees possess saintly behavior and deep 
intelligence, they completely dedicate them-
selves to Me and do not desire anything besides 
Me. Indeed, even if I offer them liberation from 
birth and death, they do not accept it. (34) It is 
said that complete detachme nt is the highest 
stage of freedom. Therefore, one who has no 
personal desire and does not pursue personal 
rewards can achieve loving devotional service 
unto Me. (35) Material piety and sin, which 
arise from the good and evil of this world, can-
not exist wi thin My unalloyed devotees, who, 
being free from material hankering, maintain 
steady spiritual consciousness in all circum-
stances. Indeed, such devotees have achieved 
Me, the Supreme Lord, who am beyond any-
thing that can be conceived by material intelli-
gence. (36) Persons who seriously follow these 
methods of achieving Me, which I have person-
ally taught, attain freedom from illusion, and 
upon reaching My personal abode they per-
fectly understand the Absolute Truth. (37)  
 SB 11.21: Lord K ṛṣṇa’s Explanation of  
the Vedic Path  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  Those who give up these methods for 
achieving Me, which consist of devotional ser-
vice, analytic philosophy and regulated execu-
tion of prescribed duties, and instead, being 
moved by the material sens es, cultivate insig-
nificant sense gratification, certainly undergo 
the continual cycle of material existence. (1) 
Steadiness in one’s own position is declared to 
be actual piety, whereas deviation from one’s 
position is considered impiety. In this way the 
two are definitely ascertained. (2) O sinless Ud-
dhava, in order to understand what is proper in 
life one must evaluate a given object within its 
particular category. Thus, in analyzing reli-
gious principles one must consider purity and 
impurity. Similarly, in one’s ordinary dealings 
one must distinguish between good and bad, 
and to insure one’s physical survival one must 
recognize that which is auspicious and inauspi-
cious. (3) I have revealed this way of life for 
those bearing the burden of mundane religious  
principles. (4) Earth, water, fire, air and ether 
are the five basic elements that constitute the 
bodies of all conditioned souls, from Lord 
Brahmā himself down to the nonmoving crea-
tures. These elements all emanate from the one 
Personality of Godhead. (5 ) My dear Uddhava, 
although all material bodies are composed of 
the same five elements and are thus equal, the 
Vedic literatures conceive of different names 
and forms in relation to such bodies so that the 
living entities may achieve their goal of life. (6 ) 
O saintly Uddhava, in order to restrict materi-
alistic activities, I have established that which 
is proper and improper among all material 
things, including time, space and all physical 
objects. (7) Among places, those bereft of the 
spotted antelope, thos e devoid of devotion to 
the brāhma ṇas, those possessing spotted ante-
lopes but bereft of respectable men, provinces 
like Kīka ṭa and places where cleanliness and 
purificatory rites are neglected, where meat -
eaters are prominent or where the earth is bar-
ren, are all considered to be contaminated 
lands. (8) A specific time is considered pure 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

859 
 when it is appropriate, either by its own nature 
or through achievement of suitable parapherna-
lia, for the performance of one’s prescribed 
duty. That time which impedes the  perfor-
mance of one’s duty is considered impure. (9) 
An object’s purity or impurity is established by 
application of another object, by words, by rit-
uals, by the effects of time or according to rel-
ative magnitude. (10) Impure things may or 
may not impose s inful reactions upon a person, 
depending on that person’s strength or weak-
ness, intelligence, wealth, location and physical 
condition. (11) Various objects such as grains, 
wooden utensils, things made of bone, thread, 
liquids, objects derived from fire, sk ins and 
earthy objects are all purified by time, by the 
wind, by fire, by earth and by water, either sep-
arately or in combination. (12) A particular pu-
rifying agent is considered appropriate when its 
application removes the bad odor or dirty cov-
ering of so me contaminated object and makes 
it resume its original nature. (13) The self can 
be cleansed by bathing, charity, austerity, age, 
personal strength, purificatory rituals, pre-
scribed duties and, above all, by remembrance 
of Me. The brāhma ṇa and other twice -born men 
should be duly purified before performing their 
specific activities. (14) A mantra is purified 
when chanted with proper knowledge, and 
one’s work is purified when offered to Me. 
Thus by purification of the place, time, sub-
stance, doer, mantras an d work, one becomes 
religious, and by negligence of these six items 
one is considered irreligious. (15) Sometimes 
piety becomes sin, and sometimes what is ordi-
narily sin becomes piety on the strength of Ve-
dic injunctions. Such special rules in effect 
eradi cate the clear distinction between piety 
and sin. (16) The same activities that would de-
grade an elevated person do not cause falldown 
for those who are already fallen. Indeed, one 
who is lying on the ground cannot possibly fall 
further. The material assoc iation that is dictated 
by one’s own nature is considered a good qual-
ity. (17) By refraining from a particular sinful 
or materialistic activity, one becomes freed 
from its bondage. Such renunciation is the basis of religious and auspicious life for human b e-
ings and drives away all suffering, illusion and 
fear. (18)  

One who accepts material sense objects as 
desirable certainly becomes attached to them. 
From such attachment lust arises, and this lust 
creates quarrel among men. (19) From quarrel 
arises intole rable anger, followed by the dark-
ness of ignorance. This ignorance quickly over-
takes a man’s broad intelligence. (20) O saintly 
Uddhava, a person bereft of real intelligence is 
considered to have lost everything. Deviated 
from the actual purpose of his lif e, he becomes 
dull, just like a dead person. (21) Because of 
absorption in sense gratification, one cannot 
recognize himself or others. Living uselessly in 
ignorance like a tree, one is merely breathing 
just like a bellows. (22)  

Those statements of script ure promising fru-
itive rewards do not prescribe the ultimate good 
for men but are merely enticements for execut-
ing beneficial religious duties, like promises of 
candy spoken to induce a child to take benefi-
cial medicine. (23) Simply by material birth, 
huma n beings become attached within their 
minds to personal sense gratification, long du-
ration of life, sense activities, bodily strength, 
sexual potency and friends and family. Their 
minds are thus absorbed in that which defeats 
their actual self -interest. (2 4) Those ignorant of 
their real self -interest are wandering on the path 
of material existence, gradually heading toward 
darkness. Why would the Vedas further en-
courage them in sense gratification if they, alt-
hough foolish, submissively pay heed to Vedic 
injunctions? (25) Persons with perverted intel-
ligence do not understand this actual purpose of 
Vedic knowledge and instead propagate as the 
highest Vedic truth the flowery statements of 
the Vedas that promise material rewards. Those 
in actual knowledge of th e Vedas never speak 
in that way. (26) Those who are full of lust, av-
arice and greed mistake mere flowers to be the 
actual fruit of life. Bewildered by the glare of 
fire and suffocated by its smoke, they cannot 
recognize their own true identity. (27) My dea r 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

860 
 Uddhava, persons dedicated to sense gratifica-
tion obtained through honoring the Vedic ritu-
als cannot understand that I am situated in eve-
ryone’s heart and that the entire universe is 
nondifferent from Me and emanates from Me. 
Indeed, they are just like p ersons whose eyes 
are covered by fog. (28) Those who are sworn 
to sense gratification cannot understand the 
confidential conclusion of Vedic knowledge as 
explained by Me. Taking pleasure in violence, 
they cruelly slaughter innocent animals in sac-
rifice for  their own sense gratification and thus 
worship demigods, forefathers and leaders 
among ghostly creatures. Such passion for vio-
lence, however, is never encouraged within the 
process of Vedic sacrifice. (29 -30) 

Just as a foolish businessman gives up his 
real wealth in useless business speculation, 
foolish persons give up all that is actually valu-
able in life and instead pursue promotion to ma-
terial heaven, which although pleasing to hear 
about is actually unreal, like a dream. Such be-
wildered persons imagin e within their hearts 
that they will achieve all material blessings. 
(31) Those established in material passion, 
goodness and ignorance worship the particular 
demigods and other deities, headed by Indra, 
who manifest the same modes of passion, good-
ness or ignorance. They fail, however, to 
properly worship Me. (32) The worshipers of 
demigods think, “We shall worship the demi-
gods in this life, and by our sacrifices we shall 
go to heaven and enjoy there. When that enjoy-
ment is finished we shall return to this world 
and take birth as great householders in aristo-
cratic families.” Being excessively proud and 
greedy, such persons are bewildered by the 
flowery words of the Vedas. They are not at-
tracted to topics about Me, the Supreme Lord. 
(33-34) The Vedas, divided  into three divi-
sions, ultimately reveal the living entity as pure 
spirit soul. The Vedic seers and mantras, how-
ever, deal in esoteric terms, and I also am 
pleased by such confidential descriptions. (35) 
The transcendental sound of the Vedas is very 
diffic ult to comprehend and manifests on dif-
ferent levels within the prā ṇa, senses and mind. 
This Vedic sound is unlimited, very deep and unfathomable, just like the ocean. (36) As the 
unlimited, unchanging and omnipotent Person-
ality of Godhead dwelling within a ll living be-
ings, I personally establish the Vedic sound vi-
bration in the form of o ṁkāra within all living 
entities. It is thus perceived subtly, just like a 
single strand of fiber on a lotus stalk. (37) Just 
as a spider brings forth from its heart its web  
and emits it through its mouth, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead manifests Himself as 
the reverberating primeval vital air, comprising 
all sacred Vedic meters and full of transcenden-
tal pleasure. Thus the Lord, from the ethereal 
sky of His heart, create s the great and limitless 
Vedic sound by the agency of His mind, which 
conceives of variegated sounds such as the 
sparśas. The Vedic sound branches out in thou-
sands of directions, adorned with the different 
letters expanded from the syllable om: the con-
sonants, vowels, sibilants and semivowels. The 
Veda is then elaborated by many verbal varie-
ties, expressed in different meters, each having 
four more syllables than the previous one. Ulti-
mately the Lord again withdraws His manifes-
tation of Vedic sound within Himself. (38 -40) 
The Vedic meters are Gāyatrī, U ṣṇik, Anu ṣṭup, 
Bṛhatī, Pa ṅkti, Tri ṣṭup, Jagatī, Aticchanda, 
Atya ṣṭi, Atijagatī and Ativirā ṭ. (41) In the entire 
world no one but Me actually understands the 
confidential purpose of Vedic knowledge. Thus 
peopl e do not know what the Vedas are actually 
prescribing in the ritualistic injunctions of 
karma -kāṇḍa, or what object is actually being 
indicated in the formulas of worship found in 
the upāsanā -kāṇḍa, or that which is elaborately 
discussed through various hy potheses in the 
Jnana -kāṇḍa section of the Vedas. (42) I am the 
ritualistic sacrifice enjoined by the Vedas, and 
I am the worshipable Deity. It is I who am pre-
sented as various philosophical hypotheses, 
and it is I alone who am then refuted by philo-
sophica l analysis. The transcendental sound vi-
bration thus establishes Me as the essential 
meaning of all Vedic knowledge. The Vedas, 
elaborately analyzing all material duality as 
nothing but My illusory potency, ultimately 
completely negate this duality and achi eve their 
own satisfaction. (43)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

861 
 SB 11.22: Enumeration of the Elements of 
Material Creation  

Uddhava inquired:  My dear Lord, O mas-
ter of the universe, how many different ele-
ments of creation have been enumerated by the 
great sages? I have heard You person ally de-
scribe a total of twenty -eightGod, the jīva soul, 
the mahat -tattva, false ego, the five gross ele-
ments, the ten senses, the mind, the five subtle 
objects of perception and the three modes of na-
ture. But some authorities say that there are 
twenty -six elements, while others cite twenty -
five or else seven, nine, six, four or eleven, and 
even others say that there are seventeen, sixteen 
or thirteen. What did each of these sages have 
in mind when he calculated the creative ele-
ments in such different ways?  O supreme eter-
nal, kindly explain this to me. (1 -3) 

Lord K ṛṣṇa replied:  Because all material 
elements are present everywhere, it is reasona-
ble that different learned brāhma ṇas have ana-
lyzed them in different ways. All such philoso-
phers spoke under the sh elter of My mystic po-
tency, and thus they could say anything without 
contradicting the truth. (4) When philosophers 
argue, “I don’t choose to analyze this particular 
case in the same way that you have,” it is 
simply My own insurmountable energies that 
are motivating their analytic disagreements. (5) 
By interaction of My energies different opin-
ions arise. But for those who have fixed their 
intelligence on Me and controlled their senses, 
differences of perception disappear, and conse-
quently the very cause for  argument is re-
moved. (6) O best among men, because subtle 
and gross elements mutually enter into one an-
other, philosophers may calculate the number 
of basic material elements in different ways, ac-
cording to their personal desire. (7) All subtle 
material e lements are actually present within 
their gross effects; similarly, all gross elements 
are present within their subtle causes, since ma-
terial creation takes place by progressive man-
ifestation of elements from subtle to gross. 
Thus we can find all material elements within 
any single element. (8) Therefore, no matter which of these thinkers is speaking, and regard-
less of whether in their calculations they in-
clude material elements within their previous 
subtle causes or else within their subsequent 
manifest pr oducts, I accept their conclusions as 
authoritative, because a logical explanation can 
always be given for each of the different theo-
ries. (9)  

Because a person who has been covered by 
ignorance since time immemorial is not capable 
of effecting his own sel f-realization, there must 
be some other personality who is in factual 
knowledge of the Absolute Truth and can im-
part this knowledge to him. (10) According to 
knowledge in the material mode of goodness, 
there is no qualitative difference between the 
living entity and the supreme controller. The 
imagination of qualitative difference between 
them is useless speculation. (11) Nature exists 
originally as the equilibrium of the three mate-
rial modes, which pertain only to nature, not to 
the transcendental spirit s oul. These modes-
goodness, passion and ignoranceare the effec-
tive causes of the creation, maintenance and de-
struction of this universe. (12) In this world the 
mode of goodness is recognized as knowledge, 
the mode of passion as fruitive work, and the 
mode of  darkness as ignorance. Time is per-
ceived as the agitated interaction of the material 
modes, and the totality of functional propensity 
is embodied by the primeval sūtra, or mahat -
tattva. (13)  

I have described the nine basic elements as 
the enjoying soul, nature, nature’s primeval 
manifestation of the mahat -tattva, false ego, 
ether, air, fire, water and earth. (14) Hearing, 
touch, sight, smell and taste are the five 
knowledge -acquiring senses, My dear Ud-
dhava, and speech, the hands, the genitals, the 
anus a nd the legs constitute the five working 
senses. The mind belongs to both these catego-
ries. (15) Sound, touch, taste, smell and form 
are the objects of the knowledge -acquiring 
senses, and movement, speech, excretion and 
manufacture are functions of the work ing 
senses. (16) In the beginning of creation nature 
assumes, by the modes of goodness, passion 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

862 
 and ignorance, its form as the embodiment of 
all subtle causes and gross manifestations 
within the universe. The Supreme Personality 
of Godhead does not enter t he interaction of 
material manifestation but merely glances upon 
nature. (17) As the material elements, headed 
by the mahat -tattva, are transformed, they re-
ceive their specific potencies from the glance 
of the Supreme Lord, and being amalgamated 
by the pow er of nature, they create the univer-
sal egg. (18)  

According to some philosophers there are 
seven elements, namely earth, water, fire, air 
and ether, along with the conscious spirit soul 
and the Supreme Soul, who is the basis of both 
the material elements and the ordinary spirit 
soul. According to this theory, the body, senses, 
life air and all material phenomena are pro-
duced from these seven elements. (19) Other 
philosophers state that there are six elementsthe 
five physical elements(earth, water, fire, ai r and 
ether) and the sixth element, the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead. That Supreme Lord, en-
dowed with the elements that He has brought 
forth from Himself, creates this universe and 
then personally enters within it. (20) Some phi-
losophers propose the exis tence of four basic 
elements, of which threefire, water and 
earthemanate from the fourth, the Self. Once 
existing, these elements produce the cosmic 
manifestation, in which all material creation 
takes place. (21) Some calculate the existence 
of seventeen b asic elements, namely the five 
gross elements, the five objects of perception, 
the five sensory organs, the mind, and the soul 
as the seventeenth element. (22) According to 
the calculation of sixteen elements, the only 
difference from the previous theory i s that the 
soul is identified with the mind. If we think in 
terms of five physical elements, five senses, the 
mind, the individual soul and the Supreme 
Lord, there are thirteen elements. (23) Counting 
eleven, there are the soul, the gross elements 
and the senses. Eight gross and subtle elements 
plus the Supreme Lord would make nine. (24) 
Thus great philosophers have analyzed the ma-
terial elements in many different ways. All of 
their proposals are reasonable, since they are all presented with ample logic. In deed, such phil-
osophical brilliance is expected of the truly 
learned. (25)  

Śrī Uddhava inquired:  Although nature 
and the living entity are constitutionally dis-
tinct, O Lord K ṛṣṇa, there appears to be no dif-
ference between them, because they are found 
residing within one another. Thus the soul ap-
pears to be within nature and nature within the 
soul. (26)  

O lotus -eyed K ṛṣṇa, O omniscient Lord, 
kindly cut this great doubt out of my heart with 
Your own words, which exhibit Your great skill 
in reasoning. (27) F rom You alone the 
knowledge of the living beings arises, and by 
Your potency that knowledge is stolen away. 
Indeed, no one but Yourself can understand the 
real nature of Your illusory potency. (28)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  O best among men , material nature and 
its enjoyer are clearly distinct. This manifest 
creation undergoes constant transformation, 
being founded upon the agitation of the modes 
of nature. (29) My dear Uddhava, My material 
energy, comprising three modes and acting 
through t hem, manifests the varieties of crea-
tion along with varieties of consciousness for 
perceiving them. The manifest result of mate-
rial transformation is understood in three as-
pects: adhyātmic, adhidaivic and adhibhautic. 
(30) Sight, visible form and the refle cted image 
of the sun within the aperture of the eye all 
work together to reveal one another. But the 
original sun standing in the sky is self -mani-
fested. Similarly, the Supreme Soul, the origi-
nal cause of all entities, who is thus separate 
from all of the m, acts by the illumination of His 
own transcendental experience as the ultimate 
source of manifestation of all mutually mani-
festing objects. (31) Similarly, the sense or-
gans, namely the skin, ears, eyes, tongue and 
noseas well as the functions of the subt le body, 
namely conditioned consciousness, mind, intel-
ligence and false egocan all be analyzed in 
terms of the threefold distinction of sense, ob-
ject of perception and presiding deity. (32) 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

863 
 When the three modes of nature are agitated, 
the resultant transfo rmation appears as the ele-
ment false ego in three phasesgoodness, pas-
sion and ignorance. Generated from the mahat -
tattva, which is itself produced from the un-
manifest pradhāna, this false ego becomes the 
cause of all material illusion and duality. (33)  

The speculative argument of philosophers 
“This world is real,” “No, it is not real” is based 
upon incomplete knowledge of the Supreme 
Soul and is simply aimed at understanding ma-
terial dualities. Although such argument is use-
less, persons who have turned the ir attention 
away from Me, their own true Self, are unable 
to give it up. (34)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  O supreme master, the 
intelligence of those dedicated to fruitive activ-
ities is certainly deviated from You. Please ex-
plain to me how such persons accept supe rior 
and inferior bodies by their materialistic activ-
ities and then give up such bodies. O Govinda, 
this topic is very difficult for foolish persons to 
understand. Being cheated by illusion in this 
world, they generally do not become aware of 
these facts. (35-36) 

Lord K ṛṣṇa said:  The material mind of 
men is shaped by the reactions of fruitive work. 
Along with the five senses, it travels from one 
material body to another. The spirit soul, alt-
hough different from this mind, follows it. (37) 
The mind, bound t o the reactions of fruitive 
work, always meditates on the objects of the 
senses, both those that are seen in this world 
and those that are heard about from Vedic au-
thority. Consequently, the mind appears to 
come into being and to suffer annihilation 
along with its objects of perception, and thus its 
ability to distinguish past and future is lost. (38) 
When the living entity passes from the present 
body to the next body, which is created by his 
own karma, he becomes absorbed in the pleas-
urable and painful se nsations of the new body 
and completely forgets the experience of the 
previous body. This total forgetfulness of one’s 
previous material identity, which comes about 
for one reason or another, is called death. (39) O most charitable Uddhava, what is called birth 
is simply a person’s total identification with a 
new body. One accepts the new body just as 
one completely accepts the experience of a 
dream or a fantasy as reality. (40) Just as a per-
son experiencing a dream or daydream does not 
remember his previou s dreams or daydreams, a 
person situated in his present body, although 
having existed prior to it, thinks that he has only 
recently come into being. (41) Because the 
mind, which is the resting place of the senses, 
has created the identification with a new body, 
the threefold material variety of high, middle 
and low class appears as if present within the 
reality of the soul. Thus the self creates external 
and internal duality, just as a man might give 
birth to a bad son. (42) My dear Uddhava, ma-
terial bodies  are constantly undergoing creation 
and destruction by the force of time, whose 
swiftness is imperceptible. But because of the 
subtle nature of time, no one sees this. (43) The 
different stages of transformation of all mate-
rial bodies occur just like those  of the flame of 
a candle, the current of a river, or the fruits of a 
tree. (44) Although the illumination of a lamp 
consists of innumerable rays of light undergo-
ing constant creation, transformation and de-
struction, a person with illusory intelligence 
who sees the light for a moment will speak 
falsely, saying, “This is the light of the lamp.” 
As one observes a flowing river, ever -new wa-
ter passes by and goes far away, yet a foolish 
person, observing one point in the river, falsely 
states, “This is the wate r of the river.” Simi-
larly, although the material body of a human 
being is constantly undergoing transformation, 
those who are simply wasting their lives falsely 
think and say that each particular stage of the 
body is the person’s real identity. (45)  

A pe rson does not actually take birth out of 
the seed of past activities, nor, being immortal, 
does he die. By illusion the living being appears 
to be born and to die, just as fire in connection 
with firewood appears to begin and then cease 
to exist. (46) Impr egnation, gestation, birth, in-
fancy, childhood, youth, middle age, old age 
and death are the nine ages of the body. (47) 
Although the material body is different from 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

864 
 the self, because of the ignorance due to mate-
rial association one falsely identifies ones elf 
with the superior and inferior bodily condi-
tions. Sometimes a fortunate person is able to 
give up such mental concoction. (48) By the 
death of one’s father or grandfather one can 
surmise one’s own death, and by the birth of 
one’s son one can understand  the condition of 
one’s own birth. A person who thus realistically 
understands the creation and destruction of ma-
terial bodies is no longer subject to these dual-
ities. (49) One who observes the birth of a tree 
from its seed and the ultimate death of the tr ee 
after maturity certainly remains a distinct ob-
server separate from the tree. In the same way, 
the witness of the birth and death of the mate-
rial body remains separate from it. (50) An un-
intelligent man, failing to distinguish himself 
from material natur e, thinks nature to be real. 
By contact with it he becomes completely be-
wildered and enters into the cycle of material 
existence. (51) Made to wander because of his 
fruitive work, the conditioned soul, by contact 
with the mode of goodness, takes birth amon g 
the sages or demigods. By contact with the 
mode of passion he becomes a demon or human 
being, and by association with the mode of ig-
norance he takes birth as a ghost or in the ani-
mal kingdom. (52) Just as one may imitate per-
sons whom one sees dancing and  singing, sim-
ilarly the soul, although never the doer of ma-
terial activities, becomes captivated by material 
intelligence and is thus forced to imitate its 
qualities. (53) The soul’s material life, his ex-
perience of sense gratification, is actually false, 
O descendant of Daśārha, just like trees’ ap-
pearance of quivering when the trees are re-
flected in agitated water, or like the earth’s ap-
pearance of spinning due to one’s spinning his 
eyes around, or like the world of a fantasy or 
dream. (54 -55) For one who  is meditating on 
sense gratification, material life, although lack-
ing factual existence, does not go away, just as 
the unpleasant experiences of a dream do not. 
(56) 

Therefore, O Uddhava, do not try to enjoy 
sense gratification with the material senses. See how illusion based on material dualities pre-
vents one from realizing the self. (57) Even 
though neglected, insulted, ridiculed or envied 
by bad men, or even though repeatedly agitated 
by being beaten, tied up or deprived of one’s 
occupation, spat upon or polluted with urine by 
ignorant people, one who desires the highest 
goal in life should in spite of all these difficul-
ties use his intelligence to keep himself safe on 
the spiritual platform. (58 -59) 

Śrī Uddhava said:  O best of all speakers, 
please exp lain to me how I may properly un-
derstand this. (60) O soul of the universe, the 
conditioning of one’s personality in material 
life is very strong, and therefore it is very diffi-
cult even for learned men to tolerate the of-
fenses committed against them by ig norant 
people. Only Your devotees, who are fixed in 
Your loving service and who have achieved 
peace by residing at Your lotus feet, are able to 
tolerate such offenses. (61)  

SB 11.23: The Song of the Avantī 
Brāhma ṇa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Lord Mukunda, 
the chief of the Dāśārhas, having thus been re-
spectfully requested by the best of His devo-
tees, Śrī Uddhava, first acknowledged the fit-
ness of his servant’s statements. Then the Lord, 
whose glorious exploits are most worthy of be-
ing heard, began to reply to him. (1)  

Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa said:  O disciple of 
Bṛhaspati, there is virtually no saintly man in 
this world capable of resettling his own mind 
after it has been disturbed by the insulting 
words of uncivilized men. (2) Sharp arrows 
which pierce one’s chest and reach the heart do 
not cause as much suffering as the arrows of 
harsh, insulting words that become lodged 
within the heart when spoken by uncivilized 
men. (3) My dear Uddhava, in this regard a 
most pious story is told, and I shall now de-
scribe it to you. P lease listen with careful atten-
tion. (4) Once a certain sannyāsī was insulted 
in many ways by impious men. However, with 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

865 
 determination he remembered that he was suf-
fering the fruit of his own previous karma. I 
will narrate to you his story and that which h e 
spoke. (5)  

In the country of Avantī there once lived a 
certain brāhma ṇa who was very rich and gifted 
with all opulences, and who was engaged in the 
occupation of commerce. But he was a miserly 
personlusty, greedy and very prone to anger. 
(6) 

In his hom e, devoid of religiosity and lawful 
sense gratification, the family members and 
guests were never properly respected, even 
with words. He would not even allow sufficient 
gratification for his own body at the suitable 
times. (7) Since he was so hardhearted and mi-
serly, his sons, in -laws, wife, daughters and 
servants began to feel inimical toward him. Be-
coming disgusted, they would never treat him 
with affection. (8) In this way the presiding de-
ities of the five family sacrifices became angry 
at the brāhma ṇa, who, being niggardly, guarded 
his wealth like a Yak ṣa, who had no good des-
tination either in this world or the next, and who 
was totally deprived of religiosity and sense en-
joyment. (9) O magnanimous Uddhava, by his 
neglect of these demigods he depleted h is stock 
of piety and all his wealth. The accumulation of 
his repeated exhaustive endeavors was totally 
lost. (10) Some of the wealth of this so -called 
brāhma ṇa was taken away by his relatives, My 
dear Uddhava, some by thieves, some by the 
whims of provide nce, some by the effects of 
time, some by ordinary men and some by gov-
ernment authorities. (11) Finally, when his 
property was completely lost, he who never en-
gaged in religiosity or sense enjoyment became 
ignored by his family members. Thus he began 
to feel unbearable anxiety. (12) Having lost all 
his wealth, he felt great pain and lamentation. 
His throat choked up with tears, and he medi-
tated for a long time on his fortune. Then a 
powerful feeling of renunciation came over 
him. (13)  
 The brāhma ṇa spoke as  follows:  O what 
great misfortune! I have simply tormented my-
self uselessly, struggling so hard for money that 
was not even intended for religiosity or mate-
rial enjoyment. (14) Generally, the wealth of 
misers never allows them any happiness. In this 
life i t causes their self -torment, and when they 
die it sends them to hell. (15) Whatever pure 
fame is possessed by the famous and whatever 
praiseworthy qualities are found in the virtuous 
are destroyed by even a small amount of greed, 
just as one’s attractive p hysical beauty is ruined 
by a trace of white leprosy. (16) In the earning, 
attainment, increase, protection, expense, loss 
and enjoyment of wealth, all men experience 
great labor, fear, anxiety and delusion. (17) 
Theft, violence, speaking lies, duplicity, lust, 
anger, perplexity, pride, quarreling, enmity, 
faithlessness, envy and the dangers caused by 
women, gambling and intoxication are the fif-
teen undesirable qualities that contaminate men 
because of greed for wealth. Although these 
qualities are undesira ble, men falsely ascribe 
value to them. One desiring to achieve the real 
benefit of life should therefore remain aloof 
from undesirable material wealth. (18 -19) Even 
a man’s brothers, wife, parents and friends 
united with him in love will immediately break  
off their affectionate relationships and become 
enemies over a single coin. (20) For even a 
small amount of money these relatives and 
friends become very agitated and their anger is 
inflamed. Acting as rivals, they quickly give up 
all sentiments of goodwi ll and will reject one at 
a moment’s notice, even to the point of com-
mitting murder. (21) Those who obtain human 
life, which is prayed for even by the demigods, 
and in that human birth become situated as 
first-class brāhma ṇas, are extremely fortunate. 
If they disregard this important opportunity, 
they are certainly killing their own self -interest 
and thus achieve a most unfortunate end. (22) 
What mortal man, having achieved this human 
life, which is the very gateway to both heaven 
and liberation, would will ingly become at-
tached to that abode of worthlessness, material 
property? (23) One who fails to distribute his 
wealth to the proper shareholdersthe demigods, 
sages, forefathers and ordinary living entities, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

866 
 as well as his immediate relatives, in -laws and 
own selfis maintaining his wealth simply like a 
Yakṣa and will fall down. (24) Discriminating 
persons are able to utilize their money, youth 
and strength to achieve perfection. But I have 
feverishly squandered these in the useless en-
deavor for further wealth . Now that I am an old 
man, what can I achieve? (25) Why must an in-
telligent man suffer by his constant vain efforts 
to get wealth? Indeed, this whole world is most 
bewildered by someone’s illusory potency. 
(26) 

For one who is in the grips of death, what is 
the use of wealth or those who offer it, sense 
gratification or those who offer it, or, for that 
matter, any type of fruitive activity, which 
simply causes one to again take birth in the ma-
terial world? (27)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord 
Hari, who contains within Himself all the dem-
igods, must be satisfied with me. Indeed, He 
has brought me to this suffering condition and 
forced me to experience detachment, which is 
the boat to carry me over this ocean of material 
life. (28) If there is any t ime remaining in my 
life, I will perform austerities and force my 
body to subsist on the bare necessities. Without 
further confusion I shall pursue that which con-
stitutes my entire self -interest in life, and I shall 
remain satisfied within the self. (29) T hus may 
the presiding demigods of these three worlds 
kindly show their mercy upon me. Indeed, 
Mahārāja Kha ṭvāṅga was able to achieve the 
spiritual world in a single moment. (30)  

Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa continued:  His mind thus 
determined, that most excellent Avant ī 
brāhma ṇa was able to untie the knots of desire 
within his heart. He then assumed the role of a 
peaceful and silent sannyāsī mendicant. (31) 
He wandered about the earth, keeping his intel-
ligence, senses and life air under control. To 
beg charity he travel ed alone to various cities 
and villages. He did not advertise his advanced 
spiritual position and thus was not recognized 
by others. (32) O kind Uddhava, seeing him as an old, dirty beggar, rowdy persons would dis-
honor him with many insults. (33) Some of 
these persons would take away his sannyāsī 
rod, and some the waterpot which he was using 
as a begging bowl. Some took his deerskin seat, 
some his chanting beads, and some would steal 
his torn, ragged clothing. Displaying these 
things before him, they would pretend to offer 
them back but would then hide them again. (34) 
When he was sitting on the bank of a river 
about to partake of the food that he had col-
lected by his begging, such sinful rascals would 
come and pass urine on it, and they would dare 
to spit o n his head. (35) Although he had taken 
a vow of silence, they would try to make him 
speak, and if he did not speak they would beat 
him with sticks. Others would chastise him, 
saying, “This man is just a thief.” And others 
would bind him up with rope, shout ing, “Tie 
him up! Tie him up!” (36) They would criticize 
and insult him, saying, “This man is just a hyp-
ocrite and a cheat. He makes a business of reli-
gion simply because he lost all his wealth and 
his family threw him out.” (37) Some would 
ridicule him by  saying, “Just see this greatly 
powerful sage! He is as steadfast as the 
Himālaya Mountains. By practice of silence he 
strives for his goal with great determination, 
just like a heron.” Other persons would pass 
foul air upon him, and sometimes others would  
bind this twice -born brāhma ṇa in chains and 
keep him captive like a pet animal. (38 -39) The 
brāhma ṇa understood that all his sufferingfrom 
other living beings, from the higher forces of 
nature and from his own bodywas unavoidable, 
being allotted to him by  providence. (40) Even 
while being insulted by these low -class men 
who were trying to effect his downfall, he re-
mained steady in his spiritual duties. Fixing his 
resolution in the mode of goodness, he began to 
chant the following song. (41) The brāhma ṇa 
said: These people are not the cause of my hap-
piness and distress. Neither are the demigods, 
my own body, the planets, my past work, or 
time. Rather, it is the mind alone that causes 
happiness and distress and perpetuates the rota-
tion of material life. (42)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

867 
 The powerful mind actuates the functions of 
the material modes, from which evolve the dif-
ferent kinds of material activities in the modes 
of goodness, ignorance and passion. From the 
activities in each of these modes develop the 
corresponding statuses of life. (43) Although 
present along with the struggling mind within 
the material body, the Supersoul is not endeav-
oring, because He is already endowed with 
transcendental enlightenment. Acting as my 
friend, He simply witnesses from His transcen-
dental positio n. I, the infinitesimal spirit soul, 
on the other hand, have embraced this mind, 
which is the mirror reflecting the image of the 
material world. Thus I have become engaged in 
enjoying objects of desire and am entangled 
due to contact with the modes of natu re. (44) 
Charity, prescribed duties, observance of major 
and minor regulative principles, hearing from 
scripture, pious works and purifying vows all 
have as their final aim the subduing of the 
mind. Indeed, concentration of the mind on the 
Supreme is the h ighest yoga. (45)  

If one’s mind is perfectly fixed and pacified, 
then tell me what need does one have to per-
form ritualistic charity and other pious rituals? 
And if one’s mind remains uncontrolled, lost in 
ignorance, then of what use are these engage-
ments  for him? (46) All the senses have been 
under the control of the mind since time imme-
morial, and the mind himself never comes un-
der the sway of any other. He is stronger than 
the strongest, and his godlike power is fear-
some. Therefore, anyone who can bring  the 
mind under control becomes the master of all 
the senses. (47) Failing to conquer this irre-
pressible enemy, the mind, whose urges are in-
tolerable and who torments the heart, many 
people are completely bewildered and create 
useless quarrel with others. Thus they conclude 
that other people are either their friends, their 
enemies or parties indifferent to them. (48) Per-
sons who identify with this body, which is 
simply the product of the material mind, are 
blinded in their intelligence, thinking in terms 
of “I” and “mine.” Because of their illusion of 
“this is I, but that is someone else,” they wander 
in endless darkness. (49) If you say that these people are the cause of my happiness and dis-
tress, then where is the place of the soul in such 
a conception? Th is happiness and distress per-
tain not to the soul but to the interactions of ma-
terial bodies. If someone bites his tongue with 
his own teeth, at whom can he become angry in 
his suffering? (50)  

If you say that the demigods who rule the 
bodily senses cause suffering, still, how can 
such suffering apply to the spirit soul? This act-
ing and being acted upon are merely interac-
tions of the changeable senses and their presid-
ing deities. When one limb of the body attacks 
another, with whom can the person in that bo dy 
be angry? (51) If the soul himself were the 
cause of happiness and distress, then we could 
not blame others, since happiness and distress 
would be simply the nature of the soul. Accord-
ing to this theory, nothing except the soul actu-
ally exists, and if w e were to perceive some-
thing besides the soul, that would be illusion. 
Therefore, since happiness and distress do not 
actually exist in this concept, why become an-
gry at oneself or others? (52) And if we exam-
ine the hypothesis that the planets are the im-
mediate cause of suffering and happiness, then 
also where is the relationship with the soul, 
who is eternal? After all, the effect of the plan-
ets applies only to things that have taken birth. 
Expert astrologers have moreover explained 
how the planets are onl y causing pain to each 
other. Therefore, since the living entity is dis-
tinct from these planets and from the material 
body, against whom should he vent his anger? 
(53) If we assume that fruitive work is the cause 
of happiness and distress, we still are not  deal-
ing with the soul. The idea of material work 
arises when there is a spiritual actor who is con-
scious and a material body that undergoes the 
transformation of happiness and distress as a 
reaction to such work. Since the body has no 
life, it cannot be t he actual recipient of happi-
ness and distress, nor can the soul, who is ulti-
mately completely spiritual and aloof from the 
material body. Since karma thus has no ulti-
mate basis in either the body or the soul, at 
whom can one become angry? (54) If we accept  
time as the cause of happiness and distress, that 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

868 
 experience still cannot apply to the spirit soul, 
since time is a manifestation of the Lord’s spir-
itual potency and the living entities are also ex-
pansions of the Lord’s spiritual potency mani-
festing throu gh time. Certainly a fire does not 
burn its own flames or sparks, nor does the cold 
harm its own snowflakes or hail. In fact, the 
spirit soul is transcendental and beyond the ex-
perience of material happiness and distress. At 
whom, therefore, should one bec ome angry? 
(55) The false ego gives shape to illusory ma-
terial existence and thus experiences material 
happiness and distress. The spirit soul, how-
ever, is transcendental to material nature; he 
can never actually be affected by material hap-
piness and distr ess in any place, under any cir-
cumstance or by the agency of any person. A 
person who understands this has nothing what-
soever to fear from the material creation. (56) I 
shall cross over the insurmountable ocean of 
nescience by being firmly fixed in the ser vice 
of the lotus feet of K ṛṣṇa. This was approved 
by the previous ācāryas, who were fixed in firm 
devotion to the Lord, Paramātmā, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. (57) Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa 
said: Thus becoming detached upon the loss of 
his property, this sag e gave up his moroseness. 
He left home, taking sannyāsa, and began to 
travel about the earth. Even when insulted by 
foolish rascals he remained unswerved from his 
duty and chanted this song. (58)  

No other force besides his own mental con-
fusion makes the s oul experience happiness 
and distress. His perception of friends, neutral 
parties and enemies and the whole material life 
he builds around this perception are simply cre-
ated out of ignorance. (59) My dear Uddhava, 
fixing your intelligence on Me, you should  thus 
completely control the mind. This is the es-
sence of the science of yoga. (60) Anyone who 
listens to or recites to others this song of the 
sannyāsī, which presents scientific knowledge 
of the Absolute, and who thus meditates upon 
it with full attentio n, will never again be over-
whelmed by the dualities of material happiness 
and distress. (61)  

SB 11.24: The Philosophy of Sā ṅkhya   
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa said:  Now I shall describe 
to you the science of Sā ṅkhya, which has been 
perfectly established by ancient auth orities. By 
understanding this science a person can imme-
diately give up the illusion of material duality. 
(1) Originally, during the K ṛta-yuga, when all 
men were very expert in spiritual discrimina-
tion, and also previous to that, during the period 
of annih ilation, the seer existed alone, nondif-
ferent from the seen object. (2) That one Abso-
lute Truth, remaining free from material duali-
ties and inaccessible to ordinary speech and 
mind, divided Himself into two categoriesthe 
material nature and the living enti ties who are 
trying to enjoy the manifestations of that na-
ture. (3) Of these two categories of manifesta-
tion, one is material nature, which embodies 
both the subtle causes and manifest products of 
matter. The other is the conscious living entity, 
designate d as the enjoyer. (4) When material 
nature was agitated by My glance, the three ma-
terial modesgoodness, passion and ignorance-
became manifest to fulfill the pending desires 
of the conditioned souls. (5) From these modes 
arose the primeval sūtra, along with the mahat -
tattva. By the transformation of the mahat -
tattva was generated the false ego, the cause of 
the living entities’ bewilderment. (6) False ego, 
which is the cause of physical sensation, the 
senses and the mind, encompasses both spirit 
and matter an d manifests in three varieties: in 
the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. 
(7) From false ego in the mode of ignorance 
came the subtle physical perceptions, from 
which the gross elements were generated. From 
false ego in the mode of passion came the 
senses, and from false ego in the mode of good-
ness arose the eleven demigods. (8) Impelled 
by Me, all these elements combined to function 
in an orderly fashion and together gave birth to 
the universal egg, which is My excellent place 
of residence. (9) I My self appeared within that 
egg, which was floating on the causal water, 
and from My navel arose the universal lotus, 
the birthplace of self -born Brahmā. (10) Lord 
Brahmā, the soul of the universe, being en-
dowed with the mode of passion, performed 
great aust erities by My mercy and thus created 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

869 
 the three planetary divisions, called Bhūr, Bhu-
var and Svar, along with their presiding deities. 
(11) Heaven was established as the residence of 
the demigods, Bhuvarloka as that of the ghostly 
spirits, and the earth sys tem as the place of hu-
man beings and other mortal creatures. Those 
mystics who strive for liberation are promoted 
beyond these three divisions. (12) Lord Brahmā 
created the region below the earth for the de-
mons and the Nāga snakes. In this way the des-
tinations of the three worlds were arranged as 
the corresponding reactions for different kinds 
of work performed within the three modes of 
nature. (13) By mystic yoga, great austerities 
and the renounced order of life, the pure desti-
nations of Maharloka, Janolo ka, Tapoloka and 
Satyaloka are attained. But by devotional yoga, 
one achieves My transcendental abode. (14) All 
results of fruitive work have been arranged 
within this world by Me, the supreme creator 
acting as the force of time. Thus one sometimes 
rises u p toward the surface of this mighty river 
of the modes of nature and sometimes again 
submerges. (15) Whatever features visibly ex-
ist within this worldsmall or great, thin or 
stoutcertainly contain both the material nature 
and its enjoyer, the spirit soul. (16) 

Gold and earth are originally existing as in-
gredients. From gold one may fashion golden 
ornaments such as bracelets and earrings, and 
from earth one may fashion clay pots and sau-
cers. The original ingredients gold and earth ex-
ist before the products made from them, and 
when the products are eventually destroyed, the 
original ingredients, gold and earth, will re-
main. Thus, since the ingredients are present in 
the beginning and at the end, they must also be 
present in the middle phase, taking the form o f 
a particular product to which we assign for con-
venience a particular name, such as bracelet, 
earring, pot or saucer. We can therefore under-
stand that since the ingredient cause exists be-
fore the creation of a product and after the prod-
uct’s destruction, the same ingredient cause 
must be present during the manifest phase, sup-
porting the product as the basis of its reality. 
(17) A material object, itself composed of an 
essential ingredient, creates another material object through transformation. Thus one cr e-
ated object becomes the cause and basis of an-
other created object. A particular thing may 
thus be called real in that it possesses the basic 
nature of another object that constitutes its 
origin and final state. (18) The material uni-
verse may be considered  real, having nature as 
its original ingredient and final state. Lord 
Mahā -Viṣṇu is the resting place of nature, 
which becomes manifest by the power of time. 
Thus nature, the almighty Vi ṣṇu and time are 
not different from Me, the Supreme Absolute 
Truth. (1 9) As long as the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead continues to glance upon nature, 
the material world continues to exist, perpetu-
ally manifesting through procreation the great 
and variegated flow of universal creation. (20)  

I am the basis of the universal form, which 
displays endless variety through the repeated 
creation, maintenance and destruction of the 
planetary systems. Originally containing within 
itself all planets in their dormant state, My uni-
versal form manifests the varieties of created 
existence  by arranging the coordinated combi-
nation of the five elements. (21) At the time of 
annihilation, the mortal body of the living be-
ing becomes merged into food. Food merges 
into the grains, and the grains merge back into 
the earth. The earth merges into its  subtle sen-
sation, fragrance. Fragrance merges into water, 
and water further merges into its own quality, 
taste. That taste merges into fire, which merges 
into form. Form merges into touch, and touch 
merges into ether. Ether finally merges into the 
sensati on of sound. The senses all merge into 
their own origins, the presiding demigods, and 
they, O gentle Uddhava, merge into the control-
ling mind, which itself merges into false ego in 
the mode of goodness. Sound becomes one 
with false ego in the mode of ignor ance, and 
all-powerful false ego, the first of all the phys-
ical elements, merges into the total nature. The 
total material nature, the primary repository of 
the three basic modes, dissolves into the modes. 
These modes of nature then merge into the un-
manife st form of nature, and that unmanifest 
form merges into time. Time merges into the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

870 
 Supreme Lord, present in the form of the om-
niscient Mahā -puruṣa, the original activator of 
all living beings. That origin of all life merges 
into Me, the unborn Supreme Soul , who re-
mains alone, established within Himself. It is 
from Him that all creation and annihilation are 
manifested. (22 -27) Just as the rising sun re-
moves the darkness of the sky, similarly, this 
scientific knowledge of cosmic annihilation re-
moves all illus ory duality from the mind of a 
serious student. Even if illusion somehow en-
ters his heart, it cannot remain there. (28) Thus 
I, the perfect seer of everything material and 
spiritual, have spoken this knowledge of 
Sāṅkhya, which destroys the illusion of dou bt 
by scientific analysis of creation and annihila-
tion. (29)  

SB 11.25: The Three Modes of Nature 
and Beyond  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  O best among men, please listen as I de-
scribe to you how the living entity attains a par-
ticular nature by  association with individual 
material modes. (1) Mind and sense control, 
tolerance, discrimination, sticking to one’s pre-
scribed duty, truthfulness, mercy, careful study 
of the past and future, satisfaction in any con-
dition, generosity, renunciation of sen se grati-
fication, faith in the spiritual master, being em-
barrassed at improper action, charity, simplic-
ity, humbleness and satisfaction within oneself 
are qualities of the mode of goodness. Material 
desire, great endeavor, audacity, dissatisfaction 
even in  gain, false pride, praying for material 
advancement, considering oneself different and 
better than others, sense gratification, rash ea-
gerness to fight, a fondness for hearing oneself 
praised, the tendency to ridicule others, adver-
tising one’s own prowess  and justifying one’s 
actions by one’s strength are qualities of the 
mode of passion. Intolerant anger, stinginess, 
speaking without scriptural authority, violent 
hatred, living as a parasite, hypocrisy, chronic 
fatigue, quarrel, lamentation, delusion, unh ap-
piness, depression, sleeping too much, false ex-
pectations, fear and laziness constitute the ma-
jor qualities of the mode of ignorance. Now please hear about the combination of these 
three modes. (2 -5) My dear Uddhava, the com-
bination of all three modes is  present in the 
mentality of “I” and “mine.” The ordinary 
transactions of this world, which are carried out 
through the agency of the mind, the objects of 
perception, the senses and the vital airs of the 
physical body, are also based on the combina-
tion of the modes. (6) When a person devotes 
himself to religiosity, economic development 
and sense gratification, the faith, wealth and 
sensual enjoyment obtained by his endeavors 
display the interaction of the three modes of na-
ture. (7) When a man desires sense gratifica-
tion, being attached to family life, and when he 
consequently becomes established in religious 
and occupational duties, the combination of the 
modes of nature is manifest. (8)  

A person exhibiting qualities such as self -
control is understood to be  predominantly in 
the mode of goodness. Similarly, a passionate 
person is recognized by his lust, and one in ig-
norance is recognized by qualities such as an-
ger. (9) Any person, whether man or woman, 
who worships Me with loving devotion, offer-
ing his or her  prescribed duties unto Me without 
material attachment, is understood to be situ-
ated in goodness. (10) When a person worships 
Me by his prescribed duties with the hope of 
gaining material benefit, his nature should be 
understood to be in passion, and one w ho wor-
ships Me with the desire to commit violence 
against others is in ignorance. (11) The three 
modes of material naturegoodness, passion and 
ignoranceinfluence the living entity but not Me. 
Manifesting within his mind, they induce the 
living entity to be come attached to material 
bodies and other created objects. In this way the 
living entity is bound up. (12) When the mode 
of goodness, which is luminous, pure and aus-
picious, predominates over passion and igno-
rance, a man becomes endowed with happiness, 
virtue, knowledge and other good qualities. 
(13) When the mode of passion, which causes 
attachment, separatism and activity, conquers 
ignorance and goodness, a man begins to work 
hard to acquire prestige and fortune. Thus in the 
mode of passion he experience s anxiety and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

871 
 struggle. (14) When the mode of ignorance 
conquers passion and goodness, it covers one’s 
consciousness and makes one foolish and dull. 
Falling into lamentation and illusion, a person 
in the mode of ignorance sleeps excessively, in-
dulges in fa lse hopes, and displays violence to-
ward others. (15) When consciousness be-
comes clear and the senses are detached from 
matter, one experiences fearlessness within the 
material body and detachment from the mate-
rial mind. You should understand this situation  
to be the predominance of the mode of good-
ness, in which one has the opportunity to real-
ize Me. (16) You should discern the mode of 
passion by its symptomsthe distortion of the in-
telligence because of too much activity, the in-
ability of the perceiving sen ses to disentangle 
themselves from mundane objects, an un-
healthy condition of the working physical or-
gans, and the unsteady perplexity of the mind. 
(17) 

When one’s higher awareness fails and fi-
nally disappears and one is thus unable to con-
centrate his att ention, his mind is ruined and 
manifests ignorance and depression. You 
should understand this situation to be the pre-
dominance of the mode of ignorance. (18)  

With the increase of the mode of goodness, 
the strength of the demigods similarly in-
creases. When  passion increases, the demoniac 
become strong. And with the rise of ignorance, 
O Uddhava, the strength of the most wicked in-
creases. (19) It should be understood that alert 
wakefulness comes from the mode of good-
ness, sleep with dreaming from the mode of 
passion, and deep, dreamless sleep from the 
mode of ignorance. The fourth state of con-
sciousness pervades these three and is transcen-
dental. (20) Learned persons dedicated to Ve-
dic culture are elevated by the mode of good-
ness to higher and higher positions . The mode 
of ignorance, on the other hand, forces one to 
fall headfirst into lower and lower births. And 
by the mode of passion one continues transmi-
grating through human bodies. (21) Those who 
leave this world in the mode of goodness go to 
the heavenly p lanets, those who pass away in the mode of passion remain in the world of hu-
man beings, and those dying in the mode of ig-
norance must go to hell. But those who are free 
from the influence of all modes of nature come 
to Me. (22) Work performed as an offerin g to 
Me, without consideration of the fruit, is con-
sidered to be in the mode of goodness. Work 
performed with a desire to enjoy the results is 
in the mode of passion. And work impelled by 
violence and envy is in the mode of ignorance. 
(23) Absolute knowled ge is in the mode of 
goodness, knowledge based on duality is in the 
mode of passion, and foolish, materialistic 
knowledge is in the mode of ignorance. 
Knowledge based upon Me, however, is under-
stood to be transcendental. (24) Residence in 
the forest is in the mode of goodness, residence 
in a town is in the mode of passion, residence 
in a gambling house displays the quality of ig-
norance, and residence in a place where I reside 
is transcendental. (25) A worker free of attach-
ment is in the mode of goodness, a worker 
blinded by personal desire is in the mode of 
passion, and a worker who has completely for-
gotten how to tell right from wrong is in the 
mode of ignorance. But a worker who has taken 
shelter of Me is understood to be transcendental 
to the modes of nat ure. (26) Faith directed to-
ward spiritual life is in the mode of goodness, 
faith rooted in fruitive work is in the mode of 
passion, faith residing in irreligious activities is 
in the mode of ignorance, but faith in My devo-
tional service is purely transcend ental. (27)  

Food that is wholesome, pure and obtained 
without difficulty is in the mode of goodness, 
food that gives immediate pleasure to the 
senses is in the mode of passion, and food that 
is unclean and causes distress is in the mode of 
ignorance. (28)  Happiness derived from the self 
is in the mode of goodness, happiness based on 
sense gratification is in the mode of passion, 
and happiness based on delusion and degrada-
tion is in the mode of ignorance. But that hap-
piness found within Me is transcendental . (29)  

Therefore, material substance, place, result 
of activity, time, knowledge, work, the per-
former of work, faith, state of consciousness, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

872 
 species of life and destination after death are all 
based on the three modes of material nature. 
(30) O best of h uman beings, all states of mate-
rial being are related to the interaction of the 
enjoying soul and material nature. Whether 
seen, heard of or only conceived within the 
mind, they are without exception constituted of 
the modes of nature. (31) O gentle Uddhav a, all 
these different phases of conditioned life arise 
from work born of the modes of material na-
ture. The living entity who conquers these 
modes, manifested from the mind, can dedicate 
himself to Me by the process of devotional ser-
vice and thus attain pu re love for Me. (32) 
Therefore, having achieved this human form of 
life, which allows one to develop full 
knowledge, those who are intelligent should 
free themselves from all contamination of the 
modes of nature and engage exclusively in lov-
ing service to Me. (33) A wise sage, free from 
all material association and unbewildered, 
should subdue his senses and worship Me. He 
should conquer the modes of passion and igno-
rance by engaging himself only with things in 
the mode of goodness. (34) Then, being fixed 
in devotional service, the sage should also con-
quer the material mode of goodness by indiffer-
ence toward the modes. Thus pacified within 
his mind, the spirit soul, freed from the modes 
of nature, gives up the very cause of his condi-
tioned life and attains Me . (35) Freed from the 
subtle conditioning of the mind and from the 
modes of nature born of material conscious-
ness, the living entity becomes completely sat-
isfied by experiencing My transcendental form. 
He no longer searches for enjoyment in the ex-
ternal en ergy, nor does he contemplate or re-
member such enjoyment within himself. (36)  

SB 11.26: The Aila -gītā 

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: 
Having achieved this human form of life, which 
affords one the opportunity to realize Me, and 
being situated in  My devotional service, one 
can achieve Me, the reservoir of all pleasure 
and the Supreme Soul of all existence, residing 
within the heart of every living being. (1) A 
person fixed in transcendental knowledge is freed from conditioned life by giving up his  
false identification with the products of the ma-
terial modes of nature. Seeing these products as 
simply illusion, he avoids entanglement with 
the modes of nature, although constantly 
among them. Because the modes of nature and 
their products are simply no t real, he does not 
accept them. (2) One should never associate 
with materialists, those dedicated to gratifying 
their genitals and bellies. By following them 
one falls into the deepest pit of darkness, just 
like a blind man who follows another blind 
man. (3) The following song was sung by the 
famous emperor Purūravā. When deprived of 
his wife, Urvaśī, he was at first bewildered, but 
by controlling his lamentation he began to feel 
detachment. (4) When she was leaving him, 
even though he was naked he ran aft er her just 
like a madman and called out in great distress, 
“O my wife, O terrible lady! Please stop!” (5) 
Although for many years Purūravā had enjoyed 
sex pleasure in the evening hours, still he was 
not satisfied by such insignificant enjoyment. 
His mind was so attracted to Urvaśī that he did 
not notice how the nights were coming and go-
ing. (6)  

King Aila said:  Alas, just see the extent of 
my delusion! This goddess was embracing me 
and held my neck in her grip. My heart was so 
polluted by lust that I had n o idea how my life 
was passing. (7) That lady cheated me so much 
that I did not even see the rising or setting of 
the sun. Alas, for so many years I passed my 
days in vain! (8) Alas, although I am supposed 
to be a mighty emperor, the crown jewel of all 
kings on this earth, just see how my bewilder-
ment has rendered me a toy animal in the hands 
of women! (9) Although I was a powerful lord 
with great opulence, that woman gave me up as 
if I were no more than an insignificant blade of 
grass. And still, naked and  without shame, I fol-
lowed her, crying out to her like a madman. 
(10) Where are my so -called great influence, 
power and sovereignty? Just like an ass being 
kicked in the face by his she -ass, I ran after that 
woman, who had already given me up. (11) 
What is  the use of a big education or the prac-
tice of austerities and renunciation, and what is 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

873 
 the use of studying religious scriptures, of liv-
ing in solitude and silence, if, after all that, 
one’s mind is stolen by a woman? (12) To hell 
with me! I am such a foo l that I didn’t even 
know what was good for me, although I arro-
gantly thought I was highly intelligent. Alt-
hough I achieved the exalted position of a lord, 
I allowed myself to be conquered by women as 
if I were a bullock or a jackass. (13) Even after 
I had  served the so -called nectar of the lips of 
Urvaśī for many years, my lusty desires kept 
rising again and again within my heart and were 
never satisfied, just like a fire that can never be 
extinguished by the oblations of ghee poured 
into its flames. (14) Who but the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who lies beyond material 
perception and is the Lord of self -satisfied 
sages, can possibly save my consciousness, 
which has been stolen by a prostitute? (15) Be-
cause I allowed my intelligence to become dull 
and be cause I failed to control my senses, the 
great confusion in my mind did not go away, 
even though Urvaśī herself gave me wise coun-
sel with well -spoken words. (16) How can I 
blame her for my trouble when I myself am ig-
norant of my real, spiritual nature? I d id not 
control my senses, and so I am like a person 
who mistakenly sees a harmless rope as a 
snake. (17) What is this polluted body any-
wayso filthy and full of bad odors? I was at-
tracted by the fragrance and beauty of a 
woman’s body, but what are those so -called at-
tractive features? They are simply a false cov-
ering created by illusion. (18) One can never 
decide whose property the body actually is. 
Does it belong to one’s parents, who have given 
birth to it, to one’s wife, who gives it pleasure, 
or to one’s employer, who orders the body 
around? Is it the property of the funeral fire or 
of the dogs and jackals who may ultimately de-
vour it? Is it the property of the indwelling soul, 
who partakes in its happiness and distress, or 
does the body belong to intimate  friends who 
encourage and help it? Although a man never 
definitely ascertains the proprietor of the body, 
he becomes most attached to it. The material 
body is a polluted material form heading to-
ward a lowly destination, yet when a man stares 
at the face o f a woman he thinks, “What a good -looking lady! What a charming nose she’s got, 
and see her beautiful smile!” (19 -20) What dif-
ference is there between ordinary worms and 
persons who try to enjoy this material body 
composed of skin, flesh, blood, muscle, fa t, 
marrow, bone, stool, urine and pus? (21) Yet 
even one who theoretically understands the ac-
tual nature of the body should never associate 
with women or with men attached to women. 
After all, the contact of the senses with their ob-
jects inevitably agitate s the mind. (22) Because 
the mind is not disturbed by that which is nei-
ther seen nor heard, the mind of a person who 
restricts the material senses will automatically 
be checked in its material activities and become 
pacified. (23) Therefore, one should neve r let 
his senses associate freely with women or with 
men attached to women. Even those who are 
highly learned cannot trust the six enemies of 
the mind; what to speak, then, of foolish per-
sons like me. (24)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: Having t hus chanted this song, Mahārāja 
Purūravā, eminent among the demigods and 
human beings, gave up the position he had 
achieved in the planet of Urvaśī. His illusion 
cleansed away by transcendental knowledge, 
he understood Me to be the Supreme Soul 
within his heart and so at last achieved peace. 
(25) An intelligent person should therefore re-
ject all bad association and instead take up the 
association of saintly devotees, whose words 
cut off the excessive attachment of one’s mind. 
(26) My devotees fix their mind s on Me and do 
not depend upon anything material. They are 
always peaceful, endowed with equal vision, 
and free from possessiveness, false ego, duality 
and greed. (27) O greatly fortunate Uddhava, in 
the association of such saintly devotees there is 
consta nt discussion of Me, and those partaking 
in this chanting and hearing of My glories are 
certainly purified of all sins. (28) Whoever 
hears, chants and respectfully takes to heart 
these topics about Me becomes faithfully dedi-
cated to Me and thus achieves My  devotional 
service. (29) What more remains to be accom-
plished for the perfect devotee after achieving 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

874 
 devotional service unto Me, the Supreme Ab-
solute Truth, whose qualities are innumerable 
and who am the embodiment of all ecstatic ex-
perience? (30) Just a s cold, fear and darkness 
are eradicated for one who has approached the 
sacrificial fire, so dullness, fear and ignorance 
are destroyed for one engaged in serving the 
devotees of the Lord. (31) The devotees of the 
Lord, peacefully fixed in absolute knowled ge, 
are the ultimate shelter for those who are re-
peatedly rising and falling within the fearful 
ocean of material life. Such devotees are just 
like a strong boat that comes to rescue persons 
who are at the point of drowning. (32) Just as 
food is the life o f all creatures, just as I am the 
ultimate shelter for the distressed, and just as 
religion is the wealth of those who are passing 
away from this world, so My devotees are the 
only refuge of persons fearful of falling into a 
miserable condition of life. (3 3) My devotees 
bestow divine eyes, whereas the sun allows 
only external sight, and that only when it is 
risen in the sky. My devotees are one’s real 
worshipable deities and real family; they are 
one’s own self, and ultimately they are nondif-
ferent from Me.  (34) Thus losing his desire to 
be on the same planet as Urvaśī, Mahārāja 
Purūravā began to wander the earth free of all 
material association and completely satisfied 
within the self. (35)  

SB 11.27: Lord K ṛṣṇa’s Instructions on 
the Process of Deity Worshi p 

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Lord, O master 
of the devotees, please explain to me the pre-
scribed method of worshiping You in Your De-
ity form. What are the qualifications of those 
devotees who worship the Deity, on what basis 
is such worship established, an d what is the 
specific method of worship? (1) All the great 
sages repeatedly declare that such worship 
brings the greatest benefit possible in human 
life. This is the opinion of Nārada Muni, the 
great Vyāsadeva and my own spiritual master, 
Bṛhaspati. (2) O  most magnanimous Lord, the 
instructions on this process of Deity worship 
first emanated from Your lotus mouth. Then 
they were spoken by the great Lord Brahmā to his sons, headed by Bh ṛgu, and by Lord Śiva to 
his wife, Pārvatī. This process is accepted by 
and appropriate for all the occupational and 
spiritual orders of society. Therefore, I consider 
worship of You in Your Deity form to be the 
most beneficial of all spiritual practices, even 
for women and śūdras. (3 -4) O lotus -eyed one, 
O Supreme Lord of all  lords of the universe, 
please explain to Your devoted servant this 
means of liberation from the bondage of work. 
(5) 

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava, there is no end to the 
innumerable Vedic prescriptions for executing 
Deity wors hip; so I shall explain this topic to 
you briefly, one step at a time. (6) One should 
carefully worship Me by selecting one of the 
three methods by which I receive sacrifice: Ve-
dic, tantric or mixed. (7) Now please listen 
faithfully as I explain exactly ho w a person who 
has achieved twice -born status through the rel-
evant Vedic prescriptions should worship Me 
with devotion. (8) A twice -born person should 
worship Me, his worshipable Lord, without du-
plicity, offering appropriate paraphernalia in 
loving devotio n to My Deity form or to a form 
of Me appearing upon the ground, in fire, in the 
sun, in water or within the worshiper’s own 
heart. (9) One should first purify his body by 
cleansing his teeth and bathing. Then one 
should perform a second cleansing by smear ing 
the body with earth and chanting both Vedic 
and tantric mantras. (10) Fixing the mind on 
Me, one should worship Me by his various pre-
scribed duties, such as chanting the Gāyatrī 
mantra at the three junctures of the day. Such 
performances are enjoined b y the Vedas and 
purify the worshiper of reactions to fruitive ac-
tivities. (11) The Deity form of the Lord is said 
to appear in eight varietiesstone, wood, metal, 
earth, paint, sand, the mind or jewels. (12) The 
Deity form of the Lord, who is the shelter of  all 
living entities, can be established in two ways: 
temporarily or permanently. But a permanent 
Deity, having been called, can never be sent 
away, My dear Uddhava. (13) The Deity that is 
temporarily established can optionally be 
called forth and sent awa y, but these two rituals 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

875 
 should always be performed when the Deity is 
traced upon the ground. Bathing should be done 
with water except if the Deity is made of clay, 
paint or wood, in which cases a thorough 
cleansing without water is enjoined. (14) One 
shou ld worship Me in My Deity forms by of-
fering the most excellent paraphernalia. But a 
devotee completely freed from material desire 
may worship Me with whatever he is able to 
obtain, and may even worship Me within his 
heart with mental paraphernalia. (15) In  wor-
shiping the temple Deity, my dear Uddhava, 
bathing and decoration are the most pleasing 
offerings. For the Deity traced on sacred 
ground, the process of tattva -vinyāsa is most 
dear. Oblations of sesame and barley soaked in 
ghee are the preferred offeri ng to the sacrificial 
fire, whereas worship consisting of upasthāna 
and arghya is preferred for the sun. One should 
worship Me in the form of water by offering 
water itself. Actually, whatever is offered to 
Me with faith by My devoteeeven if only a little 
wateris most dear to Me. (16 -17) Even very op-
ulent presentations do not satisfy Me if they are 
offered by nondevotees. But I am pleased by 
any insignificant offering made by My loving 
devotees, and I am certainly most pleased when 
nice presentations of fra grant oil, incense, flow-
ers and palatable foods are offered with love. 
(18) 

After cleansing himself and collecting all 
the paraphernalia, the worshiper should arrange 
his own seat with blades of kuśa grass whose 
tips point eastward. He should then sit fac ing 
either east or north, or else, if the Deity is fixed 
in one place, he should sit directly facing the 
Deity. (19) The devotee should sanctify the var-
ious parts of his body by touching them and 
chanting mantras. He should do the same for 
My Deity form, a nd then with his hands he 
should clean the Deity of old flowers and the 
remnants of previous offerings. He should 
properly prepare the sacred pot and the vessel 
containing water for sprinkling. (20) Then, 
with the water of that prok ṣaṇīya vessel he 
should sprinkle the area where the Deity is be-
ing worshiped, the offerings that are going to 
be presented, and his own body. Next he should decorate with various auspicious substances 
three vessels filled with water. (21) The wor-
shiper should then purify those th ree vessels. 
He should sanctify the vessel holding water for 
washing the Lord’s feet by chanting h ṛdayāya 
nama ḥ, the vessel containing water for arghya 
by chanting śirase svāhā, and the vessel con-
taining water for washing the Lord’s mouth by 
chanting śikhā yai va ṣaṭ. Also, the Gāyatrī man-
tra should be chanted for all three vessels. (22) 
The worshiper should meditate upon My subtle 
formwhich is situated within the worshiper’s 
own body, now purified by air and fireas the 
source of all living entities. This for m of the 
Lord is experienced by self -realized sages in 
the last part of the vibration of the sacred sylla-
ble om. (23) The devotee conceives of the Su-
persoul, whose presence surcharges the devo-
tee’s body, in the form corresponding to his re-
alization. Thus t he devotee worships the Lord 
to his full capacity and becomes fully absorbed 
in Him. By touching the various limbs of the 
Deity and chanting appropriate mantras, the 
devotee should invite the Supersoul to join the 
Deity’s form, and then the devotee should wor-
ship Me. (24) The worshiper should first imag-
ine My seat as decorated with the personified 
deities of religion, knowledge, renunciation 
and opulence and with My nine spiritual ener-
gies. He should think of the Lord’s sitting place 
as an eight -petaled lot us, effulgent on account 
of the saffron filaments within its whorl. Then, 
following the regulations of both the Vedas and 
the tantras, he should offer Me water for wash-
ing the feet, water for washing the mouth, ar-
ghya and other items of worship. By this pr o-
cess he achieves both material enjoyment and 
liberation. (25 -26) 

One should worship, in order, the Lord’s Su-
darśana disc, His Pāñcajanya conchshell, His 
club, sword, bow, arrows and plow, His mu ṣala 
weapon, His Kaustubha gem, His flower gar-
land and the Ś rīvatsa curl of hair on His chest. 
(27) One should worship the Lord’s associates 
Nanda and Sunanda, Garu ḍa, Praca ṇḍa and 
Caṇḍa, Mahābala and Bala, and Kumuda and 
Kumudek ṣaṇa. (28) With offerings such as 
prokṣaṇa one should worship Durgā, Vināyaka, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

876 
 Vyāsa, V iṣvaksena, the spiritual masters and 
the various demigods. All these personalities 
should be in their proper places facing the Deity 
of the Lord. (29)  

The worshiper should bathe the Deity every 
day, as opulently as his assets permit, using wa-
ters scented with sandalwood, uśīra root, cam-
phor, ku ṅkuma and aguru. He should also chant 
various Vedic hymns, such as the anuvāka 
known as Svar ṇa-gharma, the Mahāpuru ṣa-
vidyā, the Puru ṣa-sūkta and various songs of 
the Sāma Veda, such as the Rājana and the Ro-
hiṇya. (3 0-31) My devotee should then lov-
ingly decorate Me with clothing, a brāhma ṇa 
thread, various ornaments, marks of tilaka and 
garlands, and he should anoint My body with 
fragrant oils, all in the prescribed manner. (32) 
The worshiper should faithfully present  Me 
with water for washing My feet and mouth, fra-
grant oils, flowers and unbroken grains, along 
with incense, lamps and other offerings. (33) 
Within his means, the devotee should arrange 
to offer Me sugar candy, sweet rice, ghee, 
śaṣkulī [rice -flour cakes] , āpūpa [various sweet 
cakes], modaka [steamed rice -flour dumplings 
filled with sweet coconut and sugar], sa ṁyāva 
[wheat cakes made with ghee and milk and cov-
ered with sugar and spices], yogurt, vegetable 
soups and other palatable foods. (34) On spe-
cial oc casions, and daily if possible, the Deity 
should be massaged with ointment, shown a 
mirror, offered a eucalyptus stick for brushing 
His teeth, bathed with the five kinds of nectar, 
offered all kinds of opulent foods, and enter-
tained with singing and dancin g. (35)  

In an arena constructed according to scrip-
tural injunctions, the devotee should perform a 
fire sacrifice, utilizing the sacred belt, the sac-
rificial pit and the altar mound. When igniting 
the sacrificial fire, the devotee should bring it 
to a blaz e with wood piled up by his own hands. 
(36) After spreading kuśa grass on the ground 
and sprinkling it with water, one should per-
form the anvādhāna ritual according to the pre-
scribed rules. Then one should arrange the 
items to be offered as oblations and s hould 
sanctify them with water from the sprinkling vessel. The worshiper should next meditate 
upon Me within the fire. (37) The intelligent 
devotee should meditate upon that form of the 
Lord whose color is like molten gold, whose 
four arms are resplendent with the conchshell, 
disc, club and lotus flower, and who is always 
peaceful and dressed in a garment colored like 
the filaments within a lotus flower. His helmet, 
bracelets, belt and fine arm ornaments shine 
brilliantly. The symbol of Śrīvatsa is on His 
chest, along with the glowing Kaustubha gem 
and a garland of forest flowers. The devotee 
should then worship that Lord by taking pieces 
of firewood soaked in the sacrificial ghee and 
throwing them into the fire. He should perform 
the ritual of āghāra, prese nting into the fire the 
various items of oblation drenched in ghee. He 
should then offer to sixteen demigods, begin-
ning with Yamarāja, the oblation called svi ṣṭi-
kṛt, reciting the basic mantras of each deity and 
the sixteen -line Puru ṣa-sūkta hymn. Pouring 
one oblation after each line of the Puru ṣa-sūkta, 
he should utter the particular mantra naming 
each deity. (38 -41) 

Having thus worshiped the Lord in the sac-
rificial fire, the devotee should offer his obei-
sances to the Lord’s personal associates by 
bowing down and should then present offerings 
to them. He should then chant quietly the mūla -
mantra of the Deity of the Lord, remembering 
the Absolute Truth as the Supreme Personality, 
Nārāya ṇa. (42) Once again he should offer the 
Deity water for washing His mout h, and he 
should give the remnants of the Lord’s food to 
Viṣvaksena. Then he should present the Deity 
with fragrant perfume for the mouth and pre-
pared betel nut. (43) Singing along with others, 
chanting loudly and dancing, acting out My 
transcendental past imes, and hearing and tell-
ing stories about Me, the devotee should for 
some time absorb himself in such festivity. (44) 
The devotee should offer homage to the Lord 
with all kinds of hymns and prayers, both from 
the Purā ṇas and from other ancient scriptures , 
and also from ordinary traditions. Praying, “O 
Lord, please be merciful to me!” he should fall 
down flat like a rod to offer his obeisances. (45) 
Placing his head at the feet of the Deity, he 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

877 
 should then stand with folded hands before the 
Lord and pray, “O my Lord, please protect me, 
who am surrendered unto You. I am most fear-
ful of this ocean of material existence, standing 
as I am in the mouth of death.” (46) Praying in 
this way, the devotee should respectfully place 
upon his head the remnants I offer t o him. And 
if the particular Deity is meant to be sent away 
at the end of the worship, then this should be 
performed, the devotee once again placing the 
light of the Deity’s presence inside the light of 
the lotus within his own heart. (47) Whenever 
one dev elops faith in Mein My form as the De-
ity or in other bona fide manifestationsone 
should worship Me in that form. I certainly ex-
ist both within all created beings and also sep-
arately in My original form, since I am the Su-
preme Soul of all. (48)  

By worshipi ng Me through the various 
methods prescribed in the Vedas and tantras, 
one will gain from Me his desired perfection in 
both this life and the next. (49) The devotee 
should more fully establish My Deity by solidly 
constructing a temple, along with beautiful  gar-
dens. These gardens should be set aside to pro-
vide flowers for the regular daily worship, spe-
cial Deity processions and holiday obser-
vances. (50) One who offers the Deity gifts of 
land, markets, cities and villages so that the reg-
ular daily worship and  special festivals of the 
Deity may go on continually will achieve opu-
lence equal to My own. (51) By installing the 
Deity of the Lord one becomes king of the en-
tire earth, by building a temple for the Lord one 
becomes ruler of the three worlds, by worship-
ing and serving the Deity one goes to the planet 
of Lord Brahmā, and by performing all three of 
these activities one achieves a transcendental 
form like My own. (52) But one who simply 
engages in devotional service with no consid-
eration of fruitive results attains Me. Thus who-
ever worships Me according to the process I 
have described will ultimately attain pure devo-
tional service unto Me. (53) Anyone who steals 
the property of the demigods or the brāhma ṇas, 
whether originally given to them by himself or 
some one else, must live as a worm in stool for 
one hundred million years. (54) Not only the performer of the theft but also anyone who as-
sists him, instigates the crime, or simply ap-
proves of it must also share the reaction in the 
next life. According to their  degree of partici-
pation, they each must suffer a proportionate 
consequence. (55)  

SB 11.28: Jnana -yoga  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  One should neither praise nor criticize the 
conditioned nature and activities of other per-
sons. Rather, one sh ould see this world as 
simply the combination of material nature and 
the enjoying souls, all based on the one Abso-
lute Truth. (1) Whoever indulges in praising or 
criticizing the qualities and behavior of others 
will quickly become deviated from his own 
best interest by his entanglement in illusory du-
alities. (2) Just as the embodied spirit soul loses 
external consciousness when his senses are 
overcome by the illusion of dreaming or the 
deathlike state of deep sleep, so a person expe-
riencing material duality  must encounter illu-
sion and death. (3) That which is expressed by 
material words or meditated upon by the mate-
rial mind is not ultimate truth. What, therefore, 
is actually good or bad within this insubstantial 
world of duality, and how can the extent of s uch 
good and bad be measured? (4) Although shad-
ows, echoes and mirages are only illusory re-
flections of real things, such reflections do 
cause a semblance of meaningful or compre-
hensible perception. In the same way, although 
the identification of the condi tioned soul with 
the material body, mind and ego is illusory, this 
identification generates fear within him even up 
to the moment of death. (5) The Supersoul 
alone is the ultimate controller and creator of 
this world, and thus He alone is also the cre-
ated.  Similarly, the Soul of all existence Him-
self both maintains and is maintained, with-
draws and is withdrawn. No other entity can be 
properly ascertained as separate from Him, the 
Supreme Soul, who nonetheless is distinct from 
everything and everyone else. T he appearance 
of the threefold material nature, which is per-
ceived within Him, has no actual basis. Rather, 
you should understand that this material nature, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

878 
 composed of the three modes, is simply the 
product of His illusory potency. (6 -7) One who 
has prope rly understood the process of becom-
ing firmly fixed in theoretical and realized 
knowledge, as described herein by Me, does 
not indulge in material criticism or praise. Like 
the sun, he wanders freely throughout this 
world. (8) By direct perception, logical  deduc-
tion, scriptural testimony and personal realiza-
tion, one should know that this world has a be-
ginning and an end and so is not the ultimate 
reality. Thus one should live in this world with-
out attachment. (9)  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Lord, it is not 
possible for this material existence to be the ex-
perience of either the soul, who is the seer, or 
of the body, which is the seen object. On the 
one hand, the spirit soul is innately endowed 
with perfect knowledge, and on the other hand, 
the material body i s not a conscious, living en-
tity. To whom, then, does this experience of 
material existence pertain? (10) The spirit soul 
is inexhaustible, transcendental, pure, self -lu-
minous and never covered by anything mate-
rial. It is like fire. But the nonliving mater ial 
body, like firewood, is dull and unaware. So in 
this world, who is it that actually undergoes the 
experience of material life? (11)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  As long as the foolish spirit soul remains 
attracted to the material body, sen ses and vital 
force, his material existence continues to flour-
ish, although it is ultimately meaningless. (12) 
Actually, the living entity is transcendental to 
material existence. But because of his mentality 
of lording it over material nature, his materia l 
existential condition does not cease, and, just as 
in a dream, he is affected by all sorts of disad-
vantages. (13) Although while dreaming a per-
son experiences many undesirable things, upon 
awakening he is no longer confused by the 
dream experiences. (14)  Lamentation, elation, 
fear, anger, greed, confusion and hankering, as 
well as birth and death, are experiences of the 
false ego and not of the pure soul. (15) The liv-
ing entity who falsely identifies with his body, 
senses, life air and mind, and who dwell s within these coverings, assumes the form of his own 
materially conditioned qualities and work. He 
is designated variously in relation to the total 
material energy, and thus, under the strict con-
trol of supreme time, he is forced to run here 
and there wit hin material existence. (16) Alt-
hough the false ego has no factual basis, it is 
perceived in many formsas the functions of the 
mind, speech, life air and bodily faculties. But 
with the sword of transcendental knowledge, 
sharpened by worship of a bona fide spiritual 
master, a sober sage will cut off this false iden-
tification and live in this world free from all 
material attachment. (17) Real spiritual 
knowledge is based on the discrimination of 
spirit from matter, and it is cultivated by scrip-
tural evidence,  austerity, direct perception, re-
ception of the Purā ṇas’ historical narrations, 
and logical inference. The Absolute Truth, 
which alone was present before the creation of 
the universe and which alone will remain after 
its destruction, is also the time facto r and the 
ultimate cause. Even in the middle stage of this 
creation’s existence, the Absolute Truth alone 
is the actual reality. (18)  

Gold alone is present before its manufacture 
into gold products, the gold alone remains after 
the products’ destruction, and the gold alone is 
the essential reality while it is being utilized un-
der various designations. Similarly, I alone ex-
ist before the creation of this universe, after its 
destruction and during its maintenance. (19) 
The material mind manifests in three ph ases of 
consciousnesswakefulness, sleep and deep 
sleepwhich are products of the three modes of 
nature. The mind further appears in three dif-
ferent rolesthe perceiver, the perceived and the 
regulator of perception. Thus the mind is man-
ifested variously thro ughout these threefold 
designations. But it is the fourth factor, existing 
separately from all this, that alone constitutes 
the Absolute Truth. (20) That which did not ex-
ist in the past and will not exist in the future 
also has no existence of its own for the period 
of its duration, but is only a superficial desig-
nation. In My opinion, whatever is created and 
revealed by something else is ultimately only 
that other thing. (21) Although thus not existing 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

879 
 in reality, this manifestation of transformations 
created from the mode of passion appears real 
because the self -manifested, self -luminous Ab-
solute Truth exhibits Himself in the form of the 
material variety of the senses, the sense objects, 
the mind and the elements of physical nature. 
(22) Thus clearly under standing by discrimi-
nating logic the unique position of the Absolute 
Truth, one should expertly refute one’s misi-
dentification with matter and cut to pieces all 
doubts about the identity of the self. Becoming 
satisfied in the soul’s natural ecstasy, one 
should desist from all lusty engagements of the 
material senses. (23) The material body made 
of earth is not the true self; nor are the senses, 
their presiding demigods or the air of life; nor 
is the external air, water or fire or one’s mind. 
All these are s imply matter. Similarly, neither 
one’s intelligence, material consciousness nor 
ego, nor the elements of ether or earth, nor the 
objects of sense perception, nor even the prime-
val state of material equilibrium can be consid-
ered the actual identity of the s oul. (24) For one 
who has properly realized My personal identity 
as the Supreme Godhead, what credit is there if 
his sensesmere products of the material 
modesare perfectly concentrated in meditation? 
And on the other hand, what blame is incurred 
if his sen ses happen to become agitated? In-
deed, what does it mean to the sun if the clouds 
come and go? (25) The sky may display the 
various qualities of the air, fire, water and earth 
that pass through it, as well as such qualities as 
heat and cold, which continua lly come and go 
with the seasons. Yet the sky is never entangled 
with any of these qualities. Similarly, the Su-
preme Absolute Truth is never entangled with 
the contaminations of goodness, passion and 
ignorance, which cause the material transfor-
mations of t he false ego. (26) Nevertheless, un-
til by firmly practicing devotional service to 
Me one has completely eliminated from his 
mind all contamination of material passion, one 
must very carefully avoid associating with the 
material modes, which are produced by  My il-
lusory energy. (27)  

Just as an improperly treated disease recurs 
and gives repeated distress to the patient, the mind that is not completely purified of its per-
verted tendencies will remain attached to mate-
rial things and repeatedly torment the impe rfect 
yogī. (28) Sometimes the progress of imperfect 
transcendentalists is checked by attachment to 
family members, disciples or others, who are 
sent by envious demigods for that purpose. But 
on the strength of their accumulated advance-
ment, such imperfect  transcendentalists will re-
sume their practice of yoga in the next life. 
They will never again be trapped in the network 
of fruitive work. (29) An ordinary living entity 
performs material work and is transformed by 
the reaction to such work. Thus he is dri ven by 
various desires to continue working fruitively 
up to the very moment of his death. A wise per-
son, however, having experienced his own con-
stitutional bliss, gives up all material desires 
and does not engage in fruitive work. (30)  

The wise man, whose  consciousness is fixed 
in the self, does not even notice his own bodily 
activities. While standing, sitting, walking, ly-
ing down, urinating, eating or performing other 
bodily functions, he understands that the body 
is acting according to its own nature. ( 31) Alt-
hough a self -realized soul may sometimes see 
an impure object or activity, he does not accept 
it as real. By logically understanding impure 
sense objects to be based on illusory material 
duality, the intelligent person sees them to be 
contrary to an d distinct from reality, in the 
same way that a man awakening from sleep 
views his fading dream. (32) Material nesci-
ence, which expands into many varieties by the 
activities of the modes of nature, is wrongly ac-
cepted by the conditioned soul to be identica l 
with the self. But through the cultivation of 
spiritual knowledge, My dear Uddhava, this 
same nescience fades away at the time of liber-
ation. The eternal self, on the other hand, is 
never assumed and never abandoned. (33) 
When the sun rises it destroys t he darkness cov-
ering men’s eyes, but it does not create the ob-
jects they then see before them, which in fact 
were existing all along. Similarly, potent and 
factual realization of Me will destroy the dark-
ness covering a person’s true consciousness. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

880 
 (34) The  Supreme Lord is self -luminous, un-
born and immeasurable. He is pure transcen-
dental consciousness and perceives everything. 
One without a second, He is realized only after 
ordinary words cease. By Him the power of 
speech and the life airs are set into motio n. (35)  

Whatever apparent duality is perceived in 
the self is simply the confusion of the mind. In-
deed, such supposed duality has no basis to rest 
upon apart from one’s own soul. (36) The dual-
ity of the five material elements is perceived 
only in terms of  names and forms. Those who 
say this duality is real are pseudoscholars 
vainly proposing fanciful theories without basis 
in fact. (37)  

The physical body of the endeavoring yogī 
who is not yet mature in his practice may some-
times be overcome by various dis turbances. 
Therefore, the following process is recom-
mended. (38) Some of these obstructions may 
be counteracted by yogic meditation or by sit-
ting postures, practiced together with concen-
tration on controlled breathing, and others may 
be counteracted by spe cial austerities, mantras 
or medicinal herbs. (39) These inauspicious 
disturbances can be gradually removed by con-
stant remembrance of Me, by congregational 
hearing and chanting of My holy names, or by 
following in the footsteps of the great masters 
of yog a. (40) By various methods, some yogīs 
free the body from disease and old age and keep 
it perpetually youthful. Thus they engage in 
yoga for the purpose of achieving material 
mystic perfections. (41) This mystic bodily per-
fection is not valued very highly by those ex-
pert in transcendental knowledge. Indeed, they 
consider endeavor for such perfection useless, 
since the soul, like a tree, is permanent, but the 
body, like a tree’s fruit, is subject to destruc-
tion. (42) Although the physical body may be 
improve d by various processes of yoga, an in-
telligent person who has dedicated his life to 
Me does not place his faith in the prospect of 
perfecting his physical body through yoga, and 
in fact he gives up such procedures. (43) The 
yogī who has taken shelter of Me  remains free 
from hankering because he experiences the happiness of the soul within. Thus while exe-
cuting this process of yoga, he is never defeated 
by obstacles. (44)  

SB 11.29: Bhakti -yoga  

Śrī Uddhava said:  My dear Lord Acyuta, I 
fear that the method o f yoga described by You 
is very difficult for one who cannot control his 
mind. Therefore, please explain to me in simple 
terms how someone can more easily execute it. 
(1) O lotus -eyed Lord, generally those yogīs 
who try to steady the mind experience frustr a-
tion because of their inability to perfect the 
state of trance. Thus they weary in their attempt 
to bring the mind under control. (2) Therefore, 
O lotus -eyed Lord of the universe, swanlike 
men happily take shelter of Your lotus feet, the 
source of all tra nscendental ecstasy. But those 
who take pride in their accomplishments in 
yoga and karma fail to take shelter of You and 
are defeated by Your illusory energy. (3) My 
dear infallible Lord, it is not very astonishing 
that You intimately approach Your servant s 
who have taken exclusive shelter of You. After 
all, during Your appearance as Lord Rāmacan-
dra, even while great demigods like Brahmā 
were vying to place the effulgent tips of their 
helmets upon the cushion where Your lotus feet 
rested, You displayed spec ial affection for 
monkeys such as Hanumān because they had 
taken exclusive shelter of You. (4) Who, then, 
could dare reject You, the very Soul, the most 
dear object of worship, and the Supreme Lord 
of allYou who give all possible perfections to 
the devotee s who take shelter of You? Who 
could be so ungrateful, knowing the benefits 
You bestow? Who would reject You and accept 
something for the sake of material enjoyment, 
which simply leads to forgetfulness of You? 
And what lack is there for us who are engaged 
in the service of the dust of Your lotus feet? (5) 
O my Lord! Transcendental poets and experts 
in spiritual science could not fully express their 
indebtedness to You, even if they were en-
dowed with the prolonged lifetime of Brahmā, 
for You appear in two fe aturesexternally as the 
ācārya and internally as the Supersoulto deliver 
the embodied living being by directing him 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

881 
 how to come to You. (6) Śukadeva Gosvāmī 
said: Thus questioned by the most affectionate 
Uddhava, Lord K ṛṣṇa, the supreme controller 
of all c ontrollers, who takes the entire universe 
as His plaything and assumes the three forms of 
Brahmā, Vi ṣṇu and Śiva, began to reply, lov-
ingly displaying His all -attractive smile. (7)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said: Yes, I shall describe to you the p rinciples 
of devotion to Me, by executing which a mortal 
human being will conquer unconquerable 
death. (8) Always remembering Me, one 
should perform all his duties for Me without be-
coming impetuous. With mind and intelligence 
offered to Me, one should fix his mind in attrac-
tion to My devotional service. (9) One should 
take shelter of holy places where My saintly 
devotees reside, and one should be guided by 
the exemplary activities of My devotees, who 
appear among the demigods, demons and hu-
man beings. (10) Either alone or in public gath-
erings, with singing, dancing and other exhibi-
tions of royal opulence, one should arrange to 
celebrate those holy days, ceremonies and fes-
tivals set aside specially for My worship. (11) 
With a pure heart one should see Me, the  Su-
preme Soul within all beings and also within 
oneself, to be both unblemished by anything 
material and also present everywhere, both ex-
ternally and internally, just like the omnipres-
ent sky. (12) O brilliant Uddhava, one who thus 
views all living entitie s with the idea that I am 
present within each of them, and who by taking 
shelter of this divine knowledge offers due re-
spect to everyone, is considered actually wise. 
Such a man sees equally the brāhma ṇa and the 
outcaste, the thief and the charitable promo ter 
of brahminical culture, the sun and the tiny 
sparks of fire, the gentle and the cruel. (13 -14) 
For him who constantly meditates upon My 
presence within all persons, the bad tendencies 
of rivalry, envy and abusiveness, along with 
false ego, are very qui ckly destroyed. (15) Dis-
regarding the ridicule of one’s companions, one 
should give up the bodily conception and its ac-
companying embarrassment. One should offer 
obeisances before alleven the dogs, outcastes, 
cows and assesfalling flat upon the ground like  a rod. (16) Until one has fully developed the 
ability to see Me within all living beings, one 
must continue to worship Me by this process 
with the activities of his speech, mind and 
body. (17) By such transcendental knowledge 
of the all -pervading Personal ity of Godhead, 
one is able to see the Absolute Truth every-
where. Freed thus from all doubts, one gives up 
fruitive activities. (18) Indeed, I consider this 
processusing one’s mind, words and bodily 
functions for realizing Me within all living be-
ingsto be the best possible method of spiritual 
enlightenment. (19) My dear Uddhava, because 
I have personally established it, this process of 
devotional service unto Me is transcendental 
and free from any material motivation. Cer-
tainly a devotee never suffers even the slightest 
loss by adopting this process. (20) O Uddhava, 
greatest of saints, in a dangerous situation an 
ordinary person cries, becomes fearful and la-
ments, although such useless emotions do not 
change the situation. But activities offered to 
Me withou t personal motivation, even if they 
are externally useless, amount to the actual pro-
cess of religion. (21) This process is the su-
preme intelligence of the intelligent and the 
cleverness of the most clever, for by following 
it one can in this very life make  use of the tem-
porary and unreal to achieve Me, the eternal re-
ality. (22)  

Thus have I related to youboth in brief and 
in detaila complete survey of the science of the 
Absolute Truth. Even for the demigods, this 
science is very difficult to comprehend. (23 ) I 
have repeatedly spoken this knowledge to you 
with clear reasoning. Anyone who properly un-
derstands it will become free from all doubts 
and attain liberation. (24) Anyone who fixes his 
attention on these clear answers to your ques-
tions will attain to th e eternal, confidential goal 
of the Vedasthe Supreme Absolute Truth. (25) 
One who liberally disseminates this knowledge 
among My devotees is the bestower of the Ab-
solute Truth, and to him I give My very own 
self. (26) He who loudly recites this supreme 
knowledge, which is the most lucid and purify-
ing, becomes purified day by day, for he reveals 
Me to others with the lamp of transcendental 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

882 
 knowledge. (27) Anyone who regularly listens 
to this knowledge with faith and attention, all 
the while engaging in My pu re devotional ser-
vice, will never become bound by the reactions 
of material work. (28) My dear friend Uddhava, 
have you now completely understood this tran-
scendental knowledge? Are the confusion and 
lamentation that arose in your mind now dis-
pelled? (29) Y ou should not share this instruc-
tion with anyone who is hypocritical, atheistic 
or dishonest, or with anyone who will not listen 
faithfully, who is not a devotee, or who is 
simply not humble. (30) This knowledge 
should be taught to one who is free from the se 
bad qualities, who is dedicated to the welfare of 
the brāhma ṇas, and who is kindly disposed, 
saintly and pure. And if common workers and 
women are found to have devotion for the Su-
preme Lord, they are also to be accepted as 
qualified hearers. (31) When an inquisitive per-
son comes to understand this knowledge, he has 
nothing further to know. After all, one who has 
drunk the most palatable nectar cannot remain 
thirsty. (32) Through analytic knowledge, ritu-
alistic work, mystic yoga, mundane business 
and pol itical rule, people seek to advance in re-
ligiosity, economic development, sense gratifi-
cation and liberation. But because you are My 
devotee, whatever men can accomplish in these 
multifarious ways you will very easily find 
within Me. (33) A person who give s up all fru-
itive activities and offers himself entirely unto 
Me, eagerly desiring to render service unto Me, 
achieves liberation from birth and death and is 
promoted to the status of sharing My own opu-
lences. (34)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Hearing these 
words spoken by Lord K ṛṣṇa, and having thus 
been shown the entire path of yoga, Uddhava 
folded his hands to offer obeisances. But his 
throat choked up with love and his eyes over-
flowed with tears; so he could say nothing. (35) 
Steadying his mind, which had be come over-
whelmed with love, Uddhava felt extremely 
grateful to Lord K ṛṣṇa, the greatest hero of the 
Yadu dynasty. My dear King Parīk ṣit, Uddhava 
bowed down to touch the Lord’s lotus feet with 
his head and then spoke with folded hands. (36)   
Śrī Uddhava sai d: O unborn, primeval 
Lord, although I had fallen into the great dark-
ness of illusion, my ignorance has now been 
dispelled by Your merciful association. Indeed, 
how can cold, darkness and fear exert their 
power over one who has approached the bril-
liant sun ? (37) In return for my insignificant 
surrender, You have mercifully bestowed upon 
me, Your servant, the torchlight of transcen-
dental knowledge. Therefore, what devotee of 
Yours who has any gratitude could ever give up 
Your lotus feet and take shelter of a nother mas-
ter? (38) The firmly binding rope of my affec-
tion for the families of the Dāśārhas, V ṛṣṇis, 
Andhakas and Sātvatasa rope You originally 
cast over me by Your illusory energy for the 
purpose of developing Your creationis now cut 
off by the weapon of  transcendental knowledge 
of the self. (39) Obeisances unto You, O great-
est of yogīs. Please instruct me, who am surren-
dered unto You, how I may have undeviating 
attachment to Your lotus feet. (40)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Uddhava,  take My order and go 
to My āśrama called Badarikā. Purify yourself 
by both touching and also bathing in the holy 
waters there, which have emanated from My lo-
tus feet. Rid yourself of all sinful reactions with 
the sight of the sacred Alakanandā River. Dres s 
yourself in bark and eat whatever is naturally 
available in the forest. Thus you should remain 
content and free from desire, tolerant of all du-
alities, good -natured, self -controlled, peaceful 
and endowed with transcendental knowledge 
and realization. Wit h fixed attention, meditate 
constantly upon these instructions I have im-
parted to you and assimilate their essence. Fix 
your words and thoughts upon Me, and always 
endeavor to increase your realization of My 
transcendental qualities. In this way you will 
cross beyond the destinations of the three 
modes of nature and finally come back to Me. 
(41-44) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Thus addressed 
by Lord K ṛṣṇa, whose intelligence destroys all 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

883 
 the suffering of material life, Śrī Uddhava cir-
cumambulated the Lord and th en fell down, 
placing his head upon the Lord’s feet. Although 
Uddhava was free from the influence of all ma-
terial dualities, his heart was breaking, and at 
this time of departure he drenched the Lord’s 
lotus feet with his tears. (45) Greatly fearing 
separa tion from Him for whom he felt such in-
destructible affection, Uddhava was distraught, 
and he could not give up the Lord’s company. 
Finally, feeling great pain, he bowed down to 
the Lord again and again, placed the slippers of 
his master upon his head, and departed. (46) 
Thereupon, placing the Lord deeply within his 
heart, the great devotee Uddhava went to Bada-
rikāśrama. By engaging there in austerities, he 
attained to the Lord’s personal abode, which 
had been described to him by the only friend of 
the unive rse, Lord K ṛṣṇa Himself. (47) Thus 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, whose lotus feet are served by all 
great yoga masters, spoke to His devotee this 
nectarean knowledge, which comprises the en-
tire ocean of spiritual bliss. Anyone within this 
universe who receives this narratio n with great 
faith is assured of liberation. (48) I offer my 
obeisances to that Supreme Personality of God-
head, the original and greatest of all beings, 
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa. He is the author of the Vedas, 
and just to destroy His devotees’ fear of mate-
rial exist ence, like a bee He has collected this 
nectarean essence of all knowledge and self -re-
alization. Thus He has awarded to His many 
devotees this nectar from the ocean of bliss, and 
by His mercy they have drunk it. (49)  

SB 11.30: The Disappearance of the Yadu  
Dynasty  

King Parīk ṣit said:  After the great devotee 
Uddhava left for the forest, what did the Su-
preme Personality of Godhead, the protector of 
all living beings, do in the city of Dvārakā? (1) 
After His own dynasty met destruction from the 
curse of the b rāhma ṇas, how could the best of 
the Yadus give up His body, the dearmost ob-
ject of all eyes? (2) Once their eyes were fixed 
upon His transcendental form, women were un-
able to withdraw them, and once that form had 
entered the ears of the sages and become fi xed in their hearts, it would never depart. What to 
speak of acquiring fame, the great poets who 
described the beauty of the Lord’s form would 
have their words invested with transcendentally 
pleasing attraction. And by seeing that form on 
Arjuna’s chariot,  all the warriors on the battle-
field of Kuruk ṣetra attained the liberation of 
gaining a spiritual body similar to the Lord’s. 
(3) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Having observed 
many disturbing signs in the sky, on the earth 
and in outer space, Lord K ṛṣṇa addresse d the 
Yadus assembled in the Sudharmā council hall 
as follows. (4) The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead said: O leaders of the Yadu dynasty, 
please note all these terrible omens that have 
appeared in Dvārakā just like the flags of death. 
We should not remain  here a moment longer. 
(5) The women, children and old men should 
leave this city and go to Śa ṅkhoddhāra. We 
shall go to Prabhāsa -kṣetra, where the river Sar-
asvatī flows toward the west. (6) There we 
should bathe for purification, fast, and fix our 
minds i n meditation. We should then worship 
the demigods by bathing their images, anoint-
ing them with sandalwood pulp, and presenting 
them various offerings. (7) After performing 
the expiatory rituals with the help of greatly 
fortunate brāhma ṇas, we will worship those 
brāhma ṇas by offering them cows, land, gold, 
clothing, elephants, horses, chariots and dwell-
ing places. (8) This is indeed the appropriate 
process for counteracting our imminent adver-
sity, and it is sure to bring about the highest 
good fortune. Such worship of the demigods, 
brāhma ṇas and cows can earn the highest birth 
for all living entities. (9)  

Having heard these words from Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
the enemy of Madhu, the elders of the Yadu 
dynasty gave their assent, saying, “So be it.” 
After crossing over the  ocean in boats, they 
proceeded on chariots to Prabhāsa. (10) There, 
with great devotion, the Yādavas performed the 
religious ceremonies according to the instruc-
tions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
their personal Lord. They also performed vari-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

884 
 ous o ther auspicious rituals. (11) Then, their in-
telligence covered by Providence, they liber-
ally indulged in drinking the sweet maireya 
beverage, which can completely intoxicate the 
mind. (12) The heroes of the Yadu dynasty be-
came intoxicated from their extrav agant drink-
ing and began to feel arrogant. When they were 
thus bewildered by the personal potency of 
Lord K ṛṣṇa, a terrible quarrel arose among 
them. (13) Infuriated, they seized their bows 
and arrows, swords, bhallas, clubs, lances and 
spears and attacked  one another on the shore of 
the ocean. (14) Riding on elephants and chari-
ots with flags flying, and also on donkeys, cam-
els, bulls, buffalos, mules and even human be-
ings, the extremely enraged warriors came to-
gether and violently attacked one another with  
arrows, just as elephants in the forest attack one 
another with their tusks. (15) Their mutual en-
mity aroused, Pradyumna fought fiercely 
against Sāmba, Akrūra against Kuntibhoja, 
Aniruddha against Sātyaki, Subhadra against 
Saṅgrāmajit, Sumitra against Sur atha, and the 
two Gadas against each other. (16) Others also, 
such as Niśa ṭha, Ulmuka, Sahasrajit, Śatajit and 
Bhānu, confronted and killed one another, be-
ing blinded by intoxication and thus completely 
bewildered by Lord Mukunda Himself. (17) 
Completely a bandoning their natural friend-
ship, the members of the various Yadu clansthe 
Dāśārhas, V ṛṣṇis and Andhakas, the Bhojas, 
Sātvatas, Madhus and Arbudas, the Māthuras, 
Śūrasenas, Visarjanas, Kukuras and Kuntisall 
slaughtered one another. (18)  

Thus bewildered,  sons fought with fathers, 
brothers with brothers, nephews with paternal 
and maternal uncles, and grandsons with grand-
fathers. Friends fought with friends, and well -
wishers with well -wishers. In this way intimate 
friends and relatives all killed one anothe r. (19) 
When all their bows had been broken and their 
arrows and other missiles spent, they seized the 
tall stalks of cane with their bare hands. (20) As 
soon as they took these cane stalks in their fists, 
the stalks changed into iron rods as hard as 
thund erbolts. With these weapons the warriors 
began attacking one another again and again, 
and when Lord K ṛṣṇa tried to stop them they attacked Him as well. (21) In their confused 
state, O King, they also mistook Lord Balarāma 
for an enemy. Weapons in hand, the y ran to-
ward Him with the intention of killing Him. 
(22) O son of the Kurus, K ṛṣṇa and Balarāma 
then became very angry. Picking up cane 
stalks, They moved about within the battle and 
began to kill with these clubs. (23) The violent 
anger of these warriors,  who were overcome by 
the brāhma ṇas’ curse and bewildered by Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s illusory potency, now led them to their 
annihilation, just as a fire that starts in a bam-
boo grove destroys the entire forest. (24) When 
all the members of His own dynasty were thus 
destroyed, Lord K ṛṣṇa thought to Himself that 
at last the burden of the earth had been re-
moved. (25)  

Lord Balarāma then sat down on the shore 
of the ocean and fixed Himself in meditation 
upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Merging Himself within Hims elf, He gave up 
this mortal world. (26) Lord K ṛṣṇa, the son of 
Devakī, having seen the departure of Lord 
Rāma, sat down silently on the ground under a 
nearby pippala tree. (27) The Lord was exhib-
iting His brilliantly effulgent four -armed form, 
the radiance  of which, just like a smokeless fire, 
dissipated the darkness in all directions. His 
complexion was the color of a dark blue cloud 
and His effulgence the color of molten gold, 
and His all -auspicious form bore the mark of 
Śrīvatsa. A beautiful smile graced  His lotus 
face, locks of dark blue hair adorned His head, 
His lotus eyes were very attractive, and His 
shark -shaped earrings glittered. He wore a pair 
of silken garments, an ornamental belt, the sa-
cred thread, bracelets and arm ornaments, along 
with a hel met, the Kaustubha jewel, necklaces, 
anklets and other royal emblems. Encircling 
His body were flower garlands and His per-
sonal weapons in their embodied forms. As He 
sat He held His left foot, with its lotus -red sole, 
upon His right thigh. (28 -32) 

Just t hen a hunter named Jarā, who had ap-
proached the place, mistook the Lord’s foot for 
a deer’s face. Thinking he had found his prey, 
Jarā pierced the foot with his arrow, which he 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

885 
 had fashioned from the remaining iron frag-
ment of Sāmba’s club. (33) Then, seei ng that 
four-armed personality, the hunter became ter-
rified of the offense he had committed, and he 
fell down, placing his head upon the feet of the 
enemy of the demons. (34) Jarā said: O Lord 
Madhusūdana, I am a most sinful person. I have 
committed this a ct out of ignorance. O purest 
Lord, O Uttama ḥśloka, please forgive this sin-
ner. (35) O Lord Vi ṣṇu, the learned say that for 
any man, constant remembrance of You will 
destroy the darkness of ignorance. O master, I 
have wronged You! (36) Therefore, O Lord of  
Vaiku ṇṭha, please kill this sinful hunter of ani-
mals immediately so he may not again commit 
such offenses against saintly persons. (37) Nei-
ther Brahmā nor his sons, headed by Rudra, nor 
any of the great sages who are masters of the 
Vedic mantras can under stand the function of 
Your mystic power. Because Your illusory po-
tency has covered their sight, they remain igno-
rant of how Your mystic power works. There-
fore, what can I, such a low -born person, pos-
sibly say? (38)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Jarā, do not fear. Please get up. 
What has been done is actually My own desire. 
With My permission, go now to the abode of 
the pious, the spiritual world. (39)  

So instructed by the Supreme Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
who assumes His transcendental body by His 
own will, the hunter circumambulated the Lord 
three times and bowed down to Him. Then the 
hunter departed in an airplane that had ap-
peared just to carry him to the spiritual sky. (40)  

At that time Dāruka was searching for his 
master, K ṛṣṇa. As he neared the  place where the 
Lord was sitting, he perceived the aroma of tu-
lasī flowers in the breeze and went in its direc-
tion. (41) Upon seeing Lord K ṛṣṇa resting at the 
foot of a banyan tree, surrounded by His shin-
ing weapons, Dāruka could not control the af-
fection  he felt in his heart. His eyes filled with 
tears as he rushed down from the chariot and 
fell at the Lord’s feet. (42) Dāruka said: Just as 
on a moonless night people are merged into darkness and cannot find their way, now that I 
have lost sight of Your lo tus feet, my Lord, I 
have lost my vision and am wandering blindly 
in darkness. I cannot tell my direction, nor can 
I find any peace. (43) [Śukadeva Gosvāmī con-
tinued:] O foremost of kings, while the chariot 
driver was still speaking, before his very eyes 
the Lord’s chariot rose up into the sky along 
with its horses and its flag, which was marked 
with the emblem of Garu ḍa. (44) All the divine 
weapons of Vi ṣṇu rose up and followed the 
chariot. The Lord, Janārdana, then spoke to His 
chariot driver, who was mos t astonished to see 
all this. (45) O driver, go to Dvārakā and tell 
Our family members how their loved ones de-
stroyed one another. Also tell them of the dis-
appearance of Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa and of My pre-
sent condition. (46) You and your relatives 
should not re main in Dvārakā, the capital of the 
Yadus, because once I have abandoned that city 
it will be inundated by the ocean. (47) You 
should all take your own families, together with 
My parents, and under Arjuna’s protection go 
to Indraprastha. (48) You, Dāruka, should be 
firmly situated in devotion to Me, remaining 
fixed in spiritual knowledge and unattached to 
material considerations. Understanding these 
pastimes to be a display of My illusory potency, 
you should remain peaceful. (49) Thus ordered, 
Dāruka circum ambulated the Lord and offered 
obeisances to Him again and again. He placed 
Lord K ṛṣṇa’s lotus feet upon his head and then 
with a sad heart went back to the city. (50)  

SB 11.31: The Disappearance of Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Then Lord 
Brahmā arrived at Prabhāsa along with Lord 
Śiva and his consort, the sages, the Prajāpatis 
and all the demigods, headed by Indra. (1) The 
forefathers, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas 
and great serpents also came, along with the 
Cāra ṇas, Yak ṣas, Rāk ṣasas, Kinnara s, Apsarās 
and relatives of Garu ḍa, greatly eager to wit-
ness the departure of the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. As they were coming, all these 
personalities variously chanted and glorified 
the birth and activities of Lord Śauri [K ṛṣṇa]. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

886 
 (2-3) O King, cro wding the sky with their many 
airplanes, they showered down flowers with 
great devotion. (4)  

Seeing before Him Brahmā, the grandfather 
of the universe, along with the other demigods, 
who are all His personal and powerful expan-
sions, the Almighty Lord clos ed His lotus eyes, 
fixing His mind within Himself, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. (5)  

Without employing the mystic āgneyī med-
itation to burn up His transcendental body, 
which is the all -attractive resting place of all the 
worlds and the object of all  contemplation and 
meditation, Lord K ṛṣṇa entered into His own 
abode. (6) As soon as Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa left the 
earth, Truth, Religion, Faithfulness, Glory and 
Beauty immediately followed Him. Kettle-
drums resounded in the heavens and flowers 
showered from the  sky. (7)  

Most of the demigods and other higher be-
ings led by Brahmā could not see Lord K ṛṣṇa 
as He was entering His own abode, since He did 
not reveal His movements. But some of them 
did catch sight of Him, and they were ex-
tremely amazed. (8) Just as ord inary men can-
not ascertain the path of a lightning bolt as it 
leaves a cloud, the demigods could not trace out 
the movements of Lord K ṛṣṇa as He returned to 
His abode. (9) A few of the demigods, howev-
ernotably Lord Brahmā and Lord Śivacould as-
certain how t he Lord’s mystic power was work-
ing, and thus they became astonished. All the 
demigods praised the Lord’s mystic power and 
then returned to their own planets. (10)  

My dear King, you should understand that 
the Supreme Lord’s appearance and disappear-
ance, wh ich resemble those of embodied con-
ditioned souls, are actually a show enacted by 
His illusory energy, just like the performance 
of an actor. After creating this universe He en-
ters into it, plays within it for some time, and at 
last winds it up. Then the Lo rd remains situated 
in His own transcendental glory, having ceased 
from the functions of cosmic manifestation. 
(11) Lord K ṛṣṇa brought the son of His guru back from the planet of the lord of death in the 
boy’s selfsame body, and as the ultimate giver 
of pr otection He saved you also when you were 
burned by the brahmāstra of Aśvatthāmā. He 
conquered in battle even Lord Śiva, who deals 
death to the agents of death, and He sent the 
hunter Jarā directly to Vaiku ṇṭha in his human 
body. How could such a personalit y be unable 
to protect His own Self? (12) Although Lord 
Kṛṣṇa, being the possessor of infinite powers, 
is the only cause of the creation, maintenance 
and destruction of innumerable living beings, 
He simply did not desire to keep His body in 
this world any longer. Thus He revealed the 
destination of those fixed in the self and 
demonstrated that this mortal world is of no in-
trinsic value. (13) Anyone who regularly rises 
early in the morning and carefully chants with 
devotion the glories of Lord ŚrīK ṛṣṇa’s tra n-
scendental disappearance and His return to His 
own abode will certainly achieve that same su-
preme destination. (14)  

As soon as Dāruka reached Dvārakā, he 
threw himself at the feet of Vasudeva and 
Ugrasena and drenched their feet with his tears, 
lamenting  the loss of Lord K ṛṣṇa. (15) Dāruka 
delivered the account of the total destruction of 
the V ṛṣṇis, and upon hearing this, O Parīk ṣit, 
the people became deeply distraught in their 
hearts and stunned with sorrow. Feeling the 
overwhelming pain of separation f rom K ṛṣṇa, 
they struck their own faces while hurrying to 
the place where their relatives lay dead. (16 -17) 
When Devakī, Rohi ṇī and Vasudeva could not 
find their sons, K ṛṣṇa and Rāma, they lost con-
sciousness out of anguish. (18) Tormented by 
separation from  the Lord, His parents gave up 
their lives at that very spot. My dear Parīk ṣit, 
the wives of the Yādavas then climbed onto the 
funeral pyres, embracing their dead husbands. 
(19) The wives of Lord Balarāma also entered 
the fire and embraced His body, and 
Vasudeva’s wives entered his fire and em-
braced his body. The daughters -in-law of Lord 
Hari entered the funeral fires of their respective 
husbands, headed by Pradyumna. And Rukmi ṇī 
and the other wives of Lord K ṛṣṇawhose hearts 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

887 
 were completely absorbed in Hime ntered His 
fire. (20)  

Arjuna felt great distress over separation 
from Lord K ṛṣṇa, his dearmost friend. But he 
consoled himself by remembering the transcen-
dental words the Lord had sung to him. (21) Ar-
juna then saw to it that the funeral rites were 
properl y carried out for the dead, who had no 
remaining male family members. He executed 
the required ceremonies for each of the Yadus, 
one after another. (22) As soon as Dvārakā was 
abandoned by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, the ocean flooded it on all sid es, O King, 
sparing only His palace. (23) Lord 
Madhusūdana, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, is eternally present in Dvārakā. It is 
the most auspicious of all auspicious places, 
and merely remembering it destroys all con-
tamination. (24) Arjuna took the survivors of 
the Yadu dynastythe women, children and old 
mento Indraprastha, where he installed Vajra as 
ruler of the Yadus. (25) Hearing from Arjuna 
of the death of their friend, my dear King, your 
grandfathers established you as the maintainer 
of the dyn asty and left to prepare for their de-
parture from this world. (26)  

A person who with faith engages in chanting 
the glories of these various pastimes and incar-
nations of Vi ṣṇu, the Lord of lords, will gain 
liberation from all sins. (27) The all -auspicious 
exploits of the all -attractive incarnations of 
Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, and also the pastimes He performed 
as a child, are described in this Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam and in other scriptures. Anyone 
who clearly chants these descriptions of His 
pastimes will attain transcendental loving ser-
vice unto Lord K ṛṣṇa, who is the goal of all per-
fect sages. (28)  

Canto 12: The Age of Deterioration  

SB 12.1: The Degraded Dynasties of Kali -
yuga  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  The last king 
mentioned in our p revious enumeration of the future rulers of the Māgadha dynasty was Pura-
ñjaya, who will take birth as the descendant of 
Bṛhadratha. Purañjaya’s minister Śunaka will 
assassinate the king and install his own son, 
Pradyota, on the throne. The son of Pradyota 
will be Pālaka, his son will be Viśākhayūpa, 
and his son will be Rājaka. (1 -2) The son of 
Rājaka will be Nandivardhana, and thus in the 
Pradyotana dynasty there will be five kings, 
who will enjoy the earth for 138 years. (3)  

Nandivardhana will have a son named 
Śiśunāga, and his son will be known as Kāka-
varṇa. The son of Kākavar ṇa will be K ṣema-
dharmā, and the son of K ṣemadharmā will be 
Kṣetrajña. (4) The son of K ṣetrajña will be 
Vidhisāra, and his son will be Ajātaśatru. 
Ajātaśatru will have a son named Dar bhaka, 
and his son will be Ajaya. (5) Ajaya will father 
a second Nandivardhana, whose son will be 
Mahānandi. O best of the Kurus, these ten kings 
of the Śiśunāga dynasty will rule the earth for a 
total of 360 years during the Age of Kali. My 
dear Parīk ṣit, King Mahānandi will father a 
very powerful son in the womb of a śūdra 
woman. He will be known as Nanda and will 
be the master of millions of soldiers and fabu-
lous wealth. He will wreak havoc among the 
kṣatriyas, and from that time onward virtually 
all kin gs will be irreligious śūdras. (6 -8) 

That lord of Mahāpadma, King Nanda, will 
rule over the entire earth just like a second 
Paraśurāma, and no one will challenge his au-
thority. (9) He will have eight sons, headed by 
Sumālya, who will control the earth as power-
ful kings for one hundred years. (10) A certain 
brāhma ṇa [Cā ṇakya] will betray the trust of 
King Nanda and his eight sons and will destroy 
their dynasty. In their absence the Mauryas will 
rule the world as the Age of Kali continues. 
(11) This brāhma ṇa will enthrone Candragupta, 
whose son will be named Vārisāra. The son of 
Vārisāra will be Aśokavardhana. (12) Aśoka-
vardhana will be followed by Suyaśā, whose 
son will be Sa ṅgata. His son will be Śāliśūka, 
Śāliśūka’s son will be Somaśarmā, and 
Somaśarmā’s s on will be Śatadhanvā. His son 
will be known as B ṛhadratha. (13) O best of the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

888 
 Kurus, these ten Maurya kings will rule the 
earth for 137 years of the Kali -yuga. (14) My 
dear King Parīk ṣit, Agnimitra will follow as 
king, and then Sujye ṣṭha. Sujye ṣṭha will b e fol-
lowed by Vasumitra, Bhadraka, and the son of 
Bhadraka, Pulinda. Then the son of Pulinda, 
named Gho ṣa, will rule, followed by Vajrami-
tra, Bhāgavata and Devabhūti. In this way, O 
most eminent of the Kuru heroes, ten Śu ṅga 
kings will rule over the earth for more than one 
hundred years. Then the earth will come under 
the subjugation of the kings of the Kā ṇva dyn-
asty, who will manifest very few good quali-
ties. (15 -17) 

Vasudeva, an intelligent minister coming 
from the Kā ṇva family, will kill the last of the  
Śuṅga kings, a lusty debauchee named 
Devabhūti, and assume rulership himself. (18) 
The son of Vasudeva will be Bhūmitra, and his 
son will be Nārāya ṇa. These kings of the Kā ṇva 
dynasty will rule the earth for 345 more years 
of the Kali -yuga. (19) The last of the Kā ṇvas, 
Suśarmā, will be murdered by his own servant, 
Balī, a low -class śūdra of the Andhra race. This 
most degraded Mahārāja Balī will have control 
over the earth for some time. (20) The brother 
of Balī, named K ṛṣṇa, will become the next 
ruler of t he earth. His son will be Śāntakar ṇa, 
and his son will be Paur ṇamāsa. The son of 
Paurṇamāsa will be Lambodara, who will fa-
ther Mahārāja Cibilaka. From Cibilaka will 
come Meghasvāti, whose son will be A ṭamāna. 
The son of A ṭamāna will be Ani ṣṭakarmā. His 
son will be Hāleya, and his son will be Talaka. 
The son of Talaka will be Purī ṣabhīru, and fol-
lowing him Sunandana will become king. 
Sunandana will be followed by Cakora and the 
eight Bahus, among whom Śivasvāti will be a 
great subduer of enemies. The son of Śivasvāti 
will be Gomatī. His son will be Purīmān, whose 
son will be Medaśirā. His son will be Śi-
vaskanda, and his son will be Yajñaśrī. The son 
of Yajñaśrī will be Vijaya, who will have two 
sons, Candravijña and Lomadhi. These thirty 
kings will enjoy sove reignty over the earth for 
a total of 456 years, O favorite son of the Kurus. 
(21-26) Then will follow seven kings of the 
Ābhīra race from the city of Avabh ṛti, and then ten Gardabhīs. After them, sixteen kings of the 
Kaṅkas will rule and will be known for  their 
excessive greed. (27)  

Eight Yavanas will then take power, fol-
lowed by fourteen Turu ṣkas, ten Guru ṇḍas and 
eleven kings of the Maula dynasty. (28) These 
Ābhīras, Gardabhīs and Ka ṅkas will enjoy the 
earth for 1,099 years, and the Maulas will rule 
for 300 years. When all of them have died off 
there will appear in the city of Kilakilā a dyn-
asty of kings consisting of Bhūtananda, 
Vaṅgiri, Śiśunandi, Śiśunandi’s brother 
Yaśonandi, and Pravīraka. These kings of 
Kilakilā will hold sway for a total of 106 ye ars. 
(29-31) 

The Kilakilās will be followed by their thir-
teen sons, the Bāhlikas, and after them King 
Puṣpamitra, his son Durmitra, seven Andhras, 
seven Kauśalas and also kings of the Vidūra 
and Ni ṣadha provinces will separately rule in 
different parts of  the world. (32 -33) There will 
then appear a king of the Māgadhas named 
Viśvasphūrji, who will be like another Pura-
ñjaya. He will turn all the civilized classes into 
low-class, uncivilized men in the same cate-
gory as the Pulindas, Yadus and Madrakas. (34)  

Foolish King Viśvasphūrji will maintain all 
the citizens in ungodliness and will use his 
power to completely disrupt the k ṣatriya order. 
From his capital of Padmavatī he will rule that 
part of the earth extending from the source of 
the Ga ṅgā to Prayāga. ( 35) At that time the 
brāhma ṇas of such provinces as Śaurā ṣṭra, 
Avantī, Ābhīra, Śūra, Arbuda and Mālava will 
forget all their regulative principles, and the 
members of the royal order in these places will 
become no better than śūdras. (36) The land 
along th e Sindhu River, as well as the districts 
of Candrabhāgā, Kauntī and Kāśmīra, will be 
ruled by śūdras, fallen brāhma ṇas and meat -
eaters. Having given up the path of Vedic civi-
lization, they will have lost all spiritual 
strength. (37) There will be many such  uncivi-
lized kings ruling at the same time, O King 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

889 
 Parīk ṣit, and they will all be uncharitable, pos-
sessed of fierce tempers, and great devotees of 
irreligion and falsity. (38)  

These barbarians in the guise of kings will 
devour the citizenry, murdering inn ocent 
women, children, cows and brāhma ṇas and 
coveting the wives and property of other men. 
They will be erratic in their moods, have little 
strength of character and be very short -lived. 
Indeed, not purified by any Vedic rituals and 
lacking in the practic e of regulative principles, 
they will be completely covered by the modes 
of passion and ignorance. (39 -40) The citizens 
governed by these low -class kings will imitate 
the character, behavior and speech of their rul-
ers. Harassed by their leaders and by each  
other, they will all suffer ruination. (41)  

SB 12.2: The Symptoms of Kali -yuga  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Then, O King, re-
ligion, truthfulness, cleanliness, tolerance, 
mercy, duration of life, physical strength and 
memory will all diminish day by day becaus e 
of the powerful influence of the Age of Kali. 
(1) In Kali -yuga, wealth alone will be consid-
ered the sign of a man’s good birth, proper be-
havior and fine qualities. And law and justice 
will be applied only on the basis of one’s 
power. (2) Men and women wi ll live together 
merely because of superficial attraction, and 
success in business will depend on deceit. 
Womanliness and manliness will be judged ac-
cording to one’s expertise in sex, and a man 
will be known as a brāhma ṇa just by his wear-
ing a thread. (3) A person’s spiritual position 
will be ascertained merely according to exter-
nal symbols, and on that same basis people will 
change from one spiritual order to the next. A 
person’s propriety will be seriously questioned 
if he does not earn a good living. And  one who 
is very clever at juggling words will be consid-
ered a learned scholar. (4) A person will be 
judged unholy if he does not have money, and 
hypocrisy will be accepted as virtue. Marriage 
will be arranged simply by verbal agreement, 
and a person will think he is fit to appear in pub-
lic if he has merely taken a bath. (5)   
A sacred place will be taken to consist of no 
more than a reservoir of water located at a dis-
tance, and beauty will be thought to depend on 
one’s hairstyle. Filling the belly will beco me 
the goal of life, and one who is audacious will 
be accepted as truthful. He who can maintain a 
family will be regarded as an expert man, and 
the principles of religion will be observed only 
for the sake of reputation. (6) As the earth thus 
becomes crowd ed with a corrupt population, 
whoever among any of the social classes shows 
himself to be the strongest will gain political 
power. (7) Losing their wives and properties to 
such avaricious and merciless rulers, who will 
behave no better than ordinary thieve s, the cit-
izens will flee to the mountains and forests. (8) 
Harassed by famine and excessive taxes, peo-
ple will resort to eating leaves, roots, flesh, wild 
honey, fruits, flowers and seeds. Struck by 
drought, they will become completely ruined. 
(9) The cit izens will suffer greatly from cold, 
wind, heat, rain and snow. They will be further 
tormented by quarrels, hunger, thirst, disease 
and severe anxiety. (10) The maximum dura-
tion of life for human beings in Kali -yuga will 
become fifty years. (11)  

By the ti me the Age of Kali ends, the bodies 
of all creatures will be greatly reduced in size, 
and the religious principles of followers of 
varṇāśrama will be ruined. The path of the Ve-
das will be completely forgotten in human so-
ciety, and so -called religion will b e mostly 
atheistic. The kings will mostly be thieves, the 
occupations of men will be stealing, lying and 
needless violence, and all the social classes will 
be reduced to the lowest level of śūdras. Cows 
will be like goats, spiritual hermitages will be 
no different from mundane houses, and family 
ties will extend no further than the immediate 
bonds of marriage. Most plants and herbs will 
be tiny, and all trees will appear like dwarf śamī 
trees. Clouds will be full of lightning, homes 
will be devoid of piety,  and all human beings 
will have become like asses. At that time, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead will appear 
on the earth. Acting with the power of pure 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

890 
 spiritual goodness, He will rescue eternal reli-
gion. (12 -16) 

Lord Vi ṣṇuthe Supreme Personality of G od-
head, the spiritual master of all moving and 
nonmoving living beings, and the Supreme 
Soul of alltakes birth to protect the principles of 
religion and to relieve His saintly devotees 
from the reactions of material work. (17) Lord 
Kalki will appear in the  home of the most emi-
nent brāhma ṇa of Śambhala village, the great 
soul Vi ṣṇuyaśā. (18) Lord Kalki, the Lord of 
the universe, will mount His swift horse 
Devadatta and, sword in hand, travel over the 
earth exhibiting His eight mystic opulences and 
eight spec ial qualities of Godhead. Displaying 
His unequaled effulgence and riding with great 
speed, He will kill by the millions those thieves 
who have dared dress as kings. (19 -20) 

After all the impostor kings have been 
killed, the residents of the cities and tow ns will 
feel the breezes carrying the most sacred fra-
grance of the sandalwood paste and other dec-
orations of Lord Vāsudeva, and their minds will 
thereby become transcendentally pure. (21) 
When Lord Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, appears in t heir hearts in His tran-
scendental form of goodness, the remaining cit-
izens will abundantly repopulate the earth. (22) 
When the Supreme Lord has appeared on earth 
as Kalki, the maintainer of religion, Satya -yuga 
will begin, and human society will bring fort h 
progeny in the mode of goodness. (23) When 
the moon, the sun and B ṛhaspatī are together in 
the constellation Karka ṭa, and all three enter 
simultaneously into the lunar mansion Pu ṣyāat 
that exact moment the age of Satya, or K ṛta, 
will begin. (24)  

Thus I have described all the kingspast, pre-
sent and futurewho belong to the dynasties of 
the sun and the moon. (25) From your birth up 
to the coronation of King Nanda, 1,150 years 
will pass. (26) Of the seven stars forming the 
constellation of the seven sages, P ulaha and 
Kratu are the first to rise in the night sky. If a 
line running north and south were drawn 
through their midpoint, whichever of the lunar mansions this line passes through is said to be 
the ruling asterism of the constellation for that 
time. The Seven Sages will remain connected 
with that particular lunar mansion for one hun-
dred human years. Currently, during your life-
time, they are situated in the nak ṣatra called 
Maghā. (27 -28) 

The Supreme Lord, Vi ṣṇu, is brilliant like 
the sun and is known as K ṛṣṇa. When He re-
turned to the spiritual sky, Kali entered this 
world, and people then began to take pleasure 
in sinful activities. (29) As long as Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa, the husband of the goddess of fortune, 
touched the earth with His lotus feet, Kali was 
powerl ess to subdue this planet. (30) When the 
constellation of the seven sages is passing 
through the lunar mansion Maghā, the Age of 
Kali begins. It comprises twelve hundred years 
of the demigods. (31) When the great sages of 
the Saptar ṣi constellation pass fr om Maghā to 
Pūrvāsā ḍhā, Kali will have his full strength, be-
ginning from King Nanda and his dynasty. (32) 
Those who scientifically understand the past 
declare that on the very day that Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa 
departed for the spiritual world, the influence 
of the A ge of Kali began. (33) After the one 
thousand celestial years of Kali -yuga, the 
Satya -yuga will manifest again. At that time the 
minds of all men will become self -effulgent. 
(34) 

Thus I have described the royal dynasty of 
Manu, as it is known on this eart h. One can sim-
ilarly study the history of the vaiśyas, śūdras 
and brāhma ṇas living in the various ages. (35) 
These personalities, who were great souls, are 
now known only by their names. They exist 
only in accounts from the past, and only their 
fame remain s on the earth. (36) Devāpi, the 
brother of Mahārāja Śāntanu, and Maru, the de-
scendant of Ik ṣvāku, both possess great mystic 
strength and are living even now in the village 
of Kalāpa. (37) At the end of the Age of Kali, 
these two kings, having received ins truction di-
rectly from the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Vāsudeva, will return to human society 
and reestablish the eternal religion of man, 
characterized by the divisions of var ṇa and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

891 
 āśrama, just as it was before. (38) The cycle of 
four agesSatya, Tret ā, Dvāpara and Kalicontin-
ues perpetually among living beings on this 
earth, repeating the same general sequence of 
events. (39) My dear King Parīk ṣit, all these 
kings I have described, as well as all other hu-
man beings, come to this earth and stake their 
claims, but ultimately they all must give up this 
world and meet their destruction. (40) Even 
though a person’s body may now have the des-
ignation “king,” in the end its name will be 
“worms,” “stool” or “ashes.” What can a per-
son who injures other living bei ngs for the sake 
of his body know about his own self -interest, 
since his activities are simply leading him to 
hell? (41) [The materialistic king thinks:] “This 
unbounded earth was held by my predecessors 
and is now under my sovereignty. How can I 
arrange f or it to remain in the hands of my sons, 
grandsons and other descendants?” (42) Alt-
hough the foolish accept the body made of 
earth, water and fire as “me” and this earth as 
“mine,” in every case they have ultimately 
abandoned both their body and the earth and 
passed away into oblivion. (43) My dear King 
Parīk ṣit, all these kings who tried to enjoy the 
earth by their strength were reduced by the 
force of time to nothing more than historical ac-
counts. (44)  

SB 12.3: The Bhūmi -gītā 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  Seeing the kings 
of this earth busy trying to conquer her, the 
earth herself laughed. She said: “Just see how 
these kings, who are actually playthings in the 
hands of death, are desiring to conquer me. (1) 
“Great rulers of men, even those who are 
learned, meet  frustration and failure because of 
material lust. Driven by lust, these kings place 
great hope and faith in the dead lump of flesh 
called the body, even though the material frame 
is as fleeting as bubbles of foam on water. (2) 
“Kings and politicians imagi ne: ‘First I will 
conquer my senses and mind; then I will subdue 
my chief ministers and rid myself of the thorn -
pricks of my advisors, citizens, friends and rel-
atives, as well as the keepers of my elephants. 
In this way I will gradually conquer the entire earth.’ Because the hearts of these leaders are 
bound by great expectations, they fail to see 
death waiting nearby. (3 -4) “After conquering 
all the land on my surface, these proud kings 
forcibly enter the ocean to conquer the sea it-
self. What is the use of  their self -control, which 
is aimed at political exploitation? The actual 
goal of self -control is spiritual liberation.” (5) 
O best of the Kurus, the earth continued as fol-
lows: “Although in the past great men and their 
descendants have left me, departing from this 
world in the same helpless way they came into 
it, even today foolish men are trying to conquer 
me. (6) “For the sake of conquering me, mate-
rialistic persons fight one another. Fathers op-
pose their sons, and brothers fight one another, 
because the ir hearts are bound to possessing 
political power. (7)  

“Political leaders challenge one another: 
‘All this land is mine! It’s not yours, you fool!’ 
Thus they attack one another and die. (8) “Such 
kings as P ṛthu, Purūravā, Gādhi, Nahu ṣa, Bha-
rata, Kārtavīry a Arjuna, Māndhātā, Sagara, 
Rāma, Kha ṭvāṅga, Dhundhuhā, Raghu, T ṛṇa-
bindu, Yayāti, Śaryāti, Śantanu, Gaya, Bha-
gīratha, Kuvalayāśva, Kakutstha, Nai ṣadha, 
Nṛga, Hira ṇyakaśipu, V ṛtra, Rāva ṇa, who made 
the whole world lament, Namuci, Śambara, 
Bhauma, Hira ṇyākṣa and Tāraka, as well as 
many other demons and kings who possessed 
great powers of control over others, were all 
full of knowledge, heroic, all -conquering and 
unconquerable. Nevertheless, O almighty Lord, 
although they lived their lives intensely trying 
to possess me, these kings were subject to the 
passage of time, which reduced them all to 
mere historical accounts. None of them could 
permanently establish their rule.” (9 -13) 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  O mighty 
Parīk ṣit, I have related to you the narrations of  
all these great kings, who spread their fame 
throughout the world and then departed. My 
real purpose was to teach transcendental 
knowledge and renunciation. Stories of kings 
lend power and opulence to these narrations but 
do not in themselves constitute t he ultimate as-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

892 
 pect of knowledge. (14) The person who de-
sires pure devotional service to Lord K ṛṣṇa 
should hear the narrations of Lord Ut-
tama ḥśloka’s glorious qualities, the constant 
chanting of which destroys everything inauspi-
cious. The devotee should eng age in such lis-
tening in regular daily assemblies and should 
also continue his hearing throughout the day. 
(15) 

King Parīk ṣit said:  My lord, how can per-
sons living in the Age of Kali rid themselves of 
the cumulative contamination of this age? O 
great sage , please explain this to me. (16) 
Please explain the different ages of universal 
history, the special qualities of each age, the du-
ration of cosmic maintenance and destruction, 
and the movement of time, which is the direct 
representation of the Supreme Sou l, the Person-
ality of Godhead, Lord Vi ṣṇu. (17)  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  My dear King, in 
the beginning, during Satya -yuga, the age of 
truth, religion is present with all four of its legs 
intact and is carefully maintained by the people 
of that age. These f our legs of powerful religion 
are truthfulness, mercy, austerity and charity. 
(18) The people of Satya -yuga are for the most 
part self -satisfied, merciful, friendly to all, 
peaceful, sober and tolerant. They take their 
pleasure from within, see all things equally and 
always endeavor diligently for spiritual perfec-
tion. (19) In Tretā -yuga each leg of religion is 
gradually reduced by one quarter by the influ-
ence of the four pillars of irreligionlying, vio-
lence, dissatisfaction and quarrel. (20) In the 
Tretā a ge people are devoted to ritual perfor-
mances and severe austerities. They are not ex-
cessively violent or very lusty after sensual 
pleasure. Their interest lies primarily in religi-
osity, economic development and regulated 
sense gratification, and they achie ve prosperity 
by following the prescriptions of the three Ve-
das. Although in this age society evolves into 
four separate classes, O King, most people are 
brāhma ṇas. (21) In Dvāpara -yuga the religious 
qualities of austerity, truth, mercy and charity 
are red uced to one half by their irreligious 
counterpartsdissatisfaction, untruth, violence and enmity. (22) In the Dvāpara age people are 
interested in glory and are very noble. They de-
vote themselves to the study of the Vedas, pos-
sess great opulence, support la rge families and 
enjoy life with vigor. Of the four classes, the 
kṣatriyas and brāhma ṇas are most numerous. 
(23) In the Age of Kali only one fourth of the 
religious principles remains. That last remnant 
will continuously be decreased by the ever -in-
creasing  principles of irreligion and will finally 
be destroyed. (24) In the Kali age people tend 
to be greedy, ill -behaved and merciless, and 
they fight one another without good reason. 
Unfortunate and obsessed with material de-
sires, the people of Kali -yuga are a lmost all 
śūdras and barbarians. (25)  

The material modesgoodness, passion and 
ignorancewhose permutations are observed 
within a person’s mind, are set into motion by 
the power of time. (26) When the mind, intelli-
gence and senses are solidly fixed in the m ode 
of goodness, that time should be understood as 
Satya -yuga, the age of truth. People then take 
pleasure in knowledge and austerity. (27) O 
most intelligent one, when the conditioned 
souls are devoted to their duties but have ulte-
rior motives and seek pe rsonal prestige, you 
should understand such a situation to be the age 
of Tretā, in which the functions of passion are 
prominent. (28) When greed, dissatisfaction, 
false pride, hypocrisy and envy become promi-
nent, along with attraction for selfish activitie s, 
such a time is the age of Dvāpara, dominated 
by the mixed modes of passion and ignorance. 
(29) When there is a predominance of cheating, 
lying, sloth, sleepiness, violence, depression, 
lamentation, bewilderment, fear and poverty, 
that age is Kali, the a ge of the mode of igno-
rance. (30) Because of the bad qualities of the 
Age of Kali, human beings will become short-
sighted, unfortunate, gluttonous, lustful and 
poverty -stricken. The women, becoming un-
chaste, will freely wander from one man to the 
next. (31)  Cities will be dominated by thieves, 
the Vedas will be contaminated by speculative 
interpretations of atheists, political leaders will 
virtually consume the citizens, and the so -
called priests and intellectuals will be devotees 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

893 
 of their bellies and genita ls. (32) The brah-
macārīs will fail to execute their vows and be-
come generally unclean, the householders will 
become beggars, the vānaprasthas will live in 
the villages, and the sannyāsīs will become 
greedy for wealth. (33) Women will become 
much smaller in  size, and they will eat too 
much, have more children than they can 
properly take care of, and lose all shyness. They 
will always speak harshly and will exhibit qual-
ities of thievery, deceit and unrestrained audac-
ity. (34) Businessmen will engage in petty com-
merce and earn their money by cheating. Even 
when there is no emergency, people will con-
sider any degraded occupation quite accepta-
ble. (35)  

Servants will abandon a master who has lost 
his wealth, even if that master is a saintly per-
son of exemplary ch aracter. Masters will aban-
don an incapacitated servant, even if that serv-
ant has been in the family for generations. 
Cows will be abandoned or killed when they 
stop giving milk. (36)  

In Kali -yuga men will be wretched and con-
trolled by women. They will rej ect their fathers, 
brothers, other relatives and friends and will in-
stead associate with the sisters and brothers of 
their wives. Thus their conception of friendship 
will be based exclusively on sexual ties. (37) 
Uncultured men will accept charity on behal f 
of the Lord and will earn their livelihood by 
making a show of austerity and wearing a men-
dicant’s dress. Those who know nothing about 
religion will mount a high seat and presume to 
speak on religious principles. (38) In the Age 
of Kali, people’s minds w ill always be agitated. 
They will become emaciated by famine and 
taxation, my dear King, and will always be dis-
turbed by fear of drought. They will lack ade-
quate clothing, food and drink, will be unable 
to properly rest, have sex or bathe themselves, 
and w ill have no ornaments to decorate their 
bodies. In fact, the people of Kali -yuga will 
gradually come to appear like ghostly, haunted 
creatures. (39 -40) In Kali -yuga men will de-
velop hatred for each other even over a few 
coins. Giving up all friendly relati ons, they will be ready to lose their own lives and kill even 
their own relatives. (41) Men will no longer 
protect their elderly parents, their children or 
their respectable wives. Thoroughly degraded, 
they will care only to satisfy their own bellies 
and g enitals. (42)  

O King, in the Age of Kali people’s intelli-
gence will be diverted by atheism, and they will 
almost never offer sacrifice to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is the supreme spir-
itual master of the universe. Although the great 
personali ties who control the three worlds all 
bow down to the lotus feet of the Supreme 
Lord, the petty and miserable human beings of 
this age will not do so. (43) Terrified, about to 
die, a man collapses on his bed. Although his 
voice is faltering and he is hardl y conscious of 
what he is saying, if he utters the holy name of 
the Supreme Lord he can be freed from the re-
action of his fruitive work and achieve the su-
preme destination. But still people in the Age 
of Kali will not worship the Supreme Lord. (44)  

In the  Kali-yuga, objects, places and even 
individual personalities are all polluted. The al-
mighty Personality of Godhead, however, can 
remove all such contamination from the life of 
one who fixes the Lord within his mind. (45) If 
a person hears about, glorifies , meditates upon, 
worships or simply offers great respect to the 
Supreme Lord, who is situated within the heart, 
the Lord will remove from his mind the con-
tamination accumulated during many thou-
sands of lifetimes. (46) Just as fire applied to 
gold removes any discoloration caused by 
traces of other metals, Lord Vi ṣṇu within the 
heart purifies the minds of the yogīs. (47) By 
one’s engaging in the processes of demigod 
worship, austerities, breath control, compas-
sion, bathing in holy places, strict vows, chari ty 
and chanting of various mantras, one’s mind 
cannot attain the same absolute purification as 
that achieved when the unlimited Personality of 
Godhead appears within one’s heart. (48)  

Therefore, O King, endeavor with all your 
might to fix the Supreme Lord  Keśava within 
your heart. Maintain this concentration upon 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

894 
 the Lord, and at the time of death you will cer-
tainly attain the supreme destination. (49)  

My dear King, the Personality of Godhead 
is the ultimate controller. He is the Supreme 
Soul and the supr eme shelter of all beings. 
When meditated upon by those about to die, He 
reveals to them their own eternal spiritual iden-
tity. (50) My dear King, although Kali -yuga is 
an ocean of faults, there is still one good quality 
about this age: Simply by chanting t he Hare 
Kṛṣṇa mahā -mantra, one can become free from 
material bondage and be promoted to the tran-
scendental kingdom. (51) Whatever result was 
obtained in Satya -yuga by meditating on Vi ṣṇu, 
in Tretā -yuga by performing sacrifices, and in 
Dvāpara -yuga by servi ng the Lord’s lotus feet 
can be obtained in Kali -yuga simply by chant-
ing the Hare K ṛṣṇa mahā -mantra. (52)  

SB 12.4: The Four Categories of Univer-
sal Annihilation  

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  My dear King, I 
have already described to you the measure-
ments of time , beginning from the smallest 
fraction measured by the movement of a single 
atom up to the total life span of Lord Brahmā. I 
have also discussed the measurement of the dif-
ferent millennia of universal history. Now hear 
about the time of Brahmā’s day and th e process 
of annihilation. (1) One thousand cycles of four 
ages constitute a single day of Brahmā, known 
as a kalpa. In that period, O King, fourteen Ma-
nus come and go. (2) After one day of Brahmā, 
annihilation occurs during his night, which is of 
the same  duration. At that time all the three 
planetary systems are subject to destruction. (3) 
This is called the naimittika, or occasional, an-
nihilation, during which the original creator, 
Lord Nārāya ṇa, lies down upon the bed of 
Ananta Śe ṣa and absorbs the enti re universe 
within Himself while Lord Brahmā sleeps. (4) 
When the two halves of the lifetime of Lord 
Brahmā, the most elevated created being, are 
complete, the seven basic elements of creation 
are annihilated. (5)  
 O King, upon the annihilation of the mate-
rial elements, the universal egg, comprising the 
elemental amalgamation of creation, is con-
fronted with destruction. (6) As annihilation 
approaches, O King, there will be no rain upon 
the earth for one hundred years. Drought will 
lead to famine, and the st arving populace will 
literally consume one another. The inhabitants 
of the earth, bewildered by the force of time, 
will gradually be destroyed. (7) The sun in its 
annihilating form will drink up with its terrible 
rays all the water of the ocean, of living bodies 
and of the earth itself. But the devastating sun 
will not give any rain in return. (8) Next the 
great fire of annihilation will flare up from the 
mouth of Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇa. Carried by the 
mighty force of the wind, this fire will burn 
throughout the u niverse, scorching the lifeless 
cosmic shell. (9) Burned from all sidesfrom 
above by the blazing sun and from below by the 
fire of Lord Sa ṅkarṣaṇathe universal sphere 
will glow like a burning ball of cow dung. (10) 
A great and terrible wind of destruction will 
begin to blow for more than one hundred years, 
and the sky, covered with dust, will turn gray. 
(11) After that, O King, groups of multicolored 
clouds will gather, roaring terribly with thun-
der, and will pour down floods of rain for one 
hundred years. (12) At that time, the shell of the 
universe will fill up with water, forming a sin-
gle cosmic ocean. (13)  

As the entire universe is flooded, the water 
will rob the earth of its unique quality of fra-
grance, and the element earth, deprived of its 
distinguis hing quality, will be dissolved. (14) 
The element fire then seizes the taste from the 
element water, which, deprived of its unique 
quality, taste, merges into fire. Air seizes the 
form inherent in fire, and then fire, deprived of 
form, merges into air. The  element ether seizes 
the quality of air, namely touch, and that air en-
ters into ether. Then, O King, false ego in igno-
rance seizes sound, the quality of ether, after 
which ether merges into false ego. False ego in 
the mode of passion takes hold of the sen ses, 
and false ego in the mode of goodness absorbs 
the demigods. Then the total mahat -tattva 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

895 
 seizes false ego along with its various func-
tions, and that mahat is seized by the three basic 
modes of naturegoodness, passion and igno-
rance. My dear King Parīk ṣit, these modes are 
further overtaken by the original unmanifest 
form of nature, impelled by time. That unman-
ifest nature is not subject to the six kinds of 
transformation caused by the influence of time. 
Rather, it has no beginning and no end. It is the 
unmanifest, eternal and infallible cause of cre-
ation. (15 -19) In the unmanifest stage of mate-
rial nature, called pradhāna, there is no expres-
sion of words, no mind and no manifestation of 
the subtle elements beginning from the mahat, 
nor are there the modes of goodness, passion 
and ignorance. There is no life air or intelli-
gence, nor any senses or demigods. There is no 
definite arrangement of planetary systems, nor 
are there present the different stages of con-
sciousnesssleep, wakefulness and deep sleep. 
There  is no ether, water, earth, air, fire or sun. 
The situation is just like that of complete sleep, 
or of voidness. Indeed, it is indescribable. Au-
thorities in spiritual science explain, however, 
that since pradhāna is the original substance, it 
is the actual  basis of material creation. (20 -21) 
This is the annihilation called prāk ṛtika, during 
which the energies belonging to the Supreme 
Person and His unmanifest material nature, dis-
assembled by the force of time, are deprived of 
their potencies and merge toget her totally. (22)  

It is the Absolute Truth alone who manifests 
in the forms of intelligence, the senses and the 
objects of sense perception, and who is their ul-
timate basis. Whatever has a beginning and an 
end is insubstantial because of being an object 
perceived by limited senses and because of be-
ing nondifferent from its own cause. (23) A 
lamp, the eye that views by the light of that 
lamp, and the visible form that is viewed are all 
basically nondifferent from the element fire. In 
the same way, intellige nce, the senses and 
sense perceptions have no existence separate 
from the supreme reality, although that Abso-
lute Truth remains totally distinct from them. 
(24) 
 The three states of intelligence are called 
waking consciousness, sleep and deep sleep. 
But, m y dear King, the variegated experiences 
created for the pure living entity by these dif-
ferent states are nothing more than illusion. 
(25) Just as clouds in the sky come into being 
and are then dispersed by the amalgamation 
and dissolution of their constitu ent elements, 
this material universe is created and destroyed 
within the Absolute Truth by the amalgamation 
and dissolution of its elemental, constituent 
parts. (26) My dear King, it is stated [in the 
Vedānta -sūtra] that the ingredient cause that 
constitut es any manifested product in this uni-
verse can be perceived as a separate reality, just 
as the threads that make up a cloth can be per-
ceived separately from their product. (27) An-
ything experienced in terms of general cause 
and specific effect must be an i llusion, because 
such causes and effects exist only relative to 
each other. Indeed, whatever has a beginning 
and an end is unreal. (28) Although perceived, 
the transformation of even a single atom of ma-
terial nature has no ultimate definition without 
refer ence to the Supreme Soul. To be accepted 
as factually existing, something must possess 
the same quality as pure spiriteternal, unchang-
ing existence. (29) There is no material duality 
in the Absolute Truth. The duality perceived by 
an ignorant person is lik e the difference be-
tween the sky contained in an empty pot and the 
sky outside the pot, or the difference between 
the reflection of the sun in water and the sun 
itself in the sky, or the difference between the 
vital air within one living body and that with in 
another body. (30)  

According to their different purposes, men 
utilize gold in various ways, and gold is there-
fore perceived in various forms. In the same 
way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who 
is inaccessible to material senses, is described 
in various terms, both ordinary and Vedic, by 
different types of men. (31) Although a cloud 
is a product of the sun and is also made visible 
by the sun, it nevertheless creates darkness for 
the viewing eye, which is another partial expan-
sion of the sun. Simila rly, material false ego, a 
particular product of the Absolute Truth made 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

896 
 visible by the Absolute Truth, obstructs the in-
dividual soul, another partial expansion of the 
Absolute Truth, from realizing the Absolute 
Truth. (32) When the cloud originally produc ed 
from the sun is torn apart, the eye can see the 
actual form of the sun. Similarly, when the 
spirit soul destroys his material covering of 
false ego by inquiring into the transcendental 
science, he regains his original spiritual aware-
ness. (33) My dear P arīkṣit, when the illusory 
false ego that binds the soul has been cut off 
with the sword of discriminating knowledge 
and one has developed realization of Lord 
Acyuta, the Supreme Soul, this is called the 
ātyantika, or ultimate, annihilation of material 
existence. (34)  

Experts in the subtle workings of nature, O 
subduer of the enemy, have declared that there 
are continuous processes of creation and anni-
hilation that all created beings, beginning with 
Brahmā, constantly undergo. (35) All material 
entities un dergo transformation and are con-
stantly and swiftly eroded by the mighty cur-
rents of time. The various stages of existence 
that material things exhibit are the perpetual 
causes of their generation and annihilation. (36) 
These stages of existence created by  beginning-
less and endless time, the impersonal repre-
sentative of the Supreme Lord, are not visible, 
just as the infinitesimal momentary changes of 
position of the planets in the sky cannot be di-
rectly seen. (37) In this way the progress of 
time is describ ed in terms of the four kinds of 
annihilationcontinuous, occasional, elemental 
and final. (38)  

O best of the Kurus, I have related to you 
these narrations of the pastimes of Lord 
Nārāya ṇa, the creator of this world and the ul-
timate reservoir of all existe nce, presenting 
them to you only in brief summary. Even Lord 
Brahmā himself would be incapable of describ-
ing them entirely. (39)  

For a person who is suffering in the fire of 
countless miseries and who desires to cross the 
insurmountable ocean of material existence, there is no suitable boat except that of cultivat-
ing devotion to the transcendental taste for the 
narrations of the Supreme Personality of God-
head’s pastimes. (40) Long ago this essential 
anthology of all the Purā ṇas was spoken by the 
infallible  Lord Nara -Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi to Nārada, 
who then repeated it to K ṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Ve-
davyāsa. (41) My dear Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, that 
great personality Śrīla Vyāsadeva taught me 
this same scripture, Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, 
which is equal in stature to the four Vedas. (42 ) 
O best of the Kurus, the same Sūta Gosvāmī 
who is sitting before us will speak this 
Bhāgavatam to the sages assembled in the great 
sacrifice at Naimi ṣāraṇya. This he will do when 
questioned by the members of the assembly, 
headed by Śaunaka. (43)  

SB 12.5 : Śukadeva Gosvāmī’s Final In-
structions to Mahārāja Parīk ṣit 

Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:  This Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam has elaborately described in vari-
ous narrations the Supreme Soul of all that be-
the Personality of Godhead, Harifrom whose 
satisfaction Brahmā is bor n and from whose an-
ger Rudra takes birth. (1) O King, give up the 
animalistic mentality of thinking, “I am going 
to die.” Unlike the body, you have not taken 
birth. There was not a time in the past when you 
did not exist, and you are not about to be de-
stroyed. (2) You will not take birth again in the 
form of your sons and grandsons, like a sprout 
taking birth from a seed and then generating a 
new seed. Rather, you are entirely distinct from 
the material body and its paraphernalia, in the 
same way that fire is distinct from its fuel. (3)  

In a dream one can see his own head being 
cut off and thus understand that his actual self 
is standing apart from the dream experience. 
Similarly, while awake one can see that his 
body is a product of the five material eleme nts. 
Therefore, it is to be understood that the actual 
self, the soul, is distinct from the body it ob-
serves and is unborn and immortal. (4) When a 
pot is broken, the portion of sky within the pot 
remains as the element sky, just as before. In 
the same way , when the gross and subtle bodies 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

897 
 die, the living entity within resumes his spir-
itual identity. (5) The material bodies, qualities 
and activities of the spirit soul are created by 
the material mind. That mind is itself created 
by the illusory potency of t he Supreme Lord, 
and thus the soul assumes material existence. 
(6) A lamp functions as such only by the com-
bination of its fuel, vessel, wick and fire. Simi-
larly, material life, based on the soul’s identifi-
cation with the body, is developed and de-
stroyed b y the workings of material goodness, 
passion and ignorance, which are the constitu-
ent elements of the body. (7) The soul within 
the body is self -luminous and is separate from 
the visible gross body and invisible subtle 
body. It remains as the fixed basis o f changing 
bodily existence, just as the ethereal sky is the 
unchanging background of material transfor-
mation. Therefore, the soul is endless and with-
out material comparison. (8)  

My dear King, by constantly meditating 
upon the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva, and by ap-
plying clear and logical intelligence, you 
should carefully consider your true self and 
how it is situated within the material body. (9) 
The snake -bird Tak ṣaka, sent by the curse of 
the brāhma ṇa, will not burn your true self. The 
agents of death will never burn such a master 
of the self as you, for you have already con-
quered all dangers on your path back to God-
head. (10) You should consider, “I am nondif-
ferent from the Absolute Truth, the supreme 
abode, and that Absolute Truth, the supreme 
destination,  is nondifferent from me.” Thus re-
signing yourself to the Supreme Soul, who is 
free from all material misidentifications, you 
will not even notice the snake -bird Tak ṣaka 
when he approaches with his poison -filled 
fangs and bites your foot. Nor will you see your 
dying body or the material world around you, 
because you will have realized yourself to be 
separate from them. (11 -12) 

Beloved King Parīk ṣit, I have narrated to 
you the topics you originally inquired aboutthe 
pastimes of Lord Hari, the Supreme Soul o f the 
universe. Now, what more do you wish to hear? 
(13)  
SB 12.6: Mahārāja Parīk ṣit Passes Away  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  After hearing all that 
was narrated to him by the self -realized and eq-
uipoised Śukadeva, the son of Vyāsadeva, 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit humbly app roached his lotus 
feet. Bowing his head down upon the sage’s 
feet, the King, who had lived his entire life un-
der the protection of Lord Vi ṣṇu, folded his 
hands in supplication and spoke as follows. (1)  

Mahārāja Parīk ṣit said:  I have now 
achieved the purpo se of my life, because a great 
and merciful soul like you has shown such 
kindness to me. You have personally spoken to 
me this narration of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Hari, who is without beginning or 
end. (2) I do not consider it at all amazing t hat 
great souls such as yourself, whose minds are 
always absorbed in the infallible Personality of 
Godhead, show mercy to the foolish condi-
tioned souls, tormented as we are by the prob-
lems of material life. (3) I have heard from you 
this Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam,  which is the perfect 
summary of all the Purā ṇas and which perfectly 
describes the Supreme Lord, Uttama ḥśloka. (4)  

My lord, I now have no fear of Tak ṣaka or 
any other living being, or even of repeated 
deaths, because I have absorbed myself in that 
purely spiritual Absolute Truth, which you 
have revealed and which destroys all fear. (5) 
O brāhma ṇa, please give me permission to re-
sign my speech and the functions of all my 
senses unto Lord Adhok ṣaja. Allow me to ab-
sorb my mind, purified of lusty desires, with in 
Him and to thus give up my life. (6) You have 
revealed to me that which is most auspicious, 
the supreme personal feature of the Lord. I am 
now fixed in knowledge and self -realization, 
and my ignorance has been eradicated. (7)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thus re quested, the 
saintly son of Śrīla Vyāsadeva gave his permis-
sion to King Parīk ṣit. Then, after being wor-
shiped by the King and all the sages present, 
Śukadeva departed from that place. (8) 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit then sat down on the bank of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

898 
 the Ganges, upon a se at made of darbha grass 
with the tips of its stalks facing east, and turned 
himself toward the north. Having attained the 
perfection of yoga, he experienced full self -re-
alization and was free of material attachment 
and doubt. The saintly King settled his m ind 
within his spiritual self by pure intelligence and 
proceeded to meditate upon the Supreme Abso-
lute Truth. His life air ceased to move, and he 
became as stationary as a tree. (9 -10) 

O learned brāhma ṇas, the snake -bird 
Takṣaka, who had been sent by the angry son 
of a brāhma ṇa, was going toward the King to 
kill him when he saw Kaśyapa Muni on the 
path. (11) Tak ṣaka flattered Kaśyapa by pre-
senting him with valuable offerings and 
thereby stopped the sage, who was expert in 
counteracting poison, from protect ing 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit. Then the snake -bird, who 
could assume any form he wished, disguised 
himself as a brāhma ṇa, approached the King 
and bit him. (12) While living beings all over 
the universe looked on, the body of the great 
self-realized saint among kin gs was immedi-
ately burned to ashes by the fire of the snake’s 
poison. (13)  

There arose a terrible cry of lamentation in 
all directions on the earth and in the heavens, 
and all the demigods, demons, human beings 
and other creatures were astonished. (14) Ke t-
tledrums sounded in the regions of the demi-
gods, and the celestial Gandharvas and Apsarās 
sang. The demigods showered flowers and 
spoke words of praise. (15)  

Hearing that his father had been fatally bit-
ten by the snake -bird, Mahārāja Janamejaya be-
came ex tremely angry and had brāhma ṇas per-
form a mighty sacrifice in which he offered all 
the snakes in the world into the sacrificial fire. 
(16) When Tak ṣaka saw even the most power-
ful serpents being burned in the blazing fire of 
that snake sacrifice, he was ove rwhelmed with 
fear and approached Lord Indra for shelter. (17) 
When King Janamejaya did not see Tak ṣaka 
entering his sacrificial fire, he said to the 
brāhma ṇas: Why is not Tak ṣaka, the lowest of all serpents, burning in this fire? (18) The 
brāhma ṇas replie d: O best of kings, the snake 
Takṣaka has not fallen into the fire because he 
is being protected by Indra, whom he has ap-
proached for shelter. Indra is holding him back 
from the fire. (19) The intelligent King Ja-
namejaya, hearing these words, replied to th e 
priests: Then, my dear brāhma ṇas, why not 
make Tak ṣaka fall into the fire, along with his 
protector, Indra? (20) Hearing this, the priests 
then chanted this mantra for offering Tak ṣaka 
together with Indra as an oblation into the sac-
rificial fire: O Tak ṣaka, fall immediately into 
this fire, together with Indra and his entire host 
of demigods! (21) When Lord Indra, along with 
his airplane and Tak ṣaka, was suddenly thrown 
from his position by these insulting words of 
the brāhma ṇas, he became very disturbed. (22) 
Bṛhaspati, the son of A ṅgirā Muni, seeing Indra 
falling from the sky in his airplane along with 
Takṣaka, approached King Janamejaya and 
spoke to him as follows. (23) O King among 
men, it is not fitting that this king of snakes 
meet death at your hands , for he has drunk the 
nectar of the immortal demigods. Consequently 
he is not subject to the ordinary symptoms of 
old age and death. (24)  

The life and death of an embodied soul and 
his destination in the next life are all caused by 
himself through his ow n activity. Therefore, O 
King, no other agent is actually responsible for 
creating one’s happiness and distress. (25) 
When a conditioned soul is killed by snakes, 
thieves, fire, lightning, hunger, disease or any-
thing else, he is experiencing the reaction t o his 
own past work. (26) Therefore, my dear King, 
please stop this sacrificial performance, which 
was initiated with the intent of doing harm to 
others. Many innocent snakes have already 
been burned to death. Indeed, all persons must 
suffer the unforeseen  consequences of their 
past activities. (27)  

Sūta Gosvāmī continued:  Advised in this 
manner, Mahārāja Janamejaya replied, “So be 
it.” Honoring the words of the great sage, he 
desisted from performing the snake sacrifice 
and worshiped B ṛhaspati, the most e loquent of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

899 
 sages. (28) This is indeed the Supreme Lord 
Viṣṇu’s illusory energy, which is unstoppable 
and difficult to perceive. Although the individ-
ual spirit souls are part and parcel of the Lord, 
through the influence of this illusory energy 
they are bew ildered by their identification with 
various material bodies. (29) But there exists a 
supreme reality, in which the illusory energy 
cannot fearlessly dominate, thinking, “I can 
control this person because he is deceitful.” In 
that highest reality there are  no illusory argu-
mentative philosophies. Rather, there the true 
students of spiritual science constantly engage 
in authorized spiritual investigation. In that su-
preme reality there is no manifestation of the 
material mind, which functions in terms of al-
ternating decision and doubt. Created material 
products, their subtle causes and the goals of 
enjoyment attained by their utilization do not 
exist there. Furthermore, in that supreme reality 
there is no conditioned spirit, covered by false 
ego and the three m odes of nature. That reality 
excludes everything limited or limiting. One 
who is wise should therefore stop the waves of 
material life and enjoy within that Supreme 
Truth. (30 -31) Those who desire to give up all 
that is not essentially real move systematic ally, 
by negative discrimination of the extraneous, to 
the supreme position of Lord Vi ṣṇu. Giving up 
petty materialism, they offer their love exclu-
sively to the Absolute Truth within their hearts 
and embrace that highest truth in fixed medita-
tion. (32) Suc h devotees come to understand 
the supreme transcendental situation of the Per-
sonality of Godhead, Lord Vi ṣṇu, because they 
are no longer polluted by the concepts of “I” 
and “my,” which are based on body and home. 
(33) One should tolerate all insults and ne ver 
fail to show proper respect to any person. 
Avoiding identification with the material body, 
one should not create enmity with anyone. (34) 
I offer my obeisances to the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead, the invincible Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa. 
Simply by meditating u pon His lotus feet I have 
been able to study and appreciate this great lit-
erature. (35)  
 Śaunaka Ṛṣi said:  O gentle Sūta, please 
narrate to us how Paila and the other greatly in-
telligent disciples of Śrīla Vyāsadeva, who are 
known as the standard authoriti es of Vedic wis-
dom, spoke and edited the Vedas. (36)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  O brāhma ṇa, first the 
subtle vibration of transcendental sound ap-
peared from the sky of the heart of the most el-
evated Lord Brahmā, whose mind was per-
fectly fixed in spiritual realiza tion. One can 
perceive this subtle vibration when one stops 
all external hearing. (37) By worship of this 
subtle form of the Vedas, O brāhma ṇa, mystic 
sages cleanse their hearts of all contamination 
caused by impurity of substance, activity and 
doer, and t hus they attain freedom from re-
peated birth and death. (38) From that transcen-
dental subtle vibration arose the o ṁkāra com-
posed of three sounds. The o ṁkāra has unseen 
potencies and manifests automatically within a 
purified heart. It is the representation o f the Ab-
solute Truth in all three of His phasesthe Su-
preme Personality, the Supreme Soul and the 
supreme impersonal truth. (39) This o ṁkāra, 
ultimately nonmaterial and imperceptible, is 
heard by the Supersoul without His possessing 
material ears or any oth er material senses. The 
entire expanse of Vedic sound is elaborated 
from o ṁkāra, which appears from the soul, 
within the sky of the heart. It is the direct des-
ignation of the self -originating Absolute Truth, 
the Supersoul, and is the secret essence and 
eternal seed of all Vedic hymns. (40 -41) 

Oṁkāra exhibited the three original sounds 
of the alphabet A, U and M. These three, O 
most eminent descendant of Bh ṛgu, sustain all 
the different threefold aspects of material exist-
ence, including the three modes of n ature, the 
names of the Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma Vedas, the 
goals known as the Bhūr, Bhuvar and Svar 
planetary systems, and the three functional 
platforms called waking consciousness, sleep 
and deep sleep. (42) From that o ṁkāra Lord 
Brahmā created all the sounds  of the alphabet-
the vowels, consonants, semivowels, sibilants 
and othersdistinguished by such features as 
long and short measure. (43) All -powerful 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

900 
 Brahmā made use of this collection of sounds 
to produce from his four faces the four Vedas, 
which appeared t ogether with the sacred 
oṁkāra and the seven vyāh ṛti invocations. His 
intention was to propagate the process of Vedic 
sacrifice according to the different functions 
performed by the priests of each of the four Ve-
das. (44) Brahmā taught these Vedas to his 
sons, who were great sages among the 
brāhma ṇas and experts in the art of Vedic reci-
tation. They in turn took the role of ācāryas and 
imparted the Vedas to their own sons. (45)  

In this way, throughout the cycles of four 
ages, generation after generation of disciplesall 
firmly fixed in their spiritual vowshave re-
ceived these Vedas by disciplic succession. At 
the end of each Dvāpara -yuga the Vedas are ed-
ited into separate divisions by eminent sages. 
(46) Observing that people in general were di-
minished in thei r life span, strength and intelli-
gence by the influence of time, great sages took 
inspiration from the Personality of Godhead 
sitting within their hearts and systematically di-
vided the Vedas. (47)  

O brāhma ṇa, in the present age of 
Vaivasvata Manu, the lea ders of the universe, 
led by Brahmā and Śiva, requested the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, the protector of all the 
worlds, to save the principles of religion. O 
most fortunate Śaunaka, the almighty Lord, ex-
hibiting a divine spark of a portion of His ple-
nary portion, then appeared in the womb of 
Satyavatī as the son of Parāśara. In this form, 
named K ṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vyāsa, he divided 
the one Veda into four. (48 -49) Śrīla 
Vyāsadeva separated the mantras of the Ṛg, 
Atharva, Yajur and Sāma Vedas into four divi-
sions, just as one sorts out a mixed collection of 
jewels into piles. Thus he composed four dis-
tinct Vedic literatures. (50) The most powerful 
and intelligent Vyāsadeva called four of his dis-
ciples, O brāhma ṇa, and entrusted to each of 
them one of these fo ur sa ṁhitās. (51) Śrīla 
Vyāsadeva taught the first sa ṁhitā, the Ṛg 
Veda, to Paila and gave this collection the name 
Bahv ṛca. To the sage Vaiśampāyana he spoke 
the collection of Yajur mantras named Nigada. He taught the Sāma Veda mantras, designated 
as the Chandoga -saṁhitā, to Jaimini, and he 
spoke the Atharva Veda to his dear disciple Su-
mantu. (52 -53) After dividing his sa ṁhitā into 
two parts, the wise Paila spoke it to In-
drapramiti and Bā ṣkala. Bā ṣkala further di-
vided his collection into four parts, O 
Bhār gava, and instructed them to his disciples 
Bodhya, Yājñavalkya, Parāśara and Agnimitra. 
Indrapramiti, the self -controlled sage, taught 
his sa ṁhitā to the learned mystic Mā ṇḍūkeya, 
whose disciple Devamitra later passed down 
the divisions of the Ṛg Veda to S aubhari and 
others. (54 -56) The son of Mā ṇḍūkeya, named 
Śākalya, divided his own collection into five, 
entrusting one subdivision each to Vātsya, 
Mudgala, Śālīya, Gokhalya and Śiśira. (57) The 
sage Jātūkar ṇya was also a disciple of Śākalya, 
and after divid ing the sa ṁhitā he received from 
Śākalya into three parts, he added a fourth sec-
tion, a Vedic glossary. He taught one of these 
parts to each of four disciplesBalāka, the sec-
ond Paila, Jābāla and Viraja. (58) Bā ṣkali as-
sembled the Vālakhilya -saṁhitā, a coll ection 
from all the branches of the Ṛg Veda. This col-
lection was received by Vālāyani, Bhajya and 
Kāśāra. (59) Thus these various sa ṁhitās of the 
Ṛg Veda were maintained through disciplic 
succession by these saintly brāhma ṇas. Simply 
by hearing of this dis tribution of the Vedic 
hymns, one will be freed from all sins. (60)  

The disciples of Vaiśampāyana became au-
thorities in the Atharva Veda. They were 
known as the Carakas because they executed 
strict vows to free their guru from his sin of kill-
ing a brāhma ṇa. (61) Once Yājñavalkya, one of 
the disciples of Vaiśampāyana, said: O master, 
how much benefit will be derived from the fee-
ble endeavors of these weak disciples of yours? 
I will personally perform some outstanding 
penance. (62) Addressed thus, the spirit ual 
master Vaiśampāyana became angry and said: 
Go away from here! Enough of you, O disciple 
who insults brāhma ṇas! Furthermore, you must 
immediately give back everything I have taught 
you. (63) Yājñavalkya, the son of Devarāta, 
then vomited the mantras of the Yajur Veda and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

901 
 went away from there. The assembled disci-
ples, looking greedily upon these yajur hymns, 
assumed the form of partridges and picked 
them all up. These divisions of the Yajur Veda 
therefore became known as the most beautiful 
Taittirīya -saṁhitā, the hymns collected by par-
tridges [tittirā ḥ]. (64 -65) My dear brāhma ṇa 
Śaunaka, Yājñavalkya then desired to find out 
new yajur -mantras unknown to even his spir-
itual master. With this in mind he offered atten-
tive worship to the powerful lord of the sun . 
(66) 

Śrī Yājñavalkya said:  I offer my respectful 
obeisances to the Supreme Personality of God-
head appearing as the sun. You are present as 
the controller of the four kinds of living enti-
ties, beginning from Brahmā and extending 
down to the blades of gra ss. Just as the sky is 
present both inside and outside every living be-
ing, you exist both within the hearts of all as the 
Supersoul and externally in the form of time. 
Just as the sky cannot be covered by the clouds 
present within it, you are never covered  by any 
false material designation. By the flow of years, 
which are made up of the tiny fragments of time 
called k ṣaṇas, lavas and nime ṣas, you alone 
maintain this world, drying up the waters and 
giving them back as rain. (67) O glowing one, 
O powerful lor d of the sun, you are the chief of 
all the demigods. I meditate with careful atten-
tion on your fiery globe, because for those who 
offer prayers to you three times daily according 
to the Vedic method passed down through au-
thorized disciplic succession, you burn away all 
sinful activities, all consequent suffering and 
even the original seed of desire. (68) You are 
personally present as the indwelling lord in the 
hearts of all moving and nonmoving beings, 
who depend completely on your shelter. In-
deed, you anim ate their material minds, senses 
and vital airs to act. (69) The world has been 
seized and swallowed by the python of dark-
ness in its horrible mouth and has become un-
conscious, as if dead. But mercifully glancing 
upon the sleeping people of the world, you raise 
them up with the gift of sight. Thus you are 
most magnanimous. At the three sacred junc-
tures of each day, you engage the pious in the path of ultimate good, inducing them to per-
form religious duties that situate them in their 
spiritual position. (70)  Just like an earthly king, 
you travel about everywhere spreading fear 
among the unholy as the powerful deities of the 
directions offer you in their folded palms lotus 
flowers and other respectful presentations. (71) 
Therefore, my lord, I am prayerfully ap proach-
ing your lotus feet, which are honored by the 
spiritual masters of the three worlds, because I 
hope to receive from you mantras of the Yajur 
Veda unknown to anyone else. (72)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Satisfied by such glo-
rification, the powerful sun -god a ssumed the 
form of a horse and presented to the sage 
Yājñavalkya yajur -mantras previously un-
known in human society. (73) From these 
countless hundreds of mantras of the Yajur 
Veda, the powerful sage compiled fifteen new 
branches of Vedic literature. These became 
known as the Vājasaneyi -saṁhitā because they 
were produced from the hairs of the horse’s 
mane, and they were accepted in disciplic suc-
cession by the followers of Kā ṇva, Mādhyan-
dina and other ṛṣis. (74)  

Jaimini Ṛṣi, the authority of the Sāma Veda, 
had a son named Sumantu, and the son of Su-
mantu was Sutvān. The sage Jaimini spoke to 
each of them a different part of the Sāma -veda -
saṁhitā. (75) Sukarmā, another disciple of Jai-
mini, was a great scholar. He divided the 
mighty tree of the Sāma Veda into on e thou-
sand sa ṁhitās. Then, O brāhma ṇa, three disci-
ples of SukarmāHira ṇyanābha, the son of 
Kuśala; Pau ṣyañji; and Āvantya, who was very 
advanced in spiritual realizationtook charge of 
the sāma -mantras. (76 -77) The five hundred 
disciples of Pau ṣyañji and Āva ntya became 
known as the northern singers of the Sāma 
Veda, and in later times some of them also be-
came known as eastern singers. (78) Five other 
disciples of Pau ṣyañji, namely Laugāk ṣi, 
Māṅgali, Kulya, Kuśīda and Kuk ṣi, each re-
ceived one hundred sa ṁhitās.  (79) K ṛta, the 
disciple of Hira ṇyanābha, spoke twenty -four 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

902 
 saṁhitās to his own disciples, and the remain-
ing collections were passed down by the self -
realized sage Āvantya. (80)  

SB 12.7: The Purā ṇic Literatures  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Sumantu Ṛṣi, the au-
thori ty on the Atharva Veda, taught his sa ṁhitā 
to his disciple Kabandha, who in turn spoke it 
to Pathya and Vedadarśa. (1) Śauklāyani, Brah-
mabali, Modo ṣa and Pippalāyani were disciples 
of Vedadarśa. Hear from me also the names of 
the disciples of Pathya. My de ar brāhma ṇa, 
they are Kumuda, Śunaka and Jājali, all of 
whom knew the Atharva Veda very well. (2) 
Babhru and Saindhavāyana, disciples of Śu-
naka, studied the two divisions of their spiritual 
master’s compilation of the Atharva Veda. 
Saindhavāyana’s disciple  Sāvar ṇa and disci-
ples of other great sages also studied this edi-
tion of the Atharva Veda. (3) Nak ṣatrakalpa, 
Śāntikalpa, Kaśyapa, Ā ṅgirasa and others were 
also among the ācāryas of the Atharva Veda. 
Now, O sage, listen as I name the authorities on 
Purāṇic literature. (4)  

Trayyāru ṇi, Kaśyapa, Sāvar ṇi, Ak ṛtavra ṇa, 
Vaiśampāyana and Hārīta are the six masters of 
the Purā ṇas. (5) Each of them studied one of the 
six anthologies of the Purā ṇas from my father, 
Romahar ṣaṇa, who was a disciple of Śrīla 
Vyāsadeva. I  became the disciple of these six 
authorities and thoroughly learned all their 
presentations of Purā ṇic wisdom. (6) Romaha-
rṣaṇa, a disciple of Vedavyāsa, divided the 
Purāṇas into four basic compilations. The sage 
Kaśyapa and I, along with Sāvar ṇi and Ak ṛtav-
raṇa, a disciple of Rāma, learned these four di-
visions. (7)  

O Śaunaka, please hear with attention the 
characteristics of a Purā ṇa, which have been 
defined by the most eminent learned brāhma ṇas 
in accordance with Vedic literature. (8) O 
brāhma ṇa, authorit ies on the matter understand 
a Purā ṇa to contain ten characteristic topics: the 
creation of this universe, the subsequent crea-
tion of worlds and beings, the maintenance of 
all living beings, their sustenance, the rule of various Manus, the dynasties of gre at kings, the 
activities of such kings, annihilation, motiva-
tion and the supreme shelter. Other scholars 
state that the great Purā ṇas deal with these ten 
topics, while lesser Purā ṇas may deal with five. 
(9-10) From the agitation of the original modes 
withi n the unmanifest material nature, the ma-
hat-tattva arises. From the mahat -tattva comes 
the element false ego, which divides into three 
aspects. This threefold false ego further mani-
fests as the subtle forms of perception, as the 
senses and as the gross sen se objects. The gen-
eration of all these is called creation. (11) The 
secondary creation, which exists by the mercy 
of the Lord, is the manifest amalgamation of 
the desires of the living entities. Just as a seed 
produces additional seeds, activities that pr o-
mote material desires in the performer produce 
moving and nonmoving life forms. (12) V ṛtti 
means the process of sustenance, by which the 
moving beings live upon the nonmoving. For a 
human, v ṛtti specifically means acting for one’s 
livelihood in a manner s uited to his personal na-
ture. Such action may be carried out either in 
pursuit of selfish desire or in accordance with 
the law of God. (13)  

In each age, the infallible Lord appears in 
this world among the animals, human beings, 
sages and demigods. By His activities in these 
incarnations He protects the universe and kills 
the enemies of Vedic culture. (14) In each reign 
of Manu, six types of personalities appear as 
manifestations of Lord Hari: the ruling Manu, 
the chief demigods, the sons of Manu, Indra, 
the great sages and the partial incarnations of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. (15) 
Dynasties are lines of kings originating with 
Lord Brahmā and extending continuously 
through past, present and future. The accounts 
of such dynasties, especially of thei r most 
prominent members, constitute the subject of 
dynastic history. (16) There are four types of 
cosmic annihilationoccasional, elemental, con-
tinuous and ultimateall of which are effected by 
the inherent potency of the Supreme Lord. 
Learned scholars have  designated this topic dis-
solution. (17) Out of ignorance the living being 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

903 
 performs material activities and thereby be-
comes in one sense the cause of the creation, 
maintenance and destruction of the universe. 
Some authorities call the living being the per-
sonality underlying the material creation, while 
others say he is the unmanifest self. (18) The 
Supreme Absolute Truth is present throughout 
all the stages of awarenesswaking conscious-
ness, sleep and deep sleepthroughout all the 
phenomena manifested by the illusory energy, 
and within the functions of all living entities, 
and He also exists separate from all these. Thus 
situated in His own transcendence, He is the ul-
timate and unique shelter. (19) Although a ma-
terial object may assume various forms and 
names,  its essential ingredient is always present 
as the basis of its existence. Similarly, both 
conjointly and separately, the Supreme Abso-
lute Truth is always present with the created 
material body throughout its phases of exist-
ence, beginning with conception and ending 
with death. (20) Either automatically or be-
cause of one’s regulated spiritual practice, 
one’s mind may stop functioning on the mate-
rial platform of waking consciousness, sleep 
and deep sleep. Then one understands the Su-
preme Soul and withdraws f rom material en-
deavor. (21)  

Sages expert in ancient histories have de-
clared that the Purā ṇas, according to their vari-
ous characteristics, can be divided into eighteen 
major Purā ṇas and eighteen secondary Purā ṇas. 
(22) The eighteen major Purā ṇas are the 
Brahma, Padma, Vi ṣṇu, Śiva, Li ṅga, Garu ḍa, 
Nārada, Bhāgavata, Agni, Skanda, Bhavi ṣya, 
Brahma -vaivarta, Mārka ṇḍeya, Vāmana, 
Varāha, Matsya, Kūrma and Brahmā ṇḍa 
Purāṇas. (23 -24) I have thoroughly described to 
you, O brāhma ṇa, the expansion of the 
branches of t he Vedas by the great sage 
Vyāsadeva, his disciples and the disciples of his 
disciples. One who listens to this narration will 
increase in spiritual strength. (25)  

SB 12.8: Mārka ṇḍeya’s Prayers to Nara -
Nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi 
 ŚrīŚaunaka said:  O Sūta, may you live a  
long life! O saintly one, best of speakers, please 
continue speaking to us. Indeed, only you can 
show men the path out of the ignorance in 
which they are wandering. (1) Authorities say 
that Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi, the son of M ṛkaṇḍu, was 
an exceptionally long -lived sage who was the 
only survivor at the end of Brahmā’s day, when 
the entire universe was merged in the flood of 
annihilation. But this same Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi, 
the foremost descendant of Bh ṛgu, took birth in 
my own family during the current day of 
Brahmā, an d we have not yet seen any total an-
nihilation in this day of Brahmā. Also, it is well 
known that Mārka ṇḍeya, while wandering 
helplessly in the great ocean of annihilation, 
saw in those fearful waters a wonderful person-
alityan infant boy lying alone within the fold of 
a banyan leaf. O Sūta, I am most bewildered 
and curious about this great sage, Mārka ṇḍeya 
Ṛṣi. O great yogī, you are universally accepted 
as the authority on all the Purā ṇas. Therefore, 
kindly dispel my confusion. (2 -5) 

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  O great sage Śaunaka, 
your very question will help remove every-
one’s illusion, for it leads to the topics of Lord 
Nārāya ṇa, which cleanse away the contamina-
tion of this Kali age. (6) After being purified by 
his father’s performance of the prescribed ritu-
als le ading to Mārka ṇḍeya’s brahminical initi-
ation, Mārka ṇḍeya studied the Vedic hymns 
and strictly observed the regulative principles. 
He became advanced in austerity and Vedic 
knowledge and remained a lifelong celibate. 
Appearing most peaceful with his matted hair 
and his clothing made of bark, he furthered his 
spiritual progress by carrying the mendicant’s 
waterpot, staff, sacred thread, brahmacārī belt, 
black deerskin, lotus -seed prayer beads and 
bundles of kuśa grass. At the sacred junctures 
of the day he re gularly worshiped the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead in five formsthe sacri-
ficial fire, the sun, his spiritual master, the 
brāhma ṇas and the Supersoul within his heart. 
Morning and evening he would go out begging, 
and upon returning he would present all th e 
food he had collected to his spiritual master. 
Only when his spiritual master invited him 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

904 
 would he silently take his one meal of the day; 
otherwise he would fast. Thus devoted to aus-
terity and Vedic study, Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi wor-
shiped the supreme master of t he senses, the 
Personality of Godhead, for countless millions 
of years, and in this way he conquered uncon-
querable death. (7 -11) Lord Brahmā, Bh ṛgu 
Muni, Lord Śiva, Prajāpati Dak ṣa, the great 
sons of Brahmā, and many others among the 
human beings, demigods , forefathers and 
ghostly spiritsall were astonished by the 
achievement of Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi. (12) In this 
way the devotional mystic Mārka ṇḍeya main-
tained rigid celibacy through penance, study of 
the Vedas and self -discipline. With his mind 
thus free of all d isturbances, he turned it inward 
and meditated on the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who lies beyond the material senses. 
(13) While the mystic sage thus concentrated 
his mind by powerful yoga practice, the tre-
mendous period of six lifetimes of Manu 
passe d by. (14)  

O brāhma ṇa, during the seventh reign of 
Manu, the current age, Lord Indra came to 
know of Mārka ṇḍeya’s austerities and became 
fearful of his growing mystic potency. Thus he 
tried to impede the sage’s penance. (15)  

To ruin the sage’s spiritual practice, Lord In-
dra sent Cupid, beautiful celestial singers, 
dancing girls, the season of spring and the san-
dalwood -scented breeze from the Malaya Hills, 
along with greed and intoxication personified. 
(16) O most powerful Śaunaka, they went to 
Mārka ṇḍeya’s hermitage, on the northern side 
of the Himālaya Mountains where the 
Puṣpabhadrā River passes by the famous peak 
Citrā. (17) Groves of pious trees decorated the 
holy āśrama of Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi, and many 
saintly brāhma ṇas lived there, enjoying the 
abundant p ure, sacred ponds. The āśrama re-
sounded with the buzzing of intoxicated bees 
and the cooing of excited cuckoos, while jubi-
lant peacocks danced about. Indeed, many fam-
ilies of maddened birds crowded that her-
mitage. The springtime breeze sent by Lord In-
dra e ntered there, carrying cooling drops of 
spray from nearby waterfalls. Fragrant from the embrace of forest flowers, that breeze entered 
the hermitage and began evoking the lusty 
spirit of Cupid. (18 -20) Springtime then ap-
peared in Mārka ṇḍeya’s āśrama. Indee d, the 
evening sky, glowing with the light of the rising 
moon, became the very face of spring, and 
sprouts and fresh blossoms virtually covered 
the multitude of trees and creepers. (21) Cupid, 
the master of many heavenly women, then 
came there holding his bow and arrows. He was 
followed by groups of Gandharvas playing mu-
sical instruments and singing. (22)  

These servants of Indra found the sage sit-
ting in meditation, having just offered his pre-
scribed oblations into the sacrificial fire. His 
eyes closed in trance, he seemed invincible, 
like fire personified. (23) The women danced 
before the sage, and the celestial singers sang 
to the charming accompaniment of drums, 
cymbals and vī ṇās. (24) While the son of pas-
sion [greed personified], spring and the other 
servants of Indra all tried to agitate 
Mārka ṇḍeya’s mind, Cupid drew his five -
headed arrow and fixed it upon his bow. (25) 
The Apsarā Puñjikasthalī made a show of play-
ing with a number of toy balls. Her waist 
seemed weighed down by her heavy breasts, 
and the  wreath of flowers in her hair became 
disheveled. As she ran about after the balls, 
glancing here and there, the belt of her thin gar-
ment loosened, and suddenly the wind blew her 
clothes away. (26 -27) Cupid, thinking he had 
conquered the sage, then shot hi s arrow. But all 
these attempts to seduce Mārka ṇḍeya proved 
futile, just like the useless endeavors of an athe-
ist. (28) O learned Śaunaka, while Cupid and 
his followers tried to harm the sage, they felt 
themselves being burned alive by his potency. 
Thus th ey stopped their mischief, just like chil-
dren who have aroused a sleeping snake. (29) 
O brāhma ṇa, the followers of Lord Indra had 
impudently attacked the saintly Mārka ṇḍeya, 
yet he did not succumb to any influence of false 
ego. For great souls such toleran ce is not at all 
surprising. (30) The mighty King Indra was 
most astonished when he heard of the mystic 
prowess of the exalted sage Mārka ṇḍeya and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

905 
 saw how Cupid and his associates had become 
powerless in his presence. (31)  

Desiring to bestow His mercy upo n the 
saintly Mārka ṇḍeya, who had perfectly fixed 
his mind in self -realization through penance, 
Vedic study and observance of regulative prin-
ciples, the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
personally appeared before the sage in the 
forms of Nara and Nārāya ṇa. (32) One of Them 
was of a whitish complexion, the other black-
ish, and They both had four arms. Their eyes 
resembled the petals of blooming lotuses, and 
They wore garments of black deerskin and 
bark, along with the three -stranded sacred 
thread. In Their hand s, which were most puri-
fying, They carried the mendicant’s waterpot, 
straight bamboo staff and lotus -seed prayer 
beads, as well as the all -purifying Vedas in the 
symbolic form of bundles of darbha grass. 
Their bearing was tall and Their yellow efful-
gence t he color of radiant lightning. Appearing 
as austerity personified, They were being wor-
shiped by the foremost demigods. (33 -34) 
These two sages, Nara and Nārāya ṇa, were the 
direct personal forms of the Supreme Lord. 
When Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi saw Them, he immedi-
ately stood up and then with great respect of-
fered Them obeisances by falling down flat on 
the ground like a stick. (35) The ecstasy of see-
ing Them completely satisfied Mārka ṇḍeya’s 
body, mind and senses and caused the hairs on 
his body to stand on end and h is eyes to fill with 
tears. Overwhelmed, Mārka ṇḍeya found it dif-
ficult to look at Them. (36) Standing with his 
hands folded in supplication and his head 
bowed in humility, Mārka ṇḍeya felt such ea-
gerness that he imagined he was embracing the 
two Lords. In a  voice choked with ecstasy, he 
repeatedly said, “I offer You my humble obei-
sances.” (37) He gave Them sitting places and 
washed Their feet, and then he worshiped 
Them with presentations of arghya, sandal-
wood pulp, fragrant oils, incense and flower 
garlands . (38) Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi once again 
bowed down at the lotus feet of those two most 
worshipable sages, who were sitting at ease, 
ready to bestow all mercy upon him. He then 
addressed Them as follows. (39)   
Śrī Mārka ṇḍeya said:  O Almighty Lord, 
how can I possib ly describe You? You awaken 
the vital air, which then impels the mind, senses 
and power of speech to act. This is true for all 
ordinary conditioned souls and even for great 
demigods like Brahmā and Śiva. So it is cer-
tainly true for me. Nevertheless, You be come 
the intimate friend of those who worship You. 
(40) O Supreme Personality of Godhead, these 
two personal forms of Yours have appeared to 
bestow the ultimate benefit for the three 
worldsthe cessation of material misery and the 
conquest of death. My Lord , although You cre-
ate this universe and then assume many tran-
scendental forms to protect it, You also swal-
low it up, just like a spider who spins and later 
withdraws its web. (41) Because You are the 
protector and the supreme controller of all 
moving and n onmoving beings, anyone who 
takes shelter of Your lotus feet can never be 
touched by the contamination of material work, 
material qualities or time. Great sages who 
have assimilated the essential meaning of the 
Vedas offer their prayers to You. To gain You r 
association, they bow down to You at every op-
portunity and constantly worship You and 
meditate upon You. (42) My dear Lord, even 
Lord Brahmā, who enjoys his exalted position 
for the entire duration of the universe, fears the 
passage of time. Then what to  speak of those 
whom Brahmā creates, the conditioned souls. 
They encounter fearful dangers at every step of 
their lives. I do not know of any relief from this 
fear except shelter at Your lotus feet, which are 
the very form of liberation. (43) Therefore, I 
worship Your lotus feet, having renounced my 
identification with the material body and eve-
rything else that covers my true self. These use-
less, insubstantial and temporary coverings are 
merely presumed to be separate from You, 
whose intelligence encompasse s all truth. By 
attaining Youthe Supreme Godhead and the 
master of the soulone attains everything desir-
able. (44) O my Lord, O supreme friend of the 
conditioned soul, although for the creation, 
maintenance and annihilation of this world You 
accept the mode s of goodness, passion and ig-
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

906 
 norance, which constitute Your illusory po-
tency, You specifically employ the mode of 
goodness to liberate the conditioned souls. The 
other two modes simply bring them suffering, 
illusion and fear. (45) O Lord, because fearless-
ness, spiritual happiness and the kingdom of 
God are all achieved through the mode of pure 
goodness, Your devotees consider this mode, 
but never passion and ignorance, to be a direct 
manifestation of You, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. Intelligent pers ons thus worship 
Your beloved transcendental form, composed 
of pure goodness, along with the spiritual forms 
of Your pure devotees. (46) I offer my humble 
obeisances to Him, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. He is the all -pervading and all -inclu-
sive form  of the universe, as well as its spiritual 
master. I bow down to Lord Nārāya ṇa, the su-
premely worshipable Deity appearing as a sage, 
and also to the saintly Nara, the best of human 
beings, who is fixed in perfect goodness, fully 
in control of his speech, a nd the propagator of 
the Vedic literatures. (47) A materialist, his in-
telligence perverted by the action of his decep-
tive senses, cannot recognize You at all, alt-
hough You are always present within his own 
senses and heart and also among the objects of 
his perception. Yet even though one’s under-
standing has been covered by Your illusory po-
tency, if one obtains Vedic knowledge from 
You, the supreme spiritual master of all, he can 
directly understand You. (48) My dear Lord, 
the Vedic literatures alone reveal confidential 
knowledge of Your supreme personality, and 
thus even such great scholars as Lord Brahmā 
himself are bewildered in their attempt to un-
derstand You through empirical methods. Each 
philosopher understands You according to his 
particular speculati ve conclusions. I worship 
that Supreme Person, knowledge of whom is 
hidden by the bodily designations covering the 
conditioned soul’s spiritual identity. (49)  

SB 12.9: Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi Sees the Illu-
sory Potency of the Lord  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  The Supreme Lo rd 
Nārāya ṇa, the friend of Nara, was satisfied by the proper glorification offered by the intelli-
gent sage Mārka ṇḍeya. Thus the Lord ad-
dressed that excellent descendant of Bh ṛgu. (1)  

The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
said:  My dear Mārka ṇḍeya, you are ind eed the 
best of all learned brāhma ṇas. You have per-
fected your life by practicing fixed meditation 
upon the Supreme Soul, as well as by focusing 
upon Me your undeviating devotional service, 
your austerities, your study of the Vedas and 
your strict adherenc e to regulative principles. 
(2) We are perfectly satisfied with your practice 
of lifelong celibacy. Please choose whatever 
benediction you desire, since I can grant your 
wish. May you enjoy all good fortune. (3)  

The sage said:  O Lord of lords, all glories  
to You! O Lord Acyuta, You remove all dis-
tress for the devotees who surrender unto You. 
That you have allowed me to see You is all the 
benediction I want. (4) Such demigods as Lord 
Brahmā achieved their exalted positions simply 
by seeing Your beautiful lo tus feet after their 
minds had become mature in yoga practice. 
And now, my Lord, You have personally ap-
peared before me. (5) O lotus -eyed Lord, O 
crest jewel of renowned personalities, although 
I am satisfied simply by seeing You, I do wish 
to see Your ill usory potency, by whose influ-
ence the entire world, together with its ruling 
demigods, considers reality to be materially 
variegated. (6)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  O wise Śaunaka, thus 
satisfied by Mārka ṇḍeya’s praise and worship, 
the Supreme Personality of Godh ead, smiling, 
replied, “So be it,” and then departed for His 
hermitage at Badarikāśrama. (7) Thinking al-
ways of his desire to see the Lord’s illusory en-
ergy, the sage remained in his āśrama, meditat-
ing constantly upon the Lord within fire, the 
sun, the moo n, water, the earth, air, lightning 
and his own heart and worshiping Him with 
paraphernalia conceived in his mind. But some-
times, overwhelmed by waves of love for the 
Lord, Mārka ṇḍeya would forget to perform his 
regular worship. (8 -9) 

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

907 
 O brāhma ṇa Śaunaka, best of the Bh ṛgus, 
one day while Mārka ṇḍeya was performing his 
evening worship on the bank of the 
Puṣpabhadrā, a great wind suddenly arose. (10) 
That wind created a terrible sound and brought 
in its wake fearsome clouds that were accom-
panied by lightning and roaring thunder and 
that poured down on all sides torrents of rain as 
heavy as wagon wheels. (11) Then the four 
great oceans appeared on all sides, swallowing 
up the surface of the earth with their wind -
tossed waves. In these oceans were terrible sea 
monsters, fearful whirlpools and ominous rum-
blings. (12) The sage saw all the inhabitants of 
the universe, including himself, tormented 
within and without by the harsh winds, the bolts 
of lightning, and the great waves rising beyond 
the sky. As the whole ea rth flooded, he grew 
perplexed and fearful. (13) Even as 
Mārka ṇḍeya looked on, the rain pouring down 
from the clouds filled the ocean more and more 
until that great sea, its waters violently whipped 
into terrifying waves by hurricanes, covered up 
all the e arth’s islands, mountains and conti-
nents. (14) The water inundated the earth, outer 
space, heaven and the celestial region. Indeed, 
the entire expanse of the universe was flooded 
in all directions, and out of all its inhabitants 
only Mārka ṇḍeya remained. H is matted hair 
scattered, the great sage wandered about alone 
in the water as if dumb and blind. (15) Tor-
mented by hunger and thirst, attacked by mon-
strous makaras and timi ṅgila fish and battered 
by the wind and waves, he moved aimlessly 
through the infini te darkness into which he had 
fallen. As he grew increasingly exhausted, he 
lost all sense of direction and could not tell the 
sky from the earth. (16) At times he was en-
gulfed by the great whirlpools, sometimes he 
was beaten by the mighty waves, and at ot her 
times the aquatic monsters threatened to devour 
him as they attacked one another. Sometimes 
he felt lamentation, bewilderment, misery, hap-
piness or fear, and at other times he experi-
enced such terrible illness and pain that he felt 
himself dying. (17 -18) Countless millions of 
years passed as Mārka ṇḍeya wandered about in 
that deluge, his mind bewildered by the illusory energy of Lord Vi ṣṇu, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. (19)  

Once, while wandering in the water, the 
brāhma ṇa Mārka ṇḍeya discovered a small is-
land, upon which stood a young banyan tree 
bearing blossoms and fruits. (20) Upon a 
branch of the northeast portion of that tree he 
saw an infant boy lying within a leaf. The 
child’s effulgence was swallowing up the dark-
ness. (21) The infant’s dark -blue complexion 
was the color of a flawless emerald, His lotus 
face shone with a wealth of beauty, and His 
throat bore marks like the lines on a conchshell. 
He had a broad chest, a finely shaped nose, 
beautiful eyebrows, and lovely ears that resem-
bled pom egranate flowers and that had inner 
folds like a conchshell’s spirals. The corners of 
His eyes were reddish like the whorl of a lotus, 
and the effulgence of His corallike lips slightly 
reddened the nectarean, enchanting smile on 
His face. As He breathed, H is splendid hair 
trembled and His deep navel became distorted 
by the moving folds of skin on His abdomen, 
which resembled a banyan leaf. The exalted 
brāhma ṇa watched with amazement as the in-
fant took hold of one of His lotus feet with His 
graceful fingers,  placed a toe within His mouth 
and began to suck. (22 -25) 

As Mārka ṇḍeya beheld the child, all his 
weariness vanished. Indeed, so great was his 
pleasure that the lotus of his heart, along with 
his lotus eyes, fully blossomed and the hairs on 
his body stood  on end. Confused as to the iden-
tity of the wonderful infant, the sage ap-
proached Him. (26) Just then the child inhaled, 
drawing Mārka ṇḍeya within His body like a 
mosquito. There the sage found the entire uni-
verse arrayed as it had been before its dissolu-
tion. Seeing this, Mārka ṇḍeya was most aston-
ished and perplexed. (27) The sage saw the en-
tire universe: the sky, heavens and earth, the 
stars, mountains, oceans, great islands and con-
tinents, the expanses in every direction, the 
saintly and demoniac living beings, the forests, 
countries, rivers, cities and mines, the agricul-
tural villages and cow pastures, and the occu-
pational and spiritual activities of the various 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

908 
 social divisions. He also saw the basic elements 
of creation along with all their by -products , as 
well as time itself, which regulates the progres-
sion of countless ages within the days of 
Brahmā. In addition, he saw everything else 
created for use in material life. All this he saw 
manifested before him as if it were real. (28 -29) 
He saw before him  the Himālaya Mountains, 
the Pu ṣpabhadrā River, and his own hermitage, 
where he had had the audience of the sages 
Nara -Nārāya ṇa. Then, as Mārka ṇḍeya beheld 
the entire universe, the infant exhaled, expel-
ling the sage from His body and casting him 
back into the ocean of dissolution. (30) In that 
vast sea he again saw the banyan tree growing 
on the tiny island and the infant boy lying 
within the leaf. The child glanced at him from 
the corner of His eyes with a smile imbued with 
the nectar of love, and Mārka ṇḍeya took Him 
into his heart through his eyes. Greatly agitated, 
the sage ran to embrace the transcendental Per-
sonality of Godhead. (31 -32) 

At that moment the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who is the original master of all mys-
ticism and who is hidden with in everyone’s 
heart, became invisible to the sage, just as the 
achievements of an incompetent person can 
suddenly vanish. (33) After the Lord disap-
peared, O brāhma ṇa, the banyan tree, the great 
water and the dissolution of the universe all 
vanished as well , and in an instant Mārka ṇḍeya 
found himself back in his own hermitage, just 
as before. (34)  

SB 12.10: Lord Śiva and Umā Glorify 
Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi 

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  The Supreme Lord 
Nārāya ṇa had arranged this opulent display of 
His bewildering potency. Mār kaṇḍeya Ṛṣi, 
having experienced it, took shelter of the Lord. 
(1) 

Śrī Mārka ṇḍeya said:  O Lord Hari, I take 
shelter of the soles of Your lotus feet, which 
bestow fearlessness upon all who surrender to 
them. Even the great demigods are bewildered by Your il lusory energy, which appears to them 
in the guise of knowledge. (2)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Lord Rudra, traveling 
in the sky on his bull and accompanied by his 
consort, Rudrā ṇī, as well as his personal asso-
ciates, observed Mārka ṇḍeya in trance. (3) 
Goddess Umā , seeing the sage, addressed Lord 
Giriśa: My lord, just see this learned brāhma ṇa, 
his body, mind and senses motionless in trance. 
(4) He is as calm as the waters of the ocean 
when the wind has ceased and the fish remain 
still. Therefore, my lord, since yo u bestow per-
fection on the performers of austerity, please 
award this sage the perfection that is obviously 
due him. (5)  

Lord Śiva replied:  Surely this saintly 
brāhma ṇa does not desire any benediction, not 
even liberation itself, for he has attained pure 
devotional service unto the inexhaustible Per-
sonality of Godhead. (6) Still, my dear 
Bhavānī, let us talk with this saintly personal-
ity. After all, association with saintly devotees 
is man’s highest achievement. (7)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Having spoken thus, 
Lord Śa ṅkara, the shelter of pure souls, master 
of all spiritual sciences and controller of all em-
bodied living beingsapproached the sage. (8) 
Because Mārka ṇḍeya’s material mind had 
stopped functioning, the sage failed to notice 
that Lord Śiva and his wife , the controllers of 
the universe, had personally come to see him. 
Mārka ṇḍeya was so absorbed in meditation that 
he was unaware of either himself or the external 
world. (9) Understanding the situation very 
well, the powerful Lord Śiva employed his 
mystic p ower to enter within the sky of 
Mārka ṇḍeya’s heart, just as the wind passes 
through an opening. (10) Śrī Mārka ṇḍeya saw 
Lord Śiva suddenly appear within his heart. 
Lord Śiva’s golden hair resembled lightning, 
and he had three eyes, ten arms and a tall body  
that shone like the rising sun. He wore a tiger 
skin, and he carried a trident, a bow, arrows, a 
sword and a shield, along with prayer beads, a 
ḍamaru drum, a skull and an ax. Astonished, 
the sage came out of his trance and thought, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

909 
 “Who is this, and wher e has he come from?” 
(11-13) Opening his eyes, the sage saw Lord 
Rudra, the spiritual master of the three worlds, 
together with Umā and Rudra’s followers. 
Mārka ṇḍeya then offered his respectful obei-
sances by bowing his head. (14) Mārka ṇḍeya 
worshiped Lord Śiva, along with Umā and 
Śiva’s associates, by offering them words of 
welcome, sitting places, water for washing their 
feet, scented drinking water, fragrant oils, 
flower garlands and ārati lamps. (15) 
Mārka ṇḍeya said: O mighty lord, what can I 
possibly do  for you, who are fully satisfied by 
your own ecstasy? Indeed, by your mercy you 
satisfy this entire world. (16) Again and again I 
offer my obeisances unto you, O all -auspicious 
transcendental personality. As the lord of good-
ness you give pleasure, in cont act with the 
mode of passion you appear most fearful, and 
you also associate with the mode of ignorance. 
(17) 

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Lord Śiva, the fore-
most demigod and the shelter of the saintly dev-
otees, was satisfied by Mārka ṇḍeya’s praise. 
Pleased, he smi led and addressed the sage. (18)  

Lord Śiva said:  Please ask me for some 
benediction, since among all givers of benedic-
tions, we three, Brahmā, Vi ṣṇu and I, are the 
best. Seeing us never goes in vain, because 
simply by seeing us a mortal achieves immor-
tality. (19) The inhabitants and ruling demigods 
of all planets, along with Lord Brahmā, the Su-
preme Lord Hari and I, glorify, worship and as-
sist those brāhma ṇas who are saintly, always 
peaceful, free of material attachment, compas-
sionate to all living beings,  purely devoted to 
us, devoid of hatred and endowed with equal 
vision. (20 -21) These devotees do not differen-
tiate between Lord Vi ṣṇu, Lord Brahmā and 
me, nor do they differentiate between them-
selves and other living beings. Therefore, be-
cause you are this  kind of saintly devotee, we 
worship you. (22) Mere bodies of water do not 
constitute holy places, nor are lifeless statues of 
the demigods actual worshipable deities. Be-
cause external vision fails to appreciate the higher essence of the holy rivers and th e demi-
gods, these purify only after a considerable 
time. But devotees like you purify immedi-
ately, just by being seen. (23) By meditating 
upon the Supreme Soul, performing austerities, 
engaging in Vedic study and following regula-
tive principles, the brāhma ṇas sustain within 
themselves the three Vedas, which are nondif-
ferent from Lord Vi ṣṇu, Lord Brahmā and me. 
Therefore, I offer my obeisances unto the 
brāhma ṇas. (24) Even the worst sinners and so-
cial outcastes are purified just by hearing about 
or seeing pe rsonalities like you. Imagine, then, 
how purified they become by directly speaking 
with you. (25)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Drinking with his ears 
Lord Śiva’s nectarean words, full of the confi-
dential essence of religion, Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi 
could not be satiated. (2 6) Mārka ṇḍeya, having 
been forced by Lord Vi ṣṇu’s illusory energy to 
wander about for a long time in the water of 
dissolution, had become extremely exhausted. 
But Lord Śiva’s words of nectar vanquished his 
accumulated suffering. Thus he addressed Lord 
Śiva. (27)  

Śrī Mārka ṇḍeya said:  It is indeed most dif-
ficult for embodied souls to understand the pas-
times of the universal controllers, for such lords 
bow down to and offer praise to the very living 
beings they rule. (28) Generally it is to induce 
embodied so uls to accept religious principles 
that the authorized teachers of religion exhibit 
ideal behavior while encouraging and praising 
the proper behavior of others. (29) This appar-
ent humility is simply a show of mercy. Such 
behavior of the Supreme Lord and Hi s personal 
associates, which the Lord effects by His own 
bewildering potency, does not spoil His power 
any more than a magician’s powers are dimin-
ished by his exhibition of tricks. (30) I offer my 
obeisances to that Supreme Personality of God-
head, who has created this entire universe 
simply by His desire and then entered into it as 
the Supersoul. By making the modes of nature 
act, He seems to be the direct creator of this 
world, just as a dreamer seems to be acting 
within his dream. He is the owner and ulti mate 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

910 
 controller of the three modes of nature, yet He 
remains alone and pure, without any equal. He 
is the supreme spiritual master of all, the origi-
nal personal form of the Absolute Truth. (31 -
32) 

O all -pervading lord, since I have received 
the benedictio n of seeing you, what other ben-
ediction can I ask for? Simply by seeing you, a 
person fulfills all his desires and can achieve 
anything imaginable. (33) But I do request one 
benediction from you, who are full of all per-
fection and able to shower down the f ulfillment 
of all desires. I ask to have unfailing devotion 
for the Supreme Personality of Godhead and 
for His dedicated devotees, especially you. (34)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Thus worshiped and 
glorified by the eloquent statements of the sage 
Mārka ṇḍeya, Lord  Śarva [Śiva], encouraged by 
his consort, replied to him as follows. (35) O 
great sage, because you are devoted to Lord 
Adhok ṣaja, all your desires will be fulfilled. 
Until the very end of this creation cycle, you 
will enjoy pious fame and freedom from old  
age and death. (36) O brāhma ṇa, may you have 
perfect knowledge of past, present and future, 
along with transcendental realization of the Su-
preme, enriched by renunciation. You have the 
brilliance of an ideal brāhma ṇa, and thus may 
you achieve the post of spiritual master of the 
Purāṇas. (37)  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Having thus granted 
Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi benedictions, Lord Śiva went 
on his way, continuing to describe to goddess 
Devī the accomplishments of the sage and the 
direct exhibition of the Lord’s illusory po wer 
that he had experienced. (38) Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi, 
the best of the descendants of Bh ṛgu, is glorious 
because of his achievement of perfection in 
mystic yoga. Even today he travels about this 
world, fully absorbed in unalloyed devotion for 
the Supreme Person ality of Godhead. (39) I 
have thus narrated to you the activities of the 
highly intelligent sage Mārka ṇḍeya, especially 
how he experienced the amazing power of the 
Supreme Lord’s illusory energy. (40) Although 
this event was unique and unprecedented, some unintelligent persons compare it to the cycle of 
illusory material existence the Supreme Lord 
has created for the conditioned soulsan endless 
cycle that has been continuing since time im-
memorial. (41)  

O best of the Bh ṛgus, this account concern-
ing Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi conveys the transcenden-
tal potency of the Supreme Lord. Anyone who 
properly narrates or hears it will never again 
undergo material existence, which is based on 
the desire to perform fruitive activities. (42)  

SB 12.11: Summary Description of the 
Mah āpuru ṣa 

ŚrīŚaunaka said:  O Sūta, you are the best 
of learned men and a great devotee of the Su-
preme Lord. Therefore, we now inquire from 
you about the definitive conclusion of all tantra 
scriptures. (1) All good fortune to you! Please 
explain to us, who a re very eager to learn, the 
process of kriyā -yoga practiced through regu-
lated worship of the transcendental Lord, the 
husband of the goddess of fortune. Please also 
explain how the Lord’s devotees conceive of 
His limbs, associates, weapons and ornaments 
in terms of particular material representations. 
By expertly worshiping the Supreme Lord, a 
mortal can attain immortality. (2 -3) 

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Offering obeisances to 
my spiritual masters, I shall repeat to you the 
description of the opulences of Lord V iṣṇu 
given in the Vedas and tantras by great author-
ities, beginning from lotus -born Brahmā. (4) 
The universal form [virā ṭ] of the Personality of 
Godhead includes the nine basic elements of 
creation, starting with the unmanifest nature, 
and their subsequent  transformations. Once this 
universal form is instilled with consciousness, 
the three planetary systems become visible 
within it. (5)  

This is the representation of the Supreme 
Lord as the universal person, in which the earth 
is His feet, the sky His navel , the sun His eyes, 
the wind His nostrils, the demigod of procrea-
tion His genitals, death His anus and the moon 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

911 
 His mind. The heavenly planets are His head, 
the directions His ears, and the demigods pro-
tecting the various planets His many arms. The 
god of death is His eyebrows, shame His lower 
lip, greed His upper lip, delusion His smile, and 
moonshine His teeth, while the trees are the al-
mighty Puru ṣa’s bodily hairs, and the clouds 
the hair on His head. (6 -8) Just as one can de-
termine the dimensions of an ordinary person 
of this world by measuring his various limbs, 
one can determine the dimensions of the 
Mahāpuru ṣa by measuring the arrangement of 
the planetary systems within His universal 
form. (9)  

Upon His chest the almighty, unborn Per-
sonality of Godhea d bears the Kaustubha gem, 
which represents the pure spirit soul, along with 
the Śrīvatsa mark, which is the direct manifes-
tation of this gem’s expansive effulgence. (10) 
His flower garland is His material energy, com-
prising various combinations of the mod es of 
nature. His yellow garment is the Vedic meters, 
and His sacred thread the syllable om com-
posed of three sounds. In the form of His two 
shark -shaped earrings, the Lord carries the pro-
cesses of Sā ṅkhya and yoga, and His crown, be-
stowing fearlessness on  the inhabitants of all 
the worlds, is the supreme position of Brah-
maloka. (11 -12) Ananta, the Lord’s sitting 
place, is the unmanifest phase of material na-
ture, and the Lord’s lotus throne is the mode of 
goodness, endowed with religion and 
knowledge. (13) The club the Lord carries is 
the chief element, prā ṇa, incorporating the po-
tencies of sensory, mental and physical 
strength. His excellent conchshell is the ele-
ment water, His Sudarśana disc the element 
fire, and His sword, pure as the sky, the element 
ether. His shield embodies the mode of igno-
rance, His bow, named Śār ṅga, time, and His 
arrow -filled quiver the working sensory or-
gans. (14 -15) His arrows are said to be the 
senses, and His chariot is the active, forceful 
mind. His external appearance is the s ubtle ob-
jects of perception, and the gestures of His 
hands are the essence of all purposeful activity. 
(16) The sun globe is the place where the Su-
preme Lord is worshiped, spiritual initiation is the means of purification for the spirit soul, and 
rendering  devotional service to the Personality 
of Godhead is the process for eradicating all 
one’s sinful reactions. (17)  

Playfully carrying a lotus, which represents 
the various opulences designated by the word 
bhaga, the Supreme Lord accepts service from 
a pair  of cāmara fans, which are religion and 
fame. (18) O brāhma ṇas, the Lord’s umbrella is 
His spiritual abode, Vaiku ṇṭha, where there is 
no fear, and Garu ḍa, who carries the Lord of 
sacrifice, is the threefold Veda. (19) The god-
dess of fortune, Śrī, who never  leaves the 
Lord’s side, appears with Him in this world as 
the representation of His internal potency. 
Viṣvaksena, the chief among His personal as-
sociates, is known to be the personification of 
the Pañcarātra and other tantras. And the Lord’s 
eight doorkee pers, headed by Nanda, are His 
mystic perfections, beginning with a ṇimā. (20) 
Vāsudeva, Sa ṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and 
Aniruddha are the names of the direct personal 
expansions of the Supreme Godhead, O 
brāhma ṇa Śaunaka. (21) One can conceive of 
the Supreme Per sonality of Godhead in terms 
of awakened consciousness, sleep and deep 
sleepwhich function respectively through ex-
ternal objects, the mind and material intelli-
genceand also in terms of the fourth, transcen-
dental level of consciousness, which is charac-
terized by pure knowledge. (22) The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Lord Hari, thus ap-
pears in four personal expansions, each exhib-
iting major limbs, minor limbs, weapons and 
ornaments. Through these distinct features, the 
Lord maintains the four phases of exis tence. 
(23) 

O best of brāhma ṇas, He alone is the self -
luminous, original source of the Vedas, perfect 
and complete in His own glory. By His material 
energy He creates, destroys and maintains this 
entire universe. Because He is the performer of 
various mat erial functions, He is sometimes de-
scribed as materially divided, yet He always re-
mains transcendentally situated in pure 
knowledge. Those who are dedicated to Him in 
devotion can realize Him to be their true Soul. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

912 
 (24) O K ṛṣṇa, O friend of Arjuna, O chief  
among the descendants of V ṛṣṇi, You are the 
destroyer of those political parties that are dis-
turbing elements on this earth. Your prowess 
never deteriorates. You are the proprietor of the 
transcendental abode, and Your most sacred 
glories, which are sung by V ṛndāvana’s cow-
herd men and women and their servants, be-
stow all auspiciousness just by being heard. O 
Lord, please protect Your devotees. (25) Any-
one who rises early in the morning and, with a 
purified mind fixed upon the Mahāpuru ṣa, qui-
etly chants thi s description of His characteris-
tics will realize Him as the Supreme Absolute 
Truth residing within the heart. (26)  

ŚrīŚaunaka said:  Please describe to us, 
who have great faith in your words, the differ-
ent sets of seven personal features and associ-
ates th e sun -god exhibits during each month, 
along with their names and activities. The asso-
ciates of the sun -god, who serve their lord, are 
personal expansions of the Supreme Personal-
ity of Godhead Hari in His feature as the pre-
siding deity of the sun. (27 -28) 

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  The sun travels among 
all the planets and thus regulates their move-
ments. It has been created by Lord Vi ṣṇu, the 
Supreme Soul of all embodied beings, through 
His beginningless material energy. (29) The 
sun-god, being nondifferent from Lo rd Hari, is 
the one soul of all the worlds and their original 
creator. He is the source of all the ritualistic ac-
tivities prescribed in the Vedas and has been 
given many names by the Vedic sages. (30) Be-
ing the source of the material energy, the Per-
sonalit y of Godhead Lord Hari in His expan-
sion as the sun -god is described in nine aspects, 
O Śaunaka: the time, the place, the endeavor, 
the performer, the instrument, the specific rit-
ual, the scripture, the paraphernalia of worship 
and the result to be achieved . (31) The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, manifesting His po-
tency of time as the sun -god, travels about in 
each of the twelve months, beginning with 
Madhu, to regulate planetary motion within the 
universe. Traveling with the sun -god in each of the twelve months is a different set of six asso-
ciates. (32)  

My dear sage, Dhātā as the sun -god, 
Kṛtasthalī as the Apsarā, Heti as the Rāk ṣasa, 
Vāsuki as the Nāga, Rathak ṛt as the Yak ṣa, Pu-
lastya as the sage and Tumburu as the 
Gandharva rule the month of Madhu. (33)  Ary-
amā as the sun -god, Pulaha as the sage, Athaujā 
as the Yak ṣa, Praheti as the Rāk ṣasa, Puñji-
kasthalī as the Apsarā, Nārada as the 
Gandharva and Kacchanīra as the Nāga rule the 
month of Mādhava. (34) Mitra as the sun -god, 
Atri as the sage, Pauru ṣeya as t he Rāk ṣasa, 
Takṣaka as the Nāga, Menakā as the Apsarā, 
Hāhā as the Gandharva and Rathasvana as the 
Yakṣa rule the month of Śukra. (35) Vasi ṣṭha 
as the sage, Varu ṇa as the sun -god, Rambhā as 
the Apsarā, Sahajanya as the Rāk ṣasa, Hūhū as 
the Gandharva, Śukra  as the Nāga and Cit-
rasvana as the Yak ṣa rule the month of Śuci. 
(36) Indra as the sun -god, Viśvāvasu as the 
Gandharva, Śrotā as the Yak ṣa, Elāpatra as the 
Nāga, A ṅgirā as the sage, Pramlocā as the Ap-
sarā and Varya as the Rāk ṣasa rule the month 
of Nabhas. (37) Vivasvān as the sun -god, 
Ugrasena as the Gandharva, Vyāghra as the 
Rākṣasa, Āsāra ṇa as the Yak ṣa, Bh ṛgu as the 
sage, Anumlocā as the Apsarā and Śa ṅkhapāla 
as the Nāga rule the month of Nabhasya. (38) 
Pūṣā as the sun -god, Dhanañjaya as the Nāga, 
Vāta a s the Rāk ṣasa, Su ṣeṇa as the Gandharva, 
Suruci as the Yak ṣa, Gh ṛtācī as the Apsarā and 
Gautama as the sage rule the month of Tapas. 
(39) Ṛtu as the Yak ṣa, Varcā as the Rāk ṣasa, 
Bharadvāja as the sage, Parjanya as the sun -
god, Senajit as the Apsarā, Viśva a s the 
Gandharva and Airāvata as the Nāga rule the 
month known as Tapasya. (40) A ṁśu as the 
sun-god, Kaśyapa as the sage, Tārk ṣya as the 
Yakṣa, Ṛtasena as the Gandharva, Urvaśī as the 
Apsarā, Vidyucchatru as the Rāk ṣasa and 
Mahāśa ṅkha as the Nāga rule the m onth of Sa-
has. (41) Bhaga as the sun -god, Sphūrja as the 
Rākṣasa, Ari ṣṭanemi as the Gandharva, Ūr ṇa as 
the Yak ṣa, Āyur as the sage, Karko ṭaka as the 
Nāga and Pūrvacitti as the Apsarā rule the 
month of Pu ṣya. (42) Tva ṣṭā as the sun -god; 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

913 
 Jamadagni, the son o f Ṛcīka, as the sage; Kam-
balāśva as the Nāga; Tilottamā as the Apsarā; 
Brahmāpeta as the Rāk ṣasa; Śatajit as the 
Yakṣa; and Dh ṛtarāṣṭra as the Gandharva main-
tain the month of I ṣa. (43) Vi ṣṇu as the sun -
god, Aśvatara as the Nāga, Rambhā as the Ap-
sarā, Sūrya varcā as the Gandharva, Satyajit as 
the Yak ṣa, Viśvāmitra as the sage and Ma-
khāpeta as the Rāk ṣasa rule the month of Ūrja. 
(44) 

All these personalities are the opulent ex-
pansions of the Supreme Personality of God-
head, Vi ṣṇu, in the form of the sun -god. Th ese 
deities take away all the sinful reactions of 
those who remember them each day at dawn 
and sunset. (45) Thus, throughout the twelve 
months, the lord of the sun travels in all direc-
tions with his six types of associates, dissemi-
nating among the inhabita nts of this universe 
purity of consciousness for both this life and the 
next. (46)  

While the sages glorify the sun -god with the 
hymns of the Sāma, Ṛg and Yajur Vedas, which 
reveal his identity, the Gandharvas also sing his 
praises and the Apsarās dance be fore his char-
iot. The Nāgas arrange the chariot ropes and the 
Yakṣas harness the horses to the chariot, while 
the powerful Rāk ṣasas push from behind. (47 -
48) Facing the chariot, the sixty thousand 
brāhma ṇa sages known as Vālakhilyas travel in 
front and off er prayers to the almighty sun -god 
with Vedic mantras. (49) For the protection of 
all the worlds, the Supreme Personality of God-
head Hari, who is unborn and without begin-
ning or end, thus expands Himself during each 
day of Brahmā into these specific catego ries of 
His personal representations. (50)  

SB 12.12: The Topics of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam Summarized  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Offering my obei-
sances to the supreme religious principle, devo-
tional service; to Lord K ṛṣṇa, the supreme cre-
ator; and to all the brāhma ṇas, I shall now de-
scribe the eternal principles of religion. (1) O great sages, I have narrated to you the wonder-
ful pastimes of Lord Vi ṣṇu, as you inquired 
about them from me. Hearing such narrations is 
the suitable engagement for a person who is ac-
tually a  human being. (2) This literature fully 
glorifies the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
Hari, who removes all His devotees’ sinful re-
actions. The Lord is glorified as Nārāya ṇa, 
Hṛṣīkeśa and the Lord of the Sātvatas. (3) This 
literature describes the mystery o f the Supreme 
Absolute Truth, the source of the creation and 
annihilation of this universe. Also presented are 
divine knowledge of Him together with the pro-
cess of its cultivation, and the transcendental 
realization one achieves. (4)  

The following topics are also narrated: the 
process of devotional service together with its 
subsidiary feature of renunciation, and the his-
tories of Mahārāja Parīk ṣit and the sage Nārada. 
(5) Also described are saintly King Parīk ṣit’s 
sitting down to fast until death in respon se to 
the curse of a brāhma ṇa’s son, and the conver-
sations between Parīk ṣit and Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī, who is the best of all brāhma ṇas. (6)  

The Bhāgavatam explains how one can at-
tain liberation at the time of death by practicing 
fixed meditation in yoga. It a lso contains a dis-
cussion between Nārada and Brahmā, an enu-
meration of the incarnations of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, and a description of 
how the universe was created in progressive se-
quence, beginning from the unmanifest stage of 
material nature . (7) 

This scripture also relates the discussions 
Vidura had with Uddhava and with Maitreya, 
inquiries about the subject matter of this 
Purāṇa, and the winding up of creation within 
the body of the Supreme Lord at the time of an-
nihilation. (8) The creatio n effected by the agi-
tation of the modes of material nature, the 
seven stages of evolution by elemental transfor-
mation, and the construction of the universal 
egg, from which arises the universal form of the 
Supreme Lordall these are thoroughly de-
scribed. ( 9) Other topics include the subtle and 
gross movements of time, the generation of the 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

914 
 lotus from the navel of Garbhodakaśāyī Vi ṣṇu, 
and the killing of the demon Hira ṇyākṣa when 
the earth was delivered from the Garbhodaka 
Ocean. (10) The Bhāgavatam also des cribes the 
creation of demigods, animals and demoniac 
species of life; the birth of Lord Rudra; and the 
appearance of Svāyambhuva Manu from the 
half-man, half -woman Īśvara. (11) Also related 
are the appearance of the first woman, 
Śatarūpā, who was the exce llent consort of 
Manu, and the offspring of the pious wives of 
Prajāpati Kardama. (12) The Bhāgavatam de-
scribes the incarnation of the Supreme Person-
ality of Godhead as the exalted sage Kapila and 
records the conversation between that greatly 
learned soul and His mother, Devahūti. (13)  

Also described are the progeny of the nine 
great brāhma ṇas, the destruction of Dak ṣa’s 
sacrifice, and the history of Dhruva Mahārāja, 
followed by the histories of King P ṛthu and 
King Prācīnabarhi, the discussion between 
Prācīnabarhi and Nārada, and the life of 
Mahārāja Priyavrata. Then, O brāhma ṇas, the 
Bhāgavatam tells of the character and activities 
of King Nābhi, Lord Ṛṣabha and King Bharata. 
(14-15) The Bhāgavatam gives an elaborate de-
scription of the earth’s continents, regions, 
oceans, mountains and rivers. Also described 
are the arrangement of the celestial sphere and 
the conditions found in the subterranean re-
gions and in hell. (16)  

The rebirth of Prajāpati Dak ṣa as the son of 
the Pracetās, and the progeny of Dak ṣa’s 
daughters, who initiated the races of demigods, 
demons, human beings, animals, serpents, birds 
and so onall this is described. (17) O 
brāhma ṇas, also recounted are the births and 
deaths of V ṛtrāsura and of Diti’s sons 
Hiraṇyākṣa and Hira ṇyakaśipu, as well as the 
history of the greatest of Diti’s descendants, the 
exalted soul Prahlāda. (18)  

The reign of each Manu, the liberation of 
Gajendra, and the special incarnations of Lord 
Viṣṇu in each manvantara, such as Lord 
Hayaśīr ṣā, are described as well. (19) Th e 
Bhāgavatam also tells of the appearances of the Lord of the universe as Kūrma, Matsya, Nara-
siṁha and Vāmana, and of the demigods’ 
churning of the Milk Ocean to obtain nectar. 
(20) An account of the great battle fought be-
tween the demigods and the demons,  a system-
atic description of the dynasties of various 
kings, and narrations concerning Ik ṣvāku’s 
birth, his dynasty and the dynasty of the pious 
Sudyumnaall are presented within this litera-
ture. (21) Also related are the histories of Ilā 
and Tārā, and the description of the descend-
ants of the sun -god, including such kings as 
Śaśāda and N ṛga. (22) The histories of 
Sukanyā, Śaryāti, the intelligent Kakutstha, 
Khaṭvāṅga, Māndhātā, Saubhari and Sagara are 
narrated. (23) The Bhāgavatam narrates the 
sanctifying p astimes of Lord Rāmacandra, the 
King of Kośala, and also explains how King 
Nimi abandoned his material body. The appear-
ance of the descendants of King Janaka is also 
mentioned. (24) The Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam de-
scribes how Lord Paraśurāma, the greatest de-
scenda nt of Bh ṛgu, annihilated all the k ṣatriyas 
on the face of the earth. It further recounts the 
lives of glorious kings who appeared in the 
dynasty of the moon -godkings such as Aila, 
Yayāti, Nahu ṣa, Du ṣmanta’s son Bharata, 
Śāntanu and Śāntanu’s son Bhī ṣma. Al so de-
scribed is the great dynasty founded by King 
Yadu, the eldest son of Yayāti. (25 -26) 

How Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and Lord of the universe, descended 
into this Yadu dynasty, how He took birth in 
the home of Vasudeva, and how He t hen grew 
up in Gokulaall this is described in detail. (27) 
Also glorified are the innumerable pastimes of 
Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the enemy of the demons, including 
His childhood pastimes of sucking out Pūtanā’s 
life air along with her breast milk, breaking the 
cart, t rampling down T ṛṇāvarta, killing 
Bakāsura, Vatsāsura and Aghāsura, and the 
pastimes He enacted when Lord Brahmā hid 
His calves and cowherd boyfriends in a cave. 
(28-29) The Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam tells how 
Lord K ṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma killed the de-
mon Dhenukāsu ra and his companions, how 
Lord Balarāma destroyed Pralambāsura, and 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

915 
 also how K ṛṣṇa saved the cowherd boys from a 
raging forest fire that had encircled them. (30)  

The chastisement of the serpent Kāliya; the 
rescue of Nanda Mahārāja from a great snake; 
the severe vows performed by the young gopīs, 
who thus satisfied Lord K ṛṣṇa; the mercy He 
showed the wives of the Vedic brāhma ṇas, who 
felt remorse; the lifting of Govardhana Hill fol-
lowed by the worship and bathing ceremony 
performed by Indra and the Surabhi  cow; Lord 
Kṛṣṇa’s nocturnal pastimes with the cowherd 
girls; and the killing of the foolish demons 
Śaṅkhacū ḍa, Ari ṣṭa and Keśīall these pastimes 
are elaborately recounted. (31 -33) The 
Bhāgavatam describes the arrival of Akrūra, 
the subsequent departure of  Kṛṣṇa and 
Balarāma, the lamentation of the gopīs and the 
touring of Mathurā. (34) Also narrated are how 
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma killed the elephant Kuva-
layāpī ḍa, the wrestlers Mu ṣṭika and Cā ṇūra, 
and Ka ṁsa and other demons, as well as how 
Kṛṣṇa brought back th e dead son of His spir-
itual master, Sāndīpani Muni. (35) Then, O 
brāhma ṇas, this scripture recounts how Lord 
Hari, while residing in Mathurā in the company 
of Uddhava and Balarāma, performed pastimes 
for the satisfaction of the Yadu dynasty. (36) 
Also desc ribed are the annihilation of each of 
the many armies brought by Jarāsandha, the 
killing of the barbarian king Kālayavana and 
the establishment of Dvārakā City. (37) This 
work also describes how Lord K ṛṣṇa brought 
from heaven the pārijāta tree and the Sudh armā 
assembly hall, and how He kidnapped Rukmi ṇī 
by defeating all His rivals in battle. (38) Also 
narrated are how Lord K ṛṣṇa, in the battle with 
Bāṇāsura, defeated Lord Śiva by making him 
yawn, how the Lord cut off Bā ṇāsura’s arms, 
and how He killed the m aster of Prāgjyoti ṣa-
pura and then rescued the young princesses 
held captive in that city. (39)  

There are descriptions of the powers and the 
deaths of the King of Cedi, Pau ṇḍraka, Śālva, 
the foolish Dantavakra, Śambara, Dvivida, 
Pīṭha, Mura, Pañcajana and other demons, 
along with a description of how Vārā ṇasī was burned to the ground. The Bhāgavatam also re-
counts how Lord K ṛṣṇa relieved the earth’s 
burden by engaging the Pā ṇḍavas in the Battle 
of Kuruk ṣetra. (40 -41) 

How the Lord withdrew His own dynasty on  
the pretext of the brāhma ṇas’ curse; 
Vasudeva’s conversation with Nārada; the ex-
traordinary conversation between Uddhava and 
Kṛṣṇa, which reveals the science of the self in 
complete detail and elucidates the religious 
principles of human society; and then  how Lord 
Kṛṣṇa gave up this mortal world by His own 
mystic powerthe Bhāgavatam narrates all these 
events. (42 -43) This work also describes peo-
ple’s characteristics and behavior in the differ-
ent ages, the chaos men experience in the Age 
of Kali, the four k inds of annihilation and the 
three kinds of creation. (44) There are also an 
account of the passing away of the wise and 
saintly King Vi ṣṇurāta [Parīk ṣit], an explana-
tion of how Śrīla Vyāsadeva disseminated the 
branches of the Vedas, a pious narration con-
cerning Mārka ṇḍeya Ṛṣi, and a description of 
the detailed arrangement of the Lord’s univer-
sal form and His form as the sun, the soul of the 
universe. (45)  

Thus, O best of the brāhma ṇas, I have ex-
plained herein what you have inquired from 
me. This literatur e has glorified in full detail the 
activities of the Lord’s pastime incarnations. 
(46) If when falling, slipping, feeling pain or 
sneezing one involuntarily cries out in a loud 
voice, “Obeisances to Lord Hari!” one will be 
automatically freed from all his sinful reac-
tions. (47) When people properly glorify the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead or simply 
hear about His power, the Lord personally en-
ters their hearts and cleanses away every trace 
of misfortune, just as the sun removes the dark-
ness or as a powerfu l wind drives away the 
clouds. (48) Words that do not describe the 
transcendental Personality of Godhead but in-
stead deal with temporary matters are simply 
false and useless. Only those words that mani-
fest the transcendental qualities of the Supreme 
Lord a re actually truthful, auspicious and pi-
ous. (49) Those words describing the glories of 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

916 
 the all -famous Personality of Godhead are at-
tractive, relishable and ever fresh. Indeed, such 
words are a perpetual festival for the mind, and 
they dry up the ocean of m isery. (50) Those 
words that do not describe the glories of the 
Lord, who alone can sanctify the atmosphere of 
the whole universe, are considered to be like 
unto a place of pilgrimage for crows, and are 
never resorted to by those situated in transcen-
dental  knowledge. The pure and saintly devo-
tees take interest only in topics glorifying the 
infallible Supreme Lord. (51) On the other 
hand, that literature which is full of descriptions 
of the transcendental glories of the name, fame, 
forms, pastimes and so on of the unlimited Su-
preme Lord is a different creation, full of tran-
scendental words directed toward bringing 
about a revolution in the impious lives of this 
world’s misdirected civilization. Such tran-
scendental literatures, even though imperfectly 
composed , are heard, sung and accepted by pu-
rified men who are thoroughly honest. (52) 
Knowledge of self -realization, even though 
free from all material affinity, does not look 
well if devoid of a conception of the Infallible 
[God]. What, then, is the use of even the most 
properly performed fruitive activities, which 
are naturally painful from the very beginning 
and transient by nature, if they are not utilized 
for the devotional service of the Lord? (53) The 
great endeavor one undergoes in executing the 
ordinary s ocial and religious duties of the 
varṇāśrama system, in performing austerities, 
and in hearing from the Vedas culminates only 
in the achievement of mundane fame and opu-
lence. But by respecting and attentively hearing 
the recitation of the transcendental qu alities of 
the Supreme Lord, the husband of the goddess 
of fortune, one can remember His lotus feet. 
(54) Remembrance of Lord K ṛṣṇa’s lotus feet 
destroys everything inauspicious and awards 
the greatest good fortune. It purifies the heart 
and bestows devoti on for the Supreme Soul, 
along with knowledge enriched with realization 
and renunciation. (55) O most eminent of 
brāhma ṇas, you are all indeed extremely fortu-
nate, since you have already placed within your 
hearts Lord Śrī Nārāya ṇathe Personality of Godhead , the supreme controller and the ulti-
mate Soul of all existencebeyond whom there 
is no other god. You have undeviating love for 
Him, and thus I request you to worship Him. 
(56) 

I also have now been fully reminded of the 
science of God, which I previously heard from 
the mouth of the great sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī. 
I was present in the assembly of great sages 
who heard him speak to King Parīk ṣit as the 
monarch sat fasting until death. (57)  

O brāhma ṇas, I have thus described to you 
the glories of the Supreme Lo rd Vāsudeva, 
whose extraordinary activities are most worthy 
of glorification. This narration destroys all that 
is inauspicious. (58) One who with undeviating 
attention constantly recites this literature at 
every moment of every hour, as well as one 
who fai thfully hears even one verse or half a 
verse or a single line or even half a line, cer-
tainly purifies his very self. (59) One who hears 
this Bhāgavatam on the Ekādaśī or Dvādaśī day 
is assured of long life, and one who recites it 
with careful attention whi le fasting is purified 
of all sinful reactions. (60) One who controls 
his mind, fasts at the holy places Pu ṣkara, Ma-
thurā or Dvārakā, and studies this scripture will 
be freed from all fear. (61) Upon the person 
who glorifies this Purā ṇa by chanting or hear-
ing it, the demigods, sages, Siddhas, Pitās, Ma-
nus and kings of the earth bestow all desirable 
things. (62) By studying this Bhāgavatam, a 
brāhma ṇa can enjoy the same rivers of honey, 
ghee and milk he enjoys by studying the hymns 
of the Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma Vedas. (63) A 
brāhma ṇa who diligently reads this essential 
compilation of all the Purā ṇas will go to the su-
preme destination, which the Supreme Lord 
Himself has herein described. (64)  

A brāhma ṇa who studies the Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam achieves firm intelligence  in de-
votional service, a king who studies it gains 
sovereignty over the earth, a vaiśya acquires 
great treasure and a śūdra is freed from sinful 
reactions. (65) Lord Hari, the supreme control-
ler of all beings, annihilates the accumulated 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

917 
 sins of the Kali age, yet other literatures do not 
constantly glorify Him. But that Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, appearing in His innumer-
able personal expansions, is abundantly and 
constantly described throughout the various 
narrations of this Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. (66) I 
bow down to that unborn and infinite Supreme 
Soul, whose personal energies effect the crea-
tion, maintenance and destruction of the mate-
rial universe. Even Brahmā, Indra, Śa ṅkara and 
the other lords of the heavenly planets cannot 
fathom the glories of that infallible Personality 
of Godhead. (67)  

I offer my obeisances to the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, who is the eternal Lord 
and the leader of all other deities, who by 
evolving His nine material energies has ar-
ranged within Himself the abode of all movin g 
and nonmoving creatures, and who is always 
situated in pure, transcendental consciousness. 
(68) 

Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto 
my spiritual master, the son of Vyāsadeva, 
Śukadeva Gosvāmī. It is he who defeats all in-
auspicious things within t his universe. Alt-
hough in the beginning he was absorbed in the 
happiness of Brahman realization and was liv-
ing in a secluded place, giving up all other types 
of consciousness, he became attracted by the 
pleasing, most melodious pastimes of Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa. He therefore mercifully spoke this su-
preme Purā ṇa, Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, which is 
the bright light of the Absolute Truth and which 
describes the activities of the Lord. (69)  

SB 12.13: The Glories of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam  

Sūta Gosvāmī said:  Unto that personality  
whom Brahmā, Varu ṇa, Indra, Rudra and the 
Maruts praise by chanting transcendental 
hymns and reciting the Vedas with all their cor-
ollaries, pada -kramas and Upani ṣads, to whom 
the chanters of the Sāma Veda always sing, 
whom the perfected yogīs see within t heir 
minds after fixing themselves in trance and ab-
sorbing themselves within Him, and whose limit can never be found by any demigod or 
demonunto that Supreme Personality of God-
head I offer my humble obeisances. (1) When 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead a ppeared 
as Lord Kūrma, a tortoise, His back was 
scratched by the sharp -edged stones lying on 
massive, whirling Mount Mandara, and this 
scratching made the Lord sleepy. May you all 
be protected by the winds caused by the Lord’s 
breathing in this sleepy cond ition. Ever since 
that time, even up to the present day, the ocean 
tides have imitated the Lord’s inhalation and 
exhalation by piously coming in and going out. 
(2) 

Now please hear a summation of the verse 
length of each of the Purā ṇas. Then hear of the 
prime subject and purpose of this Bhāgavata 
Purāṇa, the proper method of giving it as a gift, 
the glories of such gift -giving, and finally the 
glories of hearing and chanting this literature. 
(3) The Brahma Purā ṇa consists of ten thou-
sand verses, the Padma P urāṇa of fifty -five 
thousand, Śrī Vi ṣṇu Purā ṇa of twenty -three 
thousand, the Śiva Purā ṇa of twenty -four thou-
sand and Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam of eighteen thou-
sand. The Nārada Purā ṇa has twenty -five thou-
sand verses, the Mārka ṇḍeya Purā ṇa nine thou-
sand, the Agni Pu rāṇa fifteen thousand four 
hundred, the Bhavi ṣya Purā ṇa fourteen thou-
sand five hundred, the Brahma -vaivarta Purā ṇa 
eighteen thousand and the Li ṅga Purā ṇa eleven 
thousand. The Varāha Purā ṇa contains twenty -
four thousand verses, the Skanda Purā ṇa 
eighty -one thousand one hundred, the Vāmana 
Purāṇa ten thousand, the Kūrma Purā ṇa seven-
teen thousand, the Matsya Purā ṇa fourteen 
thousand, the Garu ḍa Purā ṇa nineteen thousand 
and the Brahmā ṇḍa Purā ṇa twelve thousand. 
Thus the total number of verses in all the 
Purāṇas is four hundred thousand. Eighteen 
thousand of these, once again, belong to the 
beautiful Bhāgavatam. (4 -9) 

It was to Lord Brahmā that the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead first revealed the Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam in full. At the time, Brahmā, 
frightened by mat erial existence, was sitting on 
the lotus flower that had grown from the Lord’s 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

918 
 navel. (10) From beginning to end, the Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam is full of narrations that encourage 
renunciation of material life, as well as nectar-
ean accounts of Lord Hari’s transc endental pas-
times, which give ecstasy to the saintly devo-
tees and demigods. This Bhāgavatam is the es-
sence of all Vedānta philosophy because its 
subject matter is the Absolute Truth, which, 
while nondifferent from the spirit soul, is the 
ultimate reality, one without a second. The goal 
of this literature is exclusive devotional service 
unto that Supreme Truth. (11 -12) 

If on the full moon day of the month of 
Bhādra one places Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam on a 
golden throne and gives it as a gift, he will at-
tain the su preme transcendental destination. 
(13) All other Purā ṇic scriptures shine forth in 
the assembly of saintly devotees only as long as 
that great ocean of nectar, Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, 
is not heard. (14)  

Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is declared to be the es-
sence of all Ve dānta philosophy. One who has 
felt satisfaction from its nectarean mellow will 
never be attracted to any other literature. (15) 
Just as the Ga ṅgā is the greatest of all rivers, 
Lord Acyuta the supreme among deities and 
Lord Śambhu [Śiva] the greatest of Va iṣṇavas, 
so Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is the greatest of all 
Purāṇas. (16) O brāhma ṇas, in the same way 
that the city of Kāśī is unexcelled among holy 
places, Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is supreme among 
all the Purā ṇas. (17) Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is the 
spotless Purā ṇa. It is most dear to the Vai ṣṇavas 
because it describes the pure and supreme 
knowledge of the paramaha ṁsas. This 
Bhāgavatam reveals the means for becoming 
free from all material work, together with the 
processes of transcendental knowledge, renun-
ciation and devoti on. Anyone who seriously 
tries to understand Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, who 
properly hears and chants it with devotion, be-
comes completely liberated. (18)  

I meditate upon that pure and spotless Su-
preme Absolute Truth, who is free from suffer-
ing and death and who in the beginning person-
ally revealed this incomparable torchlight of knowledge to Brahmā. Brahmā then spoke it to 
the sage Nārada, who narrated it to K ṛṣṇa-
dvaipāyana Vyāsa. Śrīla Vyāsa revealed this 
Bhāgavatam to the greatest of sages, Śukadeva 
Gosvāmī, a nd Śukadeva mercifully spoke it to 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit. (19) We offer our obei-
sances to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
Lord Vāsudeva, the all -pervading witness, who 
mercifully explained this science to Brahmā 
when he anxiously desired salvation. (20) I of-
fer my humble obeisances to ŚrīŚukadeva 
Gosvāmī, the best of mystic sages and a per-
sonal manifestation of the Absolute Truth. He 
saved Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, who was bitten by the 
snake of material existence. (21) O Lord of 
lords, O master, please grant us p ure devotional 
service at Your lotus feet, life after life. (22)  

I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Su-
preme Lord, Hari, the congregational chanting 
of whose holy names destroys all sinful reac-
tions, and the offering of obeisances unto 
whom relieves  all material suffering. (23)  

Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

919 
 Srimad Bhagavata Mahatmya  
Uddhav speaking Srimad Bhagavatam to 
Queens of Lord Krishna  
Chapter One  
Śāṇḍilya Muni Describes Vrajabhūmi  
Śrī Vyāsadeva said: In order to relish the 
mellows of devotional service, w e continually 
offer our obeisances unto Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, 
whose eternal form is full of knowledge and 
bliss. He is supremely enchanting and the es-
sence of all that is beautiful. He always showers 
unlimited happiness on the living entities by at-
tracting them with the qualities of His beauty 
and sweetness. He is the cause of the creation, 
maintenance, and annihilation of innumerable 
universes.  
The sages of Naimi ṣāraṇya headed by Śau-
naka, who are expert in relishing the nectarean 
topics of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, off ered obei-
sances and asked the following question to Śrī 
Sūta Gosvāmī, who possesses all knowledge.  
Śaunaka said: O best of the sages, after the 
great King Yudhi ṣṭhira installed Śrī Va-
jranābha  (the grandson of Pradyumna) at Ma-
thurā, and Parīk ṣit (his own grandson) at 
Hastināpura and then left to go back to God-
head, what did King Vajranābha and Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit do?  
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said: Before reciting this 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, which is the very means 
of conquest, one should offer respectful obei-
sances un to the Personality of Godhead, 
Nārāya ṇa, unto Nara -nārāya ṇa Ṛṣi, the super-
most human being, unto mother Sarasvatī, the 
goddess of learning, and unto Śrīla Vyāsadeva, 
the author.  
O great sages headed by Śaunaka, after 
Yudhi ṣṭhira went back to Godhead, Mahār āja 
Parīk ṣit, desiring to see Vajranābha, went to 
Mathurā one day.  Vajranābha's heart was filled with affection 
when he heard that Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, who was 
equal to his own father, was coming to see him. 
He went out of the city, fell at Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit's feet, and then brought him to his pal-
ace. 
The great hero Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, who was 
always absorbed in thoughts of Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
lovingly embraced Vajranābha. They entered 
the inner palace and offered obeisances to Ro-
hiṇī, the chief of Lord K ṛṣṇa's one hu ndred and 
eight wives.  
The wives welcomed the King according to 
custom. Mahārāja Parīk ṣit then happily sat on a 
comfortable seat, and after resting a while he 
spoke to Vajranābha.  
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit said: Dear Vajranābha! 
Your father and grandfather saved m y father 
and grandfather from great dangers. I was also 
fully protected by your great -grandfather, Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. Even if I wanted to repay their kindness, 
I would never be able to. Therefore I humbly 
request you to happily engage your subordi-
nates in the aff airs of the state. You should 
never worry about protecting your treasury, ex-
panding your army, or subduing your enemies. 
Simply engage yourself in the service of your 
mothers.  
Please tell me what is the cause of your dis-
tress and rest assured that I will d ispel all your 
troubles.  
Hearing Mahārāja Parīk ṣit's words, Va-
jranābha was greatly pleased and he replied:  
Mahārāja! Whatever you have told me is 
quite proper. Your father has greatly obliged 
me by instructing me in the science of archery. 
Therefore I hav e not even the slightest worry. 
By his mercy I have become expert in the mili-
tary science of the k ṣatriyas. I have only one 
problem.  Please consider it.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

920 
 Although I've been installed as the King of 
Mathurā, I feel like I am living in a secluded 
forest. The  happiness of a kingdom is due to the 
people that live there, and I have no idea where 
the residents of this place have gone.  
Hearing Vajranābha's words, Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit called for Śā ṇḍilya Ṛṣi in order to clear 
Vajranābha's doubts. Śā ṇḍilya Ṛṣi had prev i-
ously acted as the priest for Nanda Mahārāja 
and the cowherd men. When Śā ṇḍilya Ṛṣi re-
ceived the message from Parīk ṣit Mahārāja, he 
left his āśrama and came before the kings. Va-
jranābha welcomed the best of sages with the 
proper ceremonies and had sit him  on an ele-
vated seat. Parīk ṣit Mahārāja told Śā ṇḍilya Ṛṣi 
everything that Vajranābha had just said. The 
sage affectionately comforted them with the 
following words.  
Śāṇḍilya Ṛṣi said: Dear Parīk ṣit and Va-
jranābha! I will tell you the secret of Vra-
jabhūmi. Listen carefully. The meaning of the 
word “Vraja” is all -pervasive. According to an-
cient opinions, this land is named Vraja be-
cause it is all -pervasive. This land is an all -per-
vasive spiritual manifestation, situated beyond 
the three modes of material natu re. Therefore 
this is called Vraja. This land is ever -blissful, 
effulgent, indestructible, and the abode of lib-
erated souls. Dear kings, in this land of Vraja 
the self -realized souls and devotees, who relish 
love of God, constantly experience K ṛṣṇa, 
whose form is sac -cid-ānanda. Śrīmatī 
Rādhikā, the daughter of Mahārāja V ṛṣabhanu, 
is like the ātmā of Lord Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the son of 
Nanda Mahārāja. She eternally enjoys pastimes 
with K ṛṣṇa, and therefore the devotees expert 
in enjoying transcendental mellows call Kṛṣṇa 
ātmārāma. The meaning of the word kāma is 
desire. In Vraja, K ṛṣṇa's only desire is to en-
gage in pastimes with the cows, and the cow-
herd boys and girls. Because He always 
achieves the fulfillment of this desire, He is called āptakāma. These pastimes o f the Lord 
are beyond material nature. Whenever the Lord 
enjoys His pastimes in this world, even ordi-
nary people are benefited. The creation, 
maintenance, and annihilation of the material 
world are carried out respectively by the quali-
ties of passion, good ness, and ignorance. In this 
way, two types of pastimes of Govinda —tran-
scendental and ordinary —are manifested. His 
transcendental pastimes are self -evident. This 
means that these pastimes are relished in Vraja 
by Śrī K ṛṣṇa, the topmost expert in loving ex-
changes. The ordinary pastimes consist of de-
livering the fallen souls and minimizing the 
burden of the earth in Vraja, Mathurā, and 
Dvārakā. There cannot be ordinary pastimes 
without transcendental pastimes. Ordinary pas-
times have no entrance into the trans cendental 
pastimes. The pastimes experienced by the two 
of you are ordinary pastimes. The jurisdiction 
of the ordinary pastimes stretches from this 
planet up to the heavenly planets, and Mathurā -
maṇḍala is situated within this planet. The fa-
mous Vrajabhūmi  is situated in this area, and 
the Lord's confidential pastimes are enacted 
here. Sometimes these pastimes are manifest to 
the devotees whose hearts are filled with devo-
tion. At the end of the Dvāpara -yuga in the 
twenty -eighth yuga cycle, when the Lord's a s-
sociates who are qualified in the conjugal rela-
tionship assemble together, the Lord and His 
intimate associates descend, just as He recently 
enacted here. In this way the Lord incarnates 
who He desires to relish His pastimes with His 
intimate associates. At that time all the demi-
gods and other devotees also incarnate with the 
Lord.  
In these pastimes there were three kinds of 
devotees present. There is no doubt about it. Of 
these three kinds of devotees, the first are the 
Lord's intimate eternal associates , the second 
are those aspiring to become eternal associates, 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

921 
 and the third are the demigods and their expan-
sions whom the Lord has previously already 
sent to Dvārakā.  
Now the demigods who had appeared as 
Yādavas have been sent by the Lord back to 
their d uties in the heavenly planets through the 
brāhma ṇa's curse in the Lord's mausala -līlā. 
And the Lord awarded spiritual forms to the 
devotees who aspired to become His eternal as-
sociates. The Lord then brought these devotees 
together with His intimate eterna l associates of 
the vāstavī, spiritual pastimes and they thus dis-
appeared from the vision of the ordinary peo-
ple.  
Therefore, common people, who are situ-
ated in the vyavaharika pastimes, are unquali-
fied to enter the Lord's eternal pastimes and see 
the eter nal associates of the vāstavī pastimes. 
That is why this place appears to be devoid of 
people.  
Therefore Vajranābha, you should not worry 
in the least. By following my instructions and 
establishing many towns here, you will fulfill 
all your desires. Wherev er Lord K ṛṣṇa has per-
formed His pastimes you should establish 
towns named after the particular pastime that 
was performed at that place. In this way you 
can render very nice service to the transcenden-
tal land of Vraja.  
Establish your domain at Govardhana,  
Dirghapura (Deeg), Mathurā, Mahāvana, 
Nandagrāma (Nandagaon), and B ṛhatsanu 
(Varṣāṇā). Reside in these pastime sites of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa and engage in the service of the rivers, 
mountains, ku ṇḍas, lakes, and kuñjas of Vraja, 
for by doing so you will be happy an d the citi-
zens of your kingdom will prosper. This eter-
nal, cognizant, blissful land of Vraja should be 
served by you by all efforts. By my blessings 
you will properly identify all of the places of Lord K ṛṣṇa's pastimes. O Vajranābha, by con-
tinually serving  Vraja in this way, one day you 
will meet Śrī Uddhava.  Then he will instruct 
you and your mothers in the mysteries of Vraja 
and the pastimes of the Lord.”  
After instructing Vajranābha and Parīk ṣit in 
this way, Śā ṇḍilya, the best of the ṛṣis, returned 
to his āśrama while remembering Lord K ṛṣṇa. 
Parīk ṣit and Vajranābha felt great ecstasy after 
hearing his instructions.  
Chapter Two  
Parīk ṣit and K ṛṣṇa's Wives, While Chanting 
the Glories  
Of the Lord, Met Uddhava  
The sages said: O Sūta Gosvāmī, please tell 
us w hat Mahārāja Parīk ṣit and King Va-
jranābha did after the best of the munis, 
Śāṇḍilya, returned to his āśrama.  
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said: Mahārāja Parīk ṣit 
brought thousands of prominent brāhma ṇas and 
kṣatriyas from Indraprastha and repopulated 
Mathurā.  
Mahā rāja Parīk ṣit gave respect to the 
brāhma ṇas and monkeys who were already re-
siding there because he understood they are 
dear to the Lord. With the help of Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit and by the mercy of Śā ṇḍilya Ṛṣi, Va-
jranābha gradually searched out the sites where 
Kṛṣṇa had enjoyed pastimes with His beloved 
cowherd boyfriends and girlfriends. After 
properly ascertaining the pastime site, he 
named the site according to the pastime that 
was performed there. He thus established and 
named various towns, ku ṇḍas, wells, k uñjas, 
and gardens, and he established many Śiva tem-
ples. He established Deities of the Lord such as 
Govindadeva and Harideva, and his entire 
kingdom became blissful because devotion to 
Lord K ṛṣṇa was preached everywhere. The cit-
izens always engaged in glo rifying Lord K ṛṣṇa 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

922 
 and thus merged in an ocean of bliss, they 
praised the rule of King Vajranābha.  
One day, Lord K ṛṣṇa's sixteen thousand 
queens, who were suffering due to separation, 
inquired without envy from their fellow wife, 
Kālindī, who they saw was happy.  
Kṛṣṇa's Queens said: O beautiful Kālindī! 
Just as we are all K ṛṣṇa's wives, so are you. We 
are all continually burning in the fire of separa-
tion and our hearts are distressed with unhappi-
ness due to His absence. But you are not in this 
condition, yo u are happy. Why is this? Please 
tell us the reason.  
After understanding the pain of separation 
felt by her co -wives, Kālindī, with great com-
passion, smiled and spoke as follows:  
Kālindī said: Śrī Rādhikā is the soul of 
Kṛṣṇa, who is known as ātmārāma. I a m always 
engaged in Her service. Due to the influence of 
this service, the pain of separation could not 
touch me. All of K ṛṣṇa's consorts are expan-
sions of Śrī Rādhikā. And because K ṛṣṇa is al-
ways engaged in enjoying with Śrī Rādhikā, all 
of Kṛṣṇa's other consorts are automatically be-
ing enjoyed by Him. K ṛṣṇa is nondifferent from 
Śrī Rādhikā, and Śrī Rādhikā is nondifferent 
from K ṛṣṇa. Their love is manifest in the form 
of Kṛṣṇa's flute. Śrī Candrāvalī Sakhi is a man-
ifestation of the moonlike nails of Śrī 
Kṛṣṇacandra. Due to an excessive greed to 
serve Rādhā -Kṛṣṇa, Candrāvalī has not ac-
cepted any other form. But I have seen Śrī 
Rukmi ṇī and other sakhis situated in Śrī 
Rādhikā. And you also have never been sepa-
rated from K ṛṣṇa, but you are overwhelmed be-
cause  this mystery is unknown to you. Previ-
ously, when Akrūra came to V ṛndāvana, the 
gopīs experienced similar feelings of separa-
tion, although actually that was not separation, 
it was simply a reflection of separation. But 
when Uddhava came and consoled them, their pain of separation was destroyed. Now if you 
are able to get the association of Uddhava, then 
you will also achieve the happiness of eternal 
pastimes with your beloved Śrī K ṛṣṇa. 
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said: O sages! When 
Kṛṣṇa's queens were instructed i n this way, 
they again addressed the ever -blissful Kālindī. 
At that time they all hankered for some way to 
meet Uddhava, so that they could all achieve 
the great fortune of eternal association with 
their beloved.  
Kṛṣṇa's Queens said: O Sakhi, your life is 
glorious, because you have never experienced 
the distress of separation from the Lord of your 
life. We would also like to become Rādhā's 
maidservants, just like you. But, O Kālindī, you 
have told us that all our desires would be ful-
filled by meeting Uddhav a, so please tell us 
how we can meet him.  
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said: After hearing the 
words of her co -wives, Kālindī remembered 
Kṛṣṇa, who possesses sixty -four qualities in 
full. Just before Lord K ṛṣṇa returned to His su-
preme abode, He told His minister Udd hava 
that Badarikāśrama is a suitable place to engage 
in spiritual activities. Following that instruc-
tion, Uddhava stays there and instructs those 
who visit him in the same knowledge that was 
taught to him by the Lord. The Lord taught Ud-
dhava about the mys teries of Vraja, where the 
fruits of spiritual practice are obtained. But 
since the personification of the fruits of spir-
itual practice, Lord K ṛṣṇa, has apparently left 
this place, Uddhava is also no longer seen here. 
Being desirous to associate with the d ust of 
Vraja, however, Uddhava is certainly residing 
near Govardhana at Sakhīsthalī in the form of a 
creeper. Uddhava is the personification of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa's festivals. Therefore go to Kusuma -sa-
rovara with Vajranābha and organize a festival 
there. Assemble the Lord's devotees and start a 
big festival by chanting the Lord's holy names 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

923 
 and pastimes accompanied by vī ṇās, flutes, and 
mṛdaṅgas.  
In this way when the festival expands, Ud-
dhava will certainly appear there. And by his 
mercy all your desires will be f ulfilled.  
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said: After hearing 
Kālindī speak these words Lord K ṛṣṇa's queens 
were greatly pleased. After they offered their 
respects to Kālindī they went and told Va-
jranābha and Parīk ṣit everything that they had 
heard.  
After hearing thei r narration, Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit was greatly pleased and accompanied 
them to Kusuma -sarovara and began organiz-
ing a festival there. They began a festival of 
nama sankīrtana at Sakhīsthalī, a short distance 
from Govardhana. As they glorified Lord 
Kṛṣṇa at tha t place where He always enjoys 
pastimes with His beloved, the daughter of 
Vṛṣabhanu, the place was transformed into an 
extraordinary scene. They became fully ab-
sorbed in glorifying Lord K ṛṣṇa.  
At that time, from amidst the grass, vines, 
and creepers Śrī U ddhava appeared before eve-
ryone. His complexion was bluish, and he wore 
yellow garments. He was decorated with a gar-
land of forest flowers and guñjā, and he repeat-
edly glorified K ṛṣṇa, the lover of the gopīs. 
Then the beauty of the sa ṅkīrtana festival in-
creased many times over just as when the 
moonshine falls on a crystal house. Similarly 
everyone was merged in an ocean of bliss by 
his appearance there, and they forgot what they 
were doing. When they regained their external 
consciousness, they saw Uddhava, who resem-
bles Lord K ṛṣṇa, and by worshiping him, they 
fulfilled all their desires.  
Chapter Three  
The Glories of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam,  
The Speaker and the Hearer’s  Attainment of the Supreme Abode.  
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said: Seeing everyone 
engaged in glorifyin g Lord K ṛṣṇa, Śrī Uddhava 
offered his respects and embraced them. He 
spoke with Mahārāja Parīk ṣit. 
Śrī Uddhava said: O King, you are certainly 
glorious. Your desire has been fulfilled by your 
undivided devotional service to Lord K ṛṣṇa, 
because your mind is  absorbed in this sa ṅkīr-
tana festival. It is your great fortune that you 
have such incomparable affection for Va-
jranābha and K ṛṣṇa's queens. This is quite 
proper because Lord K ṛṣṇa has given you this 
body and power.  Among the residents of 
Dvārakā, they ar e the most glorious. There is 
no doubt about it. Lord K ṛṣṇa ordered Arjuna 
to escort them to Vraja so that they could reside 
there. Illuminated by the effulgence of Śrīmatī 
Rādhārā ṇī's face, the moonlike mind of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa constantly illuminates Śrī V ṛndāv ana, 
the site of Rādhā's pastimes. Śrī K ṛṣṇacandra is 
eternally complete. Thousands of spiritual 
sparks oscillate in all directions from His sixty -
four qualities. The full moonlike K ṛṣṇa, who 
possesses sixty -four prominent qualities, is 
constantly illumina ting this land of Vraja. O 
King, the right foot of Lord K ṛṣṇa is the resi-
dence of Vajranābha, who destroys the fear of 
his subordinates. In this incarnation, Lord Śrī 
Kṛṣṇa has bewildered everyone through 
Yogamāyā. By her influence, they have forgot-
ten the ir constitutional position and they appear 
miserable. There is no doubt about it. Without 
Kṛṣṇa manifesting in one's heart, no one can re-
alise his constitutional position. K ṛṣṇa's mani-
festation within the hearts of the living entities 
has been covered by M āyā. When Lord Hari 
personally appears at the end of Dvāpara -yuga 
in the twenty -eighth yuga cycle and lifts the 
covering of Māyā, then He becomes manifest. 
O Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, the time of those manifest 
pastimes has recently ended. Therefore I will 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

924 
 now te ll you the means of having K ṛṣṇa mani-
fest within one's heart. When Lord K ṛṣṇa is un-
manifest, He will appear from Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam. Whenever and wherever the dev-
otee Bhāgavata hears and recites the book 
Bhāgavata, at that time and at that place Lord 
Kṛṣṇa personally appears. Wherever a verse of 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, or even a half -verse of 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, is recited, Lord K ṛṣṇa 
and His beloved gopīs manifest there. After at-
taining a human birth in the land of Bharata, 
those who do not hear Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam  due 
to sinful activities are committing suicide. A 
person who regularly hears or recites Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam delivers the forefathers of his 
wife, mother, and father.  
By studying and hearing Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam, brāhma ṇas are enlightened with 
knowledge, k ṣatriyas achieve victory over their 
enemies, vaiśyas acquire wealth, and śūdras are 
freed from disease. Women and lower class 
people all achieve the fulfillment of their de-
sires. Therefore what fortunate person will not 
regularly hear and chant the Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam?  
After many lifetimes of performing pious 
activities, when a person achieves full perfec-
tion then he obtains the Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. 
By reading Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam one's devo-
tional sentiments are awakened and Lord K ṛṣṇa 
manifests within the heart.  
Long ago, B ṛhaspati, the spiritual master of 
the demigods, heard the Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam 
by the mercy of Sā ṅkhyāyana Ṛṣi, and 
Bṛhaspati has narrated the same to me. I was 
therefore able to become the dear friend of Lord 
Kṛṣṇa. O Mahārāja Parīk ṣit, Bṛhaspati has  told 
me one story. Please hear it from me. From this 
story one can know the method of hearing 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam from the proper authori-
ties. Bṛhaspati said: O Uddhava, when Lord 
Kṛṣṇa accepted the puru ṣa incarnations and 
glanced over material nature to cr eate, then the 
three personalities —Brahmā, Vi ṣṇu, and 
Śiva—appeared along with the three modes of 
material nature —sattva, raja, and tama. Lord 
Kṛṣṇa then assigned the work of creation, 
maintenance, and destruction to the three pre-
dominating deities. Lord B rahmā appeared 
from the lotus sprouted from the navel of the 
Lord.  
Lord Brahmā said: O Lord! I offer my re-
spectful obeisances unto You. Because You lie 
in the transcendental water known as nāra, You 
are known as Nārāya ṇa. And as the original 
cause of every thing You are ādi -puruṣa, the 
original person. O Lord, although I am sinful 
and full of the mode of passion, You have en-
gaged me in the work of creation. But I pray for 
Your blessing that my engagement in the activ-
ities of creation will not be an impedimen t in 
my remembering Your lotus feet.  
Bṛhaspati said: After Brahmā offered these 
prayers to Lord Nārāya ṇa, at that time, long 
ago, the Lord gave Brahmā the Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam and told him: “To achieve fulfill-
ment of your desires, always serve this Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam.” On receiving Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam, Lord Brahmā was greatly 
pleased. In order to attain Lord K ṛṣṇa and pen-
etrate the seven coverings, he recited Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam for seven days. All Brahmā's de-
sires were fulfilled by serving Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam for th at seven day sacrifice. Since 
then he has always been engaged in expanding 
the creation and repeatedly reciting the Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam. As done by Brahmā, Lord Vi ṣṇu 
also prayed for the fulfillment of His desires so 
that He could engage in maintaining the c rea-
tion. 
Lord Vi ṣṇu said: O Lord, I will accept the 
paths of prav ṛtti and nirv ṛtti due to the need for 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

925 
 fruitive activities and philosophical knowledge. 
Following Your order, I will duly maintain the 
living entities. In due course of time, whenever 
there is  a decline in religious principles, I will 
accept various incarnations in order to reestab-
lish the principles of religion. I will certainly 
award the fruits of their sacrifice to those who 
desire material enjoyment, and I will award five 
kinds of liberatio n, beginning with sālokya, to 
those who are renounced and desirous to 
achieve liberation. But please tell Me how to 
maintain My dear Lak ṣmī and those who have 
no desire for the five kinds of liberation.  
After hearing Vi ṣṇu's prayers, the primeval 
Lord, Nār āyaṇa, told Him: “In order to achieve 
the fulfillment of all Your desires, just recite 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam.” Lord Vi ṣṇu was very 
pleased to receive this instruction from Lord 
Nārāya ṇa. He engaged every month along with 
Lakṣmīdevī in the recitation of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam. Thus He was able to maintain the 
creation. Whenever Lord Vi ṣṇu recites Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam, Lak ṣmīdevī listens. This takes 
one full month. And whenever Lak ṣmīdevī 
speaks Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam and Vi ṣṇu listens, 
it takes two months to relish the mello ws of the 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. At that time the taste of 
those topics become extremely palatable. The 
reason for this is that Vi ṣṇu is engaged in main-
taining the creation, therefore He is preoccu-
pied with many thoughts. But this is not the 
case with Lak ṣmīde vī, who is fully peaceful. 
The topics of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam are therefore 
more elaborately manifested in her heart.  
Thereafter the Lord engaged Śiva in the 
work of annihilation. In order to expand his 
own ability, Śiva also prayed to the Lord.  
Śrī Rudra sa id: O Lord of lords, I have the 
power to engage in three types of destruction —
perpetual, occasional, and partial. But, O Lord, 
I have no power at all for the final destruction. For this reason I am very unhappy. I am there-
fore praying to You.  
Bṛhaspati sai d: Hearing the prayers of Ru-
dra, Lord Nārāya ṇa also instructed him on the 
topics of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. Śrī Rudradeva 
then conquered the mode of ignorance just by 
serving Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. Sadāśiva Rudra 
then recited Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam over a period 
of one year. He thus attained the power of final 
destruction.  
Śrī Uddhava said: I have heard these glories 
of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam from the mouth of  Śrī 
Bṛhaspati, my spiritual master. Now I offer my 
respectful obeisances to him for I have become 
happy by hearing t he instructions of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam. According to the Vai ṣṇava tradi-
tion, I served Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam for just one 
month. Due to the influence of this service, I 
have become the dear friend of Lord K ṛṣṇa, and 
He therefore sent me to V ṛndāvana to serve his 
beloved gopīs. Although K ṛṣṇa eternally en-
joys pastimes in V ṛndāvana, His beloved gopīs 
were afflicted by feelings of separation. He 
therefore sent me here to impart the teachings 
of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam to the gopīs. The gopīs 
of Vraja were thus freed from t he pains of sep-
aration by accepting the teachings of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam according to their own intelli-
gence. Even though I do not understand the 
mystery of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, still I have ex-
perienced the wonder of this great literature. 
When the demigods, h eaded by Lord Brahmā, 
prayed to Lord K ṛṣṇa that He shall return to His 
own abode, at that time, under a banyan tree, 
the Lord personally taught me the mystery of 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. As a result of that instruc-
tion my intelligence became fixed and I pro-
ceede d to Badarikāśrama and attained perfec-
tion. Since then I am living here in Vraja as a 
creeper.  
O Parīk ṣit, I am therefore living here at 
Nārada -kuṇḍa. The devotees will realise Lord 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

926 
 Kṛṣṇa by serving Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. There-
fore I will explain Śrīmad -Bhāgav atam for the 
benefit of the devotees of the Lord. This will be 
possible only with your help.  
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said: After hearing this, 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit offered his obeisances to Ud-
dhava and said to him: O Uddhava, servant of 
Lord Hari! You should certa inly narrate 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam.  Whatever is necessary 
for me to do in this regard, please order me.  
Uddhava was most pleased on hearing 
Parīk ṣit Mahārāja speak in this way and said: O 
King! Since Lord K ṛṣṇa has left this world, the 
influence of Kali -yuga has become very prom-
inent. Whenever auspicious activities are being 
performed Kali certainly creates disturbances. 
Therefore you should go out and subdue the in-
fluence of Kali everywhere. I will remain here 
by your arrangement and recite Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam for one month according to 
Vaiṣṇava tradition. The audience will thus rel-
ish the mellows of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam and at-
tain the Lord's eternal abode.  
Hearing Śrī Uddhava's instructions, 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit was pleased by the thought 
of subduing Kali, but somew hat in anxiety he 
disclosed his mind to Uddhava.  
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit said: O Prabhu! I am ea-
ger to bring Kali -yuga under my control as you 
have instructed, but then how will I hear the 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam? I have also come to take 
shelter at your feet, so you should also be mer-
ciful to me.  
Hearing the king's words, Uddhava said: O 
King, there is no need for you to be worried, for 
you are the most eligible candidate to receive 
the Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. People in this world 
are always engaged in various kinds of fru itive 
activities and they do not even know the im-
portance of hearing Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. O 
King, by your mercy many people in this land of Bharata -varsa will achieve eternal happiness 
by hearing Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. The great sage 
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who is the repre-
sentative of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda 
Mahārāja, will recite Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam to 
you. There is no doubt about it. O King, you 
will attain the eternal abode of Lord K ṛṣṇa, the 
king of Vraja, by hearing Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, 
and Śrīmad -Bhāgavata m will then later be 
propagated throughout the world.  
Therefore, O King, prepare yourself to sub-
due Kali.  
After Uddhava spoke in this way, Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit offered obeisances to Uddhava and cir-
cumambulated him, and he then left to eradi-
cate Kali's influen ce in all directions.  
Vajranābha then installed his son, Pratibāhu, 
as the king of Mathurā. He stayed with his 
grandmothers simply for the purpose of hearing 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. Then at that place near 
Govardhana, Śrī Uddhava recited Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam for o ne month. While relishing the 
topics of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam the listeners saw 
Kṛṣṇa manifest everywhere along with His 
transcendental pastimes. The listeners could 
see themselves taking part in those transcen-
dental pastimes. Vajranābha saw himself situ-
ated a t the right lotus foot of Lord K ṛṣṇa, and 
thus felt relief from the pains of separation and 
pleased with the beauty of that scene. All his 
grandmothers, headed by Rohi ṇī, were most 
surprised to see themselves situated as the ef-
fulgence and portion of the m oonlike K ṛṣṇa, 
who inaugurates the night of the rasa dance. 
Being cured of the disease of separation from 
their beloved life and soul, they entered their 
supreme destination.  
Other people who were present there also 
disappeared and entered the Lord's eter nal pas-
times. They all enjoy pastimes with K ṛṣṇa in 
the kuñjas of Govardhana, the pasturing 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

927 
 grounds and forest of V ṛndāvana. The devotees 
who are greedy for attaining the mellows of 
transcendental love can always see these pas-
times.  
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said : Whoever chants or 
hears these pastimes of attaining the Lord's lo-
tus feet will certainly attain those lotus feet, and 
all his miseries from time immemorial will be 
destroyed forever.  
Chapter Four  
The Characteristics of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam,  
The Symptoms of  the Speaker  
And the Listener, and Establishing  
The Procedure for Hearing  
The sages headed by Śaunaka said: O Sūta, 
may you live a long life and continue instruct-
ing us. Today we have heard the wonderful glo-
ries of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam from your mouth. 
O Sū ta, now please mercifully describe for us 
the characteristics of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, its 
authenticity, the procedure for hearing, and the 
symptoms of the speaker and the listener.  
Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī said: The characteristics 
of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam and the Per sonality of 
Godhead are both eternal, full of knowledge 
and bliss.  
You should know that whatever transcen-
dental, sweet words come from the mouths of 
those whose hearts are attached to K ṛṣṇa, those 
statements are Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. You 
should also know that  Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam 
consists of knowledge, realized knowledge, 
and the four limbs of devotional service, such 
as hearing and chanting. It is expert in eradicat-
ing the influence of māyā, the illusory energy.  
Who can understand the authenticity of 
Śrīmad -Bhāg avatam, which is the unlimited 
sound representation of the Lord? In the begin-
ning of creation, Lord Hari spoke four verses to Lord Brahmā. O brāhma ṇas, only personalities 
such as Brahmā, Vi ṣṇu, and Śiva are able to at-
tain their desired goal by merging into  the 
ocean of the unlimited Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, 
others are able.  
Whatever Śrīla Vedavyāsa has described in 
the conversation between Parīk ṣit Mahārāja 
and Śukadeva Gosvāmī for the benefit of the 
less intelligent, that is known as Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam. Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam consists of 
18,000 verses, and it is the only shelter for 
those who are captured by the crocodile of Kali.  
Now I will describe those who listen to 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. There are two types of 
listeners —superior and inferior. The superior 
listeners are of four kinds —namely, cātaka 
bird, swan, parrot, and fish. And the inferior lis-
teners are also of four kinds —wolf, bhurunda 
bird, bull, and camel.  
Just as the cātaka bird does not take water 
from any source other than the raincloud, one 
who does not he ar any scripture or book other 
than those related with Lord K ṛṣṇa is called a 
cātaka listener.  
Just as the swan can extract milk from a mix-
ture of milk and water, one who can extract the 
essential topics of Lord K ṛṣṇa while listening 
to various topics is c alled a swan listener.  
Just as a parrot can recite to its master and 
others whatever it is taught, one who can nicely 
repeat the topics he has heard from the scrip-
tures to his guru and other listeners is called a 
parrot listener.  
Just as the fish that is s ituated in an ocean of 
condensed milk quietly drinks milk without 
blinking its eyes, one who quietly hears 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam while relishing the topics 
and staring unblinking at the speaker is called a 
fish listener.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

928 
 Just as the cry of the wolf frightens t he deer 
which is attracted by the sweet sound of a flute 
in the forest, the foolish listener whose loud 
noises create pain to the devotees engaged in 
hearing the sweet topics of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam is called a wolf listener.  
Just as the bhurunda bird that li ves in the 
Himalayas tells others whatever instruction it 
has heard without practicing himself, one who 
teaches others but does not follow those in-
structions is called a bhurunda listener.  
Just as the bull does not distinguish between 
eating sweet grapes o r pungent oilcakes, the 
blind person who listens to everything but has 
no intelligence to discriminate between good 
and bad is called a bull listener.  
Just as the camel rejects the sweet mango 
leaves and chews instead the bitter neem 
leaves, one who reject s the sweet narrations 
about the Lord and hears instead mundane top-
ics is called a camel listener.  
Apart from these two categories of listeners, 
there are many further sub classifications such 
as bumblebees and asses which one should un-
derstand by the symp toms of their normal be-
havior.  
Speakers say the topmost listener is he who 
comes before the speaker, offers due obei-
sances, and is eager and expert in hearing the 
pastimes of Lord Hari, after rejecting all types 
of mundane topics. He humbly engages in hear-
ing with folded hands like a disciple, he has full 
faith in the Lord, he is attached to asking ques-
tions, and he always contemplates the subject 
he has heard. He is a dear friend of the Lord's 
devotees.  
The topmost speakers, who are respected by 
all sages,  are those whose hearts are attached to 
the Lord without hankering for anything else. They are the well -wishers of all, they are mer-
ciful to the fallen, and they are expert in learn-
ing the truth by various arguments.  
Now, O brāhma ṇas, please hear the proce-
dure for hearing Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam in the 
land of Bharata. Simply by hearing these rules 
one enjoys everlasting happiness.  
There are four kinds of service to the 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam —sattvic, rajasic, tamasic, 
and nirgu ṇa.  
Enthusiastic service which is joyfu lly per-
formed in seven days, like a pompous sacrifice 
with various types of worshipable ingredients 
and hard labor, is called rajasic bhāgavata -sevā.  
Service which is peacefully performed over 
a month or two, while relishing the topics and 
thus increasing one's ecstasy, is called sattvic 
bhāgavata -sevā.  
Service which continues for one year, which 
is performed lazily yet faithfully, which gives 
happiness, and in which both rememberance 
and forgetfulness are present, is called tamasic 
bhāgavata -sevā.  
Service  in which there is no consideration of 
time factor but continues on with love and de-
votion, is called nirgu ṇa bhāgavata -sevā.  
Please know for certain that Mahārāja 
Parīk ṣit and Śukadeva Gosvāmī performed 
nirgu ṇa bhagavata -sevā. Although the hearing 
continu ed for only seven days, that was because 
Mahārāja Parīk ṣit's life continued for that dura-
tion only.  
One should hear Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam in any 
place or in any way one desires —whether 
sattvic, rajasic, tamasic, or nirgu ṇa.  
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is the only wealt h of 
those who are completely devoid of material 
desires, and greedy to relish hearing and chant-
ing the pastimes of Lord K ṛṣṇa. 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

929 
 Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is the medicine to cure 
the material disease of those who are indiffer-
ent to the miseries of material existenc e and de-
sire liberation. Therefore everyone should care-
fully serve Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam.  
The karmīs, who are greedy for material en-
joyment and advancement in material life, will 
attain everything they desire just by serving 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam in Kali -yuga.  
In Kali-yuga it is extremely rare to attain 
perfection on the path of karma due to a lack of 
physical ability, wealth, and knowledge. There-
fore those who wish auspiciousness should 
serve Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam in all respects.  
The topics of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam are able 
to give one wealth, children, wife, elephants, 
horses, fame, palatial residences, and a king-
dom without rivals.  
By serving the Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam one 
with material desires can enjoy all his desired 
results in this world and attain the abode of the 
Supreme Lord after giving up his body.  
One should serve anyone absorbed in dis-
cussing the topics of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam with 
one's body and wealth.  
By serving those who are absorbed in 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, one can attain the results 
of serving Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam.  
There are two types of reciters and listeners 
of the Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. Some desire K ṛṣṇa 
and some desire material prosperity. Material 
prosperity refers to anything not related to 
Kṛṣṇa. So if the reciter and listener are of the 
same category, then the h appiness from serving 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam increases.  
If the reciter and the listener are not of the 
same category, then there is a contradiction and 
no result is attained. Such a situation is called 
rasābhāsa, or overlapping of mellows. But a 
person who desi res K ṛṣṇa—whether as a speaker or listener —will certainly attain his 
goal, even if delayed.  
The speaker and listener who desire wealth 
will attain their desired goal if they act under 
rules and regulations. But those transcendental 
speakers and listeners w ho desire K ṛṣṇa will 
undoubtedly attain their goal even if they do not 
follow the rules and regulations, because love 
of God is the only rule for such persons.  
A person with material desires must rigidly 
follow all the rules through to completion. He 
shoul d regularly take bath in the morning, and 
after performing his daily worship he should 
accept the cara ṇāmrtā of Lord Hari.  
Thereafter the speaker or listener should 
worship their spiritual master and Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam with proper ingredients. They 
should h ear and chant Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam in a 
joyful mood.  
One should take a vow of silence, and eat 
only milk or sweet rice. He should sleep on the 
ground, give up all anger and greed, and prac-
tice the vow of brahmācārya.  
After finishing the recitation of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam, one should constantly chant the 
holy name of the Lord, and on the last day he 
should remain awake at night and then feed the 
brāhma ṇas and satisfy them with charity.  
One should then worship his spiritual master 
after offering him cloth, ornamen ts, and cows. 
Anyone who renders service to the Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam according to these regulations will 
surely achieve the fulfillment of all his desires.  
A person with material desires can obtain a 
beautiful wife, children, kingdom, or wealth if 
he so desir es. But such desires are a mockery to 
the stature of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam.  
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is the ripened fruit of 
the desire tree of Vedic literature. It has been 
bestowed to the world in this age of Kali by Śrī 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

930 
 Śukadeva Gosvāmī and has become more nec-
tarean by the touch of his lips. It is the direct 
means of attaining Lord K ṛṣṇa, and it eternally 
bestows love of God.  
Chapter Five  
Description of the Results of Hearing  
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, and the Condition  
Of Those Who are Averse to Such Hearing  
The Supreme  Lord said: O Grandfather 
Brahmā, one should regularly hear the famous 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam with faith. Know for cer-
tain that such hearing is the only means of sat-
isfying Me.  
One who daily reads Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam 
will attain with every syllable the results of  giv-
ing a brown cow in charity.  
One who daily reads or hears even a half or 
a quarter of a verse of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam at-
tains the results of giving one thousand cows in 
charity.  
My dear son, one who daily reads Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam with full concentration att ains the 
results of studying the eighteen Purā ṇas. 
Vaiṣṇavas like Prahlāda Mahārāja are al-
ways present wherever the topics of Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam are discussed. Those who worship 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam are beyond the jurisdic-
tion of Kali.  
Those persons who worshi p the Vai ṣṇava 
literature Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam in their house 
are freed from all sins and they become wor-
shipable by even the demigods.  
In the age of Kali, I become very pleased 
with those who regularly worship Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam in their house and dance witho ut 
fear. 
O My dear son, as long as Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam is present in one's house, for that long his forefathers consume milk, ghee, 
honey, and water.  
One who with devotion gives the gift of 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam to a Vai ṣṇava resides in 
My abode for millions of  kalpas.  
One who always worships Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam in his house satisfies the demigods 
for the duration of one kalpa.  
If even a half or a quarter of a verse of 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is kept in one's house that 
is glorious. For what is the need of accumulat-
ing thousands of other literatures?  
In Kali -yuga, one who does not keep 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam in his house can never be 
delivered from the control of Yamarāja.  
In Kali -yuga, how can one be considered a 
Vaiṣṇava who does not keep Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam in his house? He is more abomi-
nable than a ca ṇḍāla. 
My dear son, lord of the universe. For My 
pleasure and the pleasure of the Vai ṣṇavas one 
should keep Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam with devo-
tion.  
In Kali -yuga, wherever the auspicious 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam is recited, I reside, along 
with all the demigods.  
My dear son, all the holy rivers, ku ṇḍas, and 
lakes, all sacrifices, the seven sacred cities —
Ayodhyā, Mathurā, Māyā (Haridvāra), Kāśī, 
Kāñci, Avantī (Ujjain), and Dvārakā —and all 
the holy mountains are present where Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam i s discussed.  
O lord of the universe, one should hear 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam in order to attain fame, re-
ligiosity, victory, freedom from sin, or libera-
tion. 
By hearing Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam one be-
comes religious and he lives a long life, free 
from disease and all si nful reactions.  
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana                                                                                

931 
 O lord of the universe, I speak the truth: 
those who do not hear the topmost literature, 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, or do not express happi-
ness after hearing it are kept under Yamarāja's 
jurisdiction.  
O My dear son, there is no one more sinful 
than one who does not go anywhere to hear 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam, especially on the day of 
Ekādaśī.  
I reside in the house of one who has kept 
there a verse, a half verse, or even a quarter of 
a verse of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam.  
The purity one attains by hearing Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam cannot be attained by visiting Ba-
darikāśrama or taking bath in the confluence at 
Prayāga.  
O four -headed Brahmā, I go wherever the 
topics of Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam are discussed, 
just as a cow spontaneously follows her calf.  
I never leave one who enjoy s speaking or 
hearing Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam. One who does 
not offer respects after seeing the auspicious 
Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam loses the pious credits he 
accumulated over the past year.  
I am unlimitedly pleased with one who 
stands in respect and then offers obeisa nces 
upon seeing Śrīmad -Bhāgavatam.  
A person who circumambulates Śrīmad -
Bhāgavatam achieves the results of an aśva-
medha -yajña with every step. Of this there is no 
doubt.  
